Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at|http: //books .google .com/I 

LAW 

0. U A 

/^f 

3 

Y 

~7Sa 

, '/. 

.-■• ■ ■ : . . ■ < 

G R 0 T r u s 

llli.llT^ (IF WAIl. AND VYAC 

,1N ABlilDGKll TltAXSr.ATION, 

■1 -I !.V\ I'.l.l . i) It. 

<£CiltS roT t&t ^iinbics oC t!ie Slnitictsftii ^ttss 

' \.\Milil|ii;i' 

M.BCCf.LIir. 

JOHN W. TARKER, LONDOX. 

f^^^Si^ 

SjiPOH^- 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION. 

THE foUomng translation of the celebrated work of 
Grotius, De Jure Belli et Pacis, was made with the 
intention of its being printed side by side with the origi- 
nal ; and contains numerous references to quotations given 
in the original, but omitted in the translation for the sake 
of brevity and convenience. It has been thought tfiat 
several persons might wish to have the translation alone, 
and therefore it is here so published. In doing this, the 
references have been retained unaltered; since, though 
the translation has thus necessarily an aspect of incom- 
pleteness, the reader has thereby an indication of what is 
omitted or abridged. It is lioped that, notwithstanding 
these omissions, the translation conveys a clear and correct 
view of the reasonings and discussions of the work. 

The style of Grotius is concise, and in some degree 
technical, as the nature of the work requires : and this 
character it has not been attempted to avoid in the trans- 
lation, except so far as to make it intelligible to ordinary 
Keadcrs. 

The Preface to the Edition, and the Latin Index to 
the Work, have been annexed to the translation, as likely 
to be useful to the English Eeader. Even where they 
contain references to passages which do not appear in this 
volume, they will convey information respecting the origi- 
nal work. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

"TT is acknowledged by every one," says Mr Uallam, 
■^ " that the publication of this treatise made an epoch 
in the philosophical, and we might almost say in the poli- 
tical history of Europe." This opinion of the importance 
of Grotius's work De Jure Belli et Pacia^ prevailed from 
the time of its first appearance, and was exemplified by all 
the marks of honour with which such a book can be greeted. 
Numerous editions in various forms circulated rapidly: 
copious comments of several annotators, translations into 
several languages, speedily appeared; the work was pub- 
lished in the author's life-time, cum notis variorum^ a dis- 
tinction hitherto reserved to the ancient classics : and it 
was put into the Index Expurgatoriua at Eome. Gustavus 
Adolphus carried it about with him and kept it under his 
pillow : Oxenstiern appointed its author the ambassador of 
Sweden at Paris : the Elector Palatine Charles Louis esta- 
blished at Heidelberg a Professorship of the science thus 
created; and the science has been promoted by the like 
means in many other places up to the present time. 

Nor has it, at this day, ceased to be a book of the first- 
rate importance in this science. It is spoken of with 
respect and admiration by the principal modern writers on 
International Law : a knowledge of it is taken for granted 
in the discussions of questions belonging to that subject ; 
and it is quoted among the cardinal authorities on such 
questions. And treating, as it does, of the fundamental 
points of Philosophical Ethics, as well as of their applica- 

vi EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

tion in the Laws of Nations, it has, in that department 
also, been always regarded as a primary work. It soon 
gave rise to PuifendorTs Treatise On the Laws of Nature 
and Nations, and to other books of the same kind; of 
which some, like our own Rutherforth's Course of Lectures 
an GrotittSy show the celebrity of the work, by taking from 
it nothing but the name. Mackintosh, in more than one 
place, gives to the work the highest terms of his eloquent 
praise ; and how Mr Hallam speaks of it has been men- 
tioned above. 

Several objections have, however, been made to the 
work ; and among them, one which I shall especially notice, 
since an attempt is made in the present edition to remedy 
the inconvenience thus complained of. It has been said 
that Grotius's composition is so encumbered, in almost 
every page, with a multitude of quotations from ancient 
historians, orators, philosophers and poets, as to confuse 
the subject, obscure the reasoning, and weary the reader. 
I am not at all disposed to dissent from what several 
eminent men have said in answer to this ; defending Gro- 
tius''s quotations, as evidences of men's moral judgments, 
as appeals to general sympathy, and as graceful literary 
ornaments ; but I am also ready to allow that these cita- 
tions go to the extent of disturbing the didactic clearness 
and convenient brevity which we wish to find in a philoso- 
phical work. Hence, in the translation with which I have 
accompanied the text, I have omitted all the quotations 
except those which were necessary to carry on the argu- 
ment. By this means, the bulk of the work has been 
reduced more than one half; while, the names of the 
authors quoted, being retained in the translation, the 
reader can, if he chooses, pass to the passages adduced, 
which he will find on the same page. The translation is 
thus rather a selective than an abridged translation ; for 
the didactic and argumentative parts are, in general, so 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. vii 

far from being here abridged, that explanatory expres- 
sions and clauses are introduced in a great number of 
passages where they seemed likely to make the meaning 
clearer. 

It appears to me that the scheme and reasoning of 
Grotius's work are well worthy of being thus carefully 
presented to the reader. I agree with a former editor, 
Barbeyrac, that Grotius's learning, wonderful as it was, 
was far from being the greatest of his qualifications for 
the task which he undertook. His work is characterized 
throughout by solid philosophical principles consistently 
applied; by clear and orderly distinction of parts; by 
definite and exact notions, improved by the intellectual 
discipline of legal studies ; by a pure and humane morality, 
always inclining to the higher side in disputed questions ; 
and by a pervading though temperate spirit of religion. 
It may be doubted whether, even yet, we can place philo- 
sophical morality on any better basis than that which he 
lays down in his Prolegomena; namely, the social impulse 
by which man is actuated, in addition to the desire of his 
individual good. This social impulse is, he holds, the 
source of Jus, or Natural Law; — the basis of property 
and contract (Art. 8.) It is, he says, (Art. 16), too narrow 
a view to say that Utility is the Mother of Rights ; the 
Mother of Rights is Human Nature, taken as a whole, with 
its impulses of kindness, pity, sociality, as well as its desire 
of individual pleasure and fear of pain. Human Nature 
is the Mother of Natural Law, and Natural Law is the 
Mother of Civil or Instituted Law. 

By thus founding Morality and Law upon the whole 
compass of man's human and social, as well as animal and 
individual nature, Grotius, as I conceive, makes his system 
more true and philosophical than many of the more 
recent schemes of the philosophy of morals. He is thus 
favourably distinguished, not only from those who, like 

viii KDITOU'S PREFACE. 

Hobbcs, found law and morality on the mutual icar of mc 

and from those who proclaim utility as the basis of the 

system; but also from later and celebrated dissertate 

upon Natural Law, such as Kant and Fichte, and oth 

German philosophers. A recent i;\Titer* on this subje 

has justly remarked this distinction: that Grotius do 

not, as those philosophers do, seek the ground and bag 

of Rights in the insulated existence of the individual, bi 

in the social relations of men. The critic remarks, als 

that we do not find in him that strenuous attempt to sop 

rate jural from moral doctrines, which, in the Kantif 

period, was regarded as the essential condition for tl 

proper development of jural philosophy : nor, again, do v 

meet in Grotius with that perpetual hammering upon tl 

innate freedom of the Person as such ; with the assum] 

tion that the Person, in virtue of his mere existence as 

Person, is the bearer and possessor of an indefinite mai 

of Rights, all which may be asserted by force ; while yc 

on the other hand, the Person may, in cases of necessit; 

have to acquiesce in the mere possibility of acquirin 

Right, as the sole result of his Personality. And henc 

as the writer just quoted further remarks, we do n< 

find in him the harsh and startling propositions whic 

occur so frequently in the jural speculations of the Kantia 

period. 

The speculations on the subject of Jits, tite Doctrine t 
Rights and Obligations, both in the hands of the Germa 
writers whom I have mentioned, in those of Grotius t> an 
in those of the Roman jurists from whom this strain < 

* Ilartcnstcin : Darstcllung der RcchtspliiloFophie dcs Hugo Grotiu 
111 the Transactions of the Royal Society of Saocony, 1850. 

t The title of the work in full is, Tlugonis Orotii Dc Jure BcUi 
Ptwis Libri Trcs, in quibus Jm Naturm ct Gentium, item Juris Publi 
projcipua cjrplicantur. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. ix 

speculation was originally derived, proceed upon the sup- 
position that there is a body of Natural Law, Jus Naturce, 
distinct from Instituted Law {Jus Gentium and Jus Civile), 
and belonging to man by his nature. I have elsewhere* 
endeavoured to shew that though man nowhere exists, and 
by his nature cannot exist, without Laws, there is no special 
body of Laws which can distinctively be called Natural Law, 
Jus Naturce. I have noted {Elements of Morality, 1052) the 
inconsistencies into which Grotius, as well as others, is 
led, when he attempts to exemplify this distinction in par- 
ticular cases. But I have also (1053, 1054) pointed out 
the truths which were often expressed by means of this 
distinction ; namely, that the actual Law of any commu- 
nity might be worse than it is ; and that it may be better. 
The Jus Naturce may be the mere rudiments out of which 
the Jus Gentium is to be fashioned; or it may be the 
lofty ideal which the Jus Gentium never reaches. Both 
these lines of speculation arc very interesting and instruc- 
tive; and we may readily concede to the philosophical 
jurists the use of the phraseology which they have been 
accustomed to employ on such questions; and which is 
often convenient and useful for these and other purposes. 

Jus Gentium is a phrase which, about the time of Gro- 
tius, was passing from its ancient Eoman meaning, the Lata 
common to most Nations, to its modern meaning, the Law 
between Nations. The prolix and multifarious character of 
Grotius's work arises, in a great measure, from his setting 
out from the first of these meanings, in order to discuss 
the second. He thus begins with the philosophy of ethics, 
and ends with exhortations to humanity, truth, and justice, 
even in the conduct of wars. The latter indeed, was more 
peculiarly his object than the former ; for the narrow and 

♦ Elements of Morality, Art. 650. Mr Bentham also donios tho cxist- 
onco of such a body of Natural Rights. 

b 

X EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

savage view which derives law and justice from mutual fear, 
had not been prominently put forwards in that period, as it 
was soon afterwards by Hobbes ; and Grotius, in debating 
the question, is driven to seek the opponents of his wider 
and humaner morality, in the ancient world, among the Gre- 
cian sophists. But the miseries arising from unregulated war 
pressed upon his thoughts with present and severe reality ; 
for the Thirty Years' War had long been ravaging Europe. 
To this spectacle he himself ascribes the origin of his work. 
He says {Proleg, Art. 28), "I saw prevailing throughout 
the Christian world a license in making war, of which even 
barbarous nations would have been ashamed; recourse 
was had to arms for slight reasons, or for no reason ; and 
when arms were once taken up, all reverence for divine 
and human law was thrown away ; just as if men were 
thenceforth authorized to commit all crimes without re- 
straint." The sight of these atrocities had led many men, 
he says, to hold all war to be unlawful to Christians ; but 
he, more temperately, thought that the remedy was to 
bring it about that war itself should be subject to rules of 
humanity and decency. And he adds, that he conceived 
himself in some degree prepared for such a task by the 
practice of jurisprudence in his own country ; and hoped, 
that, though unworthily ejected from that country, which 
had been honoured by so many of his works, he might 
still promote the science by the labours of his pen. 

He claims {Proleg. 30), to be the first who had reduced 
International Law to the form of an Art or Science. Nor 
do I conceive that this claim goes beyond his due : though I 
am aware that certain writers have been recently brought to 
light and pointed out as his " Precursors*." The Precursors 
thus newly brought into notice are Johannes Oldendorp, 

* Die Vorluufcr dcs lingo Grotius auf dcm Gcbicte dcs JtK Naturm et 
Gentium. Von Carl tor Kaltonbom, 1848. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. xi 

whose Isagoge Juris Naturalise Gentium^ et CiviliSj was pub- 
lished at Cologne in 1639 ; Nicolaus Hemming, who wrote 
De Lege Naturce Methadus Apodictica ; Benedict Winkler, 
whose Principiojutm Juris libri quinque appeared in 1615| 
ten years before the publication of the work of Grotius. 
But I see no reason to think that these works did more 
to anticipate the work of Grotius than the works which he 
himself enumerates and criticizes, as bearing upon the 
subject; especially the work of the Oxford Professor of 
Law, Albericus Gcntilis, De Jure Belli, Ilanovice, 1598. 
In this work, as Mr Hallam has observed, the titles of the 
chapters run ahnost parallel to those of the first and third 
Books of Grotius ; and Grotius himself mentions him (along 
with Balthasar Ayala), as a writer who had been of great 
use to him : '' Cujus diligentia sicut alios adjuvari posse 
scio, et me adjutum profiteer," {Prol. 38). The work of 
Ayala, De Jure et Ojfficiis Bellicis, published in 1582, is 
conceived by Mr Hallam to have been the first "that 
systematically reduced the practice of nations in the con- 
duct of war to legitimate rules." But notwithstanding 
the labours of these authors, we may, I conceive, fully 
assent to Mr Hallam, when he says of Grotius's work: 
"The book may be considered as nearly original, in its 
general platform, as any work of man in an advanced 
stage of civilization and learning can be. It is more so, 
perhaps, than those of Montesquieu and [Adam] Smith." 

IVIr Dugald Stewart has, in his Dissertation on the Pro^ 
gress of Philosophy^ spoken unfavourably, indeed contemp- 
tuously, of Grotius's great work. I am happily relieved 
from any necessity of replying to this criticism, by the 
admirable manner in which the task has already been per- 
formed by Mr Hallam. That judicious and temperate 
writer finds himself compelled to refer to Mr Stewart's 
attack in these terms : " That he should have spoken of a 
work so distinguished by fame, and so effective, as he 

bs 

xii EDITOR'S TREFACE. 

himself admits, over the public mind of Europe, in terms 
of unmingled depreciation, without having done more 
than glanced at some of its pages, is an extraordinary 
symptom of that tendency towards prejudices, hasty but 
inveterate, of which that eminent man seems to have been 
not a little susceptible. The attack made by Stewart on 
those who have taken the law of nature and nations for 
their theme, and especially on Grotius, who stands for- 
wards in that list, is protracted for several pages, and it 
would be tedious to examine every sentence in succession. 
Were I to do so, it is not, in my opinion, an exaggeration 
to say that almost every successive sentence would lie 
open to criticism." He then goes on to take the chief 
heads of accusation ; and to his instructive discussion of 
them, I refer my reader*. 

Paley also, in the Preface to his Moral Philosophy^ 
censures Grotius for the profusion of his classical quota- 
tions; an objection of which I have already spoken, and 
which I have here tried to remedy ; and for the forensic 
cast of his writings. That in the work of Grotius we see 
everywhere traces of the juristical training of his mind, is 
not to be denied ; but it may be much doubted whether 
this is a disadvantage ; — whether this legal discipline of 
the intellect have not given a precision to his divisions 
and reasonings which they would not have had without 
the habits so formed. Certainly a jurist would find, in 
Paley himself, great reason to complain that questions of 
morality and of law are mingled together in a very con- 
fused and arbitrary manner. 

It was not the intention of Grotius to furnish a System 
of Ethics. But if we regard the work as to its bearing on 
ethical philosophy, it will, in many respects, sustain with 
advantage a comparison with the work of Paley. Grotius 

LitercUurc of Europe^ Part in. Chap. ir. $ 83. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. xiii 

shews, satisfactorily as I conceive, that utility is a very 
narrow and perverse expression for the foundation of 
morality {Prole ff. IG). And the foundation which he him- 
self lays, is far broader and more philosophical {Proleg. 6). 
Man, he says, is an excellent animal, differing from other 
animals, not in degree only but in nature ; and among his 
peculiar excellencies is a desire for society, a desire for a 
life spent in community with his fellow-men ; and not 
merely spent somehow, but spent tranquilly and as a rea- 
sonable being; cammunitatis non qualiscunquCf sed tran- 
quillce, et pro sui intelkctu^ modo ordinate. This desire, or 
impulse, the Stoics called oUeiwai^, the Domestic Impulse. 
We might be tempted to call it the Domestic Instinct; 
but then, we should have to recollect, that precisely one 
of the peculiarities which we have here to take into 
account, is, that man is not governed by Instinct, but by 
Season ; that in virtue of his human nature, the impulses 
which belong to him, analogous to the instincts of animals, 
become conscious and intelligent purposes : and thus per- 
sonal security, property, contracts and the like, the neces- 
sary conditions of a tranquil and reasonable community of 
life, are necessary results of man's nature. And thus 
human nature is the source of Rights, as Grolius says, 
{Proleg. IG). 

That man forms a judgment of actions, and tendencies 
to act, as being right or wrong ; and that the adjective 
right has a wider range than the substantive Rights ; are 
doctrines belonging to man's moral nature ; and these 
doctrines lead us to a scheme of morality which has its 
foundations, as a sound scheme of morality must have, at 
once in the external conditions of man's being, and in the 
internal nature of his soul. The Rights which his outward 
circumstances necessarily establish, are recognized and 
made the cardinal points of Rightness, by his inward con- 

XIV EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

victions. Among the convictions which belong to man, 
as a moral creature, is this; that not only his outward 
actions, but his inward purposes, volitions, affections, de- 
sires and habitSy ought to be right. This consideration, 
however, leads us into a region of morality with which 
Grotius is not much concerned in the present work. 
• Many of the questions of International Law which are 
discussed by Grotius, have been the subject of much sub- 
sequent discussion ; and in several cases, the opinions now 
generally accepted are different from those which he 
asserts. To have attempted to notice such cases, would 
have been, not to edit Grotius, but to compile a Treatise 
on the present state and past history of International Law. 
The student of such subjects will necessarily have to read 
many books; of which, however, this of Grotius is cer- 
tainly one of the most indispensable. What is requisite in 
order to correct him, must be obtained by studying the 
best of his successors. 

I hope that the deep and earnest love of Peace which 
inspired the design of this book, and which breathes so 
ardently through so many of its pages, will obtain a 
favourable reception for the work, in these days when the 
same sentiment is so strongly felt and so widely spread, 
and has shewn itself in so many remarkable ways. The 
progress of the study of International Law, on such prin- 
ciples as those of Grotius, and the increase of a regard 
for the authority of such Law, are among the most hope- 
ful avenues to that noble Ideal of the lovers of mankind, 
a Perpetual Peace : — the most hopeful, because along this 
avenue, we can already see a long historical progress, as well 
as a great moral aim. Grotius himself, as was natural with 
his views, indulged the hope of such a consummation ; as 
appears for instance. Book ii. chap, xxiii. Sect. x. Art. 4, 
where he says : " It would be useful, and indeed it is almost 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. xv 

necessary, that certain Congresses of Christian Powers 
should be held, in which controversies which arise among 
some of them may be decided by others who are not inte- 
rested ; and in which measures may be taken to compel the 
parties to accept peace on equitable terms." I trust that 
all Students and Professors of International Law will con- 
sider themselves as labouring upon a Problem which is 
still unsolved, while War exists ; and in which all the ap- 
proximate solutions must make wars more rare and more 
brief, as well as more orderly and more humane. 

Notwithstanding the love of peace and the spirit of 
humanity which thus runs through the work of Grotius, it 
has been blamed by some, as sanctioning, by its doctrines, 
many of the most savage usages of wan But this objec- 
tion can be made, I think, only by those who have not 
read the book with due attention. It is true, that in 
certain parts of the Third Book, he states the customary 
Bules, according to which wars have always been carried 
on ; which Eules allow killing men, taking prisoners, cap- 
turing property, laying waste a country, and the like. 
And these he calls tlte Rights of War; and gives inter- 
pretations of the rules which may seem very severe. But 
this, he himself notes : and when he has performed this 
part of his task, he forthwith (in Chap, x.) proceeds to 
say, '* I am now going to take from belligerents what I 
have seemed to grant to them, but have not really grant- 
ed :" and then he goes on with a series of Chapters, which 
he calls Temperamenta, Restraints as to the exercise of 
these Sights of War, derived from considerations of 
humanity, justice, expedience and piety: and by these 
" temperaments," he divests war of all the cruelty and 
hardship which are separable from it. Still, some persons 
appear to be offended at violent and oppressive practices 
being called Rights in any sense. Upon this, I would 

xvi ' EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

remark, that there would be little use in a writer on this 
subject stating, as the Eights of War, Kules which never 
have been observed nor acknowledged in any actual war 
up to the present time. Killing, taking prisoners and 
making captures, besieging towns, and the like, are of the 
essence of war : and these are inevitably violent and 
painful inflictions. If at any time, the rules of such prac- 
tices have been harsher than they now are, we may say 
that such Eules were the Eights of war in barbarous and 
ferocious times: but even in such times, those Eights 
imposed a certain restraint upon the victor ; as for instance, 
the Eight of making the conquered slaves, prevented his 
taking their lives. That such Eights are often morally wrong, 
Grotius himself repeatedly urges. The term Rights, like 
the term Natural Law, of which I have just spoken, may 
mean, either that which is secured to men by existing 
Eules, in every society, however rude; or that which it 
ought to be the aim of the most humane and pious men to 
secure by EiJe, as the best condition of society. But this 
latter is not an ordinary nor convenient sense of the sub- 
stantive Rights. If we were to adopt it, we should have 
a difSculty in establishing the Eight of killing men at all 
for no crime ; and therefore, there could be no Eights of 
War. 

The translation may perhaps be welcome, even to the 
classical scholar, for Grotius's style is not only very con- 
cise and pregnant, but also full of expressions borrowed 
from the jurists and the schoolmen. But as the text will 
sufficiently explain these, I have not thought it necessary 
to translate the Notes, which besides, for the most part, 
refer to the quotations only. 

There have already been published at least three trans- 
lations of Grotius's work in English, besides a small and 
worthless abridgement, published in 1G54 by C. B. (i. e. 

EDITOR'S PREFACE. xvii 

Clement Barksdalc, according to Watts). William Evats pub- 
lished a translation (in folio) in 1682, in which an attempt 
was made (not very happily,) to improve the work, by intro- 
ducing Grotius's Notes, and other matter, into the text. 
And in 1738, a translation (also in folio), was published of 
the text of the work, and of the Notes of Barbeyrac ; not 
only the smaller critical Notes which accompany the present 
edition, but also of the larger Notes, generally of a juris- 
tical and historical kind, which Barbeyrac has appended to 
his French translation. This edition is anonymous, but 
bears traces of having been executed by a writer familiar 
with the literature of jurisprudence. Besides these, there 
is, I believe, a more modern translation, which I have not 
seen. 

I had no opportunity of consulting the translations of 
1682 and 1738, till my own translation was completed; 
and if this had been otherwise, the scheme of my trans- 
lation is so different, that I should have had no temptation 
to borrow from them. I have however taken a few Notes 
from the edition of 1738. 

Barbeyrac's critical notes, given in the present edition, 
are excellent. They are mainly employed in verifying 
Grotius's quotations: quotations, often, it would seem, 
made by drawing upon a memory which appears to have 
contained in its stores the whole mass of ancient literature. 
Quotations so collected are often confused and imperfect, 
as well as difficult to trace. The learning, acuteness, vigi- 
lance and felicity, with which Barbeyrac has detected, 
traced to their origin, and rectified, such mistakes as Gro- 
tius has committed, are such as may constantly excite the 
admiration of the reader. Still, it would not have been 
proper to publish a new edition of the work without again 
verifying the references; and especially, enabling the reader 
to refer to modern editions, instead of those which Bar- 

xviii EDITOR'S PREFACE. 

beyrac employs. This task has been executed by the 
Rev. H. A. Holden, Fellow of Trinity College, who had 
before performed the same valuable serviee for the recent 
edition of Sanderson De Obliffatione Conscientice, 

The Notes of Gronovius, which occupy a considerable 
portion of the page of the most common editions of Gro- 
tius, are in reality of very little value. It is doubted by 
lydman, a more recent editor, (Utrecht, 1773) whether 
they were intended for publication; and they may in 
general be omitted without loss. A few notices taken 
from them have been retained. 

As further illustrating Barbeyrac's labours on this 
work, I have inserted his Preface, including the passage 
in which he expresses an unfavourable judgment of the 
value of the Notes of Gronovius. In this preface, the 
references to Barbeyrac's own Notes are here made ac- 
cording to the mode adopted in the present edition ; 
namely, by means of the Arabic numerals from 1 to 9; 
the Notes of Grotius being marked by the letters of the 
alphabet, as in the earlier editions. 

Tbimtt Lodgk, Cambridge, 
August 23, 18^. 

CONTENTS. 

PAnB 

Pbelimixart Remarks xxiii 

BOOK I. 

CIUPTEB 

I. What is War. What aro Rights . . . . l 

II. Whether War OTor be just .... o 
UL Of War public and priyate. Of Sororcignty . 30 
IV. Of Wars of Subjects against Superiors . . 52 

V. Who may lawfully make War. .... 60 

BOOK II. 

I. Of the Causes of War; and first, of Self-Defensc 

and the Defense of our Property . . . 61 

n. Of the Common Rights of Men .... CO 

in. Of the original acquisition of Things. The Sea, 

Rivers ....... 78 

IV. Of presumed Dereliction of Property, and the Oc- 
cupation which follows; and how it differs from 
Usucaption and Prescription .... 85 

V. Of the original acquisition of Rights oyer Persons ; 
wherein of the Rights of Parents; of Marriage; 
of Corporations ; of Rights over Subjects, and oyer 
Slaves 03 

VI. Of acquisition derivatiye, by the act of man; and 
herein of the alienation of the Sovereignty, and of 

its accompaniments ..... 107 

VII. Of the derivative acquisition which takes place by 
Law; and herein of succession to intestate pro- 
perty ........ Ill 

Vin. Of Acquisitions commonly said to bo Jure Gentium. 125 

XX CONTENTS. 

BOOK ir. 

CHAPTER PAOR 

IX. When Lordship and Ownership ceaso . . .134 

X. Of the Obligation arising from Ownership . . 141 

XI. Of Promises ....... 146 

Xn. Of Contracts 160 

XIII. Of Oaths 167 

XIV. Of the Promises, Contracts, and Oaths of SoYoreigns. 176 

XV. Of Treaties and Sponsions .... 183 

XVI. Of Interpretation 192 

XVII. Of Damage done wrongfully and consequent Obli- 
gation 205 

XVm. Of the Right of Legation 210 

XIX. Of the Right of Sepulture .... 217 

XX. Of Punishments ...... 221 

XXI. Of the Communication of Punishments . . 251 

XXIL Of Unjust Causes of War 266 

XXIII. Of Doubtful Causes of War .... 272 

XXIV. Warnings not to go to War rashly, even for just 
causes ........ 278 

XXV. Of the Causes of going to War for others . . 284 

XXVI. Of just Causes for War in those who are under 
another's jurisdiction ..... 290 

BOOK III. 

I. General Rules as to what is lawful in War by 
Natural Law ; and herein of deceit and falsehood 
[in War] 295 

IL How far by the Law of Nations the goods of Sub- 
jects are liable for the debt of the Rulers; and 
herein, of Reprisals . . . . .311 

III. Of a Just or Formal War by the Law of Nations; 

and herein of Declaration of War . .316 

IV. Of the right of killing enemies in formal War, and 

of other yiolenco against the person . . 322 

V. Of Ravaging and Pillaging Property . . . 332 

VI. Of the right of acquiring things captured in War. 335 

VII. Of the right over Prisoners of War . . . 362 
VIII. Of Lordship over the Conquered . . - 357 

CONTENTS. xxi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

IX. Of PostlimlDium 360 

X. Warnings concerning things dono in an unjufit War . 368 

XI. Rostroints as to the Bight of killing in War 371 

XII. Restraints as to Wasting, and the like . . . 379 

XIII. Restraints respecting Captures . . 384 

XIV. Restraints respecting Prisoners .... 387 

XV. Restraints respecting Conquest. . . 302 

XVI. Restraints as to things which, by the Laws of Nations, 
hare not the right of Postliminium . . . 307 

XVII. Of Neutrals in War 400 

XVIII. Of acts dono by Priyate Persons in a Public War . 403 

XIX. Of Faith between Enemies .... 406 

XX. Of the public Faith by which Wars are terminated ; 
and herein, of Treaties of Peace ; of Lot ; of Combat 
by Agreement; of Arbitration; of Surrender; of 
Hostages ; and of Pledges ..... 414 

XXI. Of Faith while war continues; of Truce; of Safe 
Passage ; of Rani^om ...... 432 

XXIL Of the Faith of subordinate Powers in a War . 441 

XXm. Of Private Faith in War 440 

XXrV^ Of Tacit Faith 450 

XXV. Tlio Conclusion, with admonitions to Good Faith and 

Peace ....... 452 

Index ....... 455 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

1 rpiIE Ciyil Law, both that of Rome, and that of oach nation in 
JL particular, has been treated of, with a view eitlicr to illustrate 
it or to present it in a compendious form, by many. But International 
Law, that which regards the mutual relations of seyeral Peoples, or 
Rulers of Peoples, whether it proceed from nature, or be instituted 
by divine command, or introduced by custom and tacit compact, has 
been touched on by few, and has been by no one treated as a whole 
in an orderly manner. And yet that this bo done, concerns the 
human race. 

2 For rightly did Cicero call that an excellent science which 

includes the alliances, treaties, and covenants of peoples, kings, and 

nations, and all the rights of war and peace. And Euripides prefers 

this science to the knowledge of things human and divine ; for ho 

makes Helen address Theonoe thus : 

'twould bo a base reproach 
That yon, who know th* affairs of gods and men 
Present and fature, know not what is just. 

3 And such a work is the more necessary on this account ; that 
there are not wanting persons in our o^^n time, and there have been 
also in former times persons, who have despised what has been done 
in this province of jurisprudence, so for as to hold that no such thing 
existed, except as a mere name. Every one can quote the saying of 
Euphemius in Thucydides ; — ^that for a king or a city which has an 
empire to maintain, nothing is unjust which is useful : and to the 
same effect is the saying, that for those who have supreme power, 
the equity is where the strength is : and that other, that state affairs 
cannot be carried on without doing somo wrong. To this we must 
add that the controversies which arise between peoples and kings 
have conmionly war for their arbiter. And tliat war is far from 
having anything to do with rights, is not only the opinion of the vul- 
gar, but even learned and prudent men often let fall expressions 
which favour such an opinion. It is very usual to put rir^hts and arms 
in opposition to each other. And accordingly Ennius says : 

They have recourse to amis, and not to rights. 

And Horace describes Achilles thus: 

Rights he spurns 
As things not made for him, claims all by arms. 

And another poet introduces a warrior, who when he enters on war, 

says: 

Now, Peace and Law, I bid you both farewell. 

x\iv PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

AntigonuB laughed at a man, who, \vhon ho was besieging his enemies' 
cities, brought to him a Dissertation on Justice. And Marius said 
that the din of arms proyented his hearing the laws. Even Pompoy, 
who was so modest that he blushed when ho had to speak in public, 
had the face to say, Arn I who am in arms to think of the lawsf 

4 In Christian writers many passages of a like sense occur : lot 
that ono of Tcrtullian suffice for all : Deceit, crueUt/f injustice, are tite 
proper business of battles. They who hold this opinion will undoubt- 
edly meet our purpose, [of establishing the Rights of War,] with tho 
expressions in Terence : 

You that attempt to fix by certain Rules 
Things so uncortiun, may with like success 
Contrive a way of going mad by reason. 

5 But sinco our discussion of Rights is worthless if there are no 
Rights, it will serve both to recommend our work, and to protect it 
from objections, if we refute briefly this very grave error. And that 
we may not havo to deal with a mob of opponents, let us appoint 
them an advocato to speak for them. And whom can wo select for 
this office, fitter than Carneades, who had made such wonderful pro- 
gross in his suspension of opinion, tho supreme aim of his Academical 
Philosophy, that ho could work tho machinery of his elotjuence for 
falsehood as easily as for truth. He, then, undertook to arguo 
against justice ; and especially tho kind of justice of which wo hero 
treat ; and in doing so, he found no argument stronger than this : — 
that men had, as utility prompted, established Rights, different as 
their manners differed ; and OTcn in the same society, often changed 
with tho change of times : but Natural Law there is none : for all 
creatures, men and animals alike, are impelled by nature to seek 
their own gratification: and thus, either there is no such thing as 
justice, or if it exist, it is the height of folly, sinco it does harm to 
itself in aiming at tho good of others. 

C But what tho philosopher hero says, and what tho poet (Ho- 
race) follows : — 

By naked nature ne'er was understood 
W'hat*s just and right: 

must by no means bo admitted. For man is an animal indeed, but 
an animal of an excellent kind, differing much more from all other 
tribes of animals than they differ from ono another ; which appears 
by tho evidence of many actions peculiar to tho human species. 
And among these properties which aro peculiar to man, is a desire 
for society ; that is, a desiro for a life spent in common with fellow- 
men ; and not merely spent somehow, but spent tranquilly, and in a 
manner corresponding to tho character of his intellect. This desiro 
tho Stoics called oticctaxrcr, the domestic instinct, or feeling of kindred. 
And therefore tho assertion, that, by nature, every animal is impelled 
only to seek its own advantage or good, if stated so generally as to 
include man, cannot be conceded. 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xw 

7 And indeed even in other animals, as well as in man, their 
desire of their own individual good is tempered by a regard, partly 
for their ofispring, partly for others of their own species; which 
in them, indeed, wo perceiro to proceed from some extrinsic in- 
telligent principle*; because with regard to other acts not at all 
more difficult than those [thus directed towards the ofispring, and 
the like,] an equal degree of intelligence does not appear. Tho 
same is to bo said of infants, in which, proyious to iill teaching, 
wo 600 a certain disposition to do good to others, as is sagaciously 
remarked by Plutarch : as for example, compassion breaks out spon- 
taneously at that age. But inasmuch as a man of full ago has 
tho knowledge which enables him to act similarly in similar cases ; 
and along with that, a peculiar and admirable appetite for society ; 
and has also language, an instrument of this desire, gi?en to him 
alone of all animals ; it is reasonable to assume that he has a faculty 
of knowing and acting according to general principles ; and such ten- 
dencies as agree with this faculty do not belong to all animals, but 
are peculiar attributes of human nature. 

J 8 And this tendency to tho conservation of society, which wo 
have now expressed in a rude manner, and which tendency is in 
agreement with tho naturo of the human intellect, is tho source of 
Jus, or Natural Law, properly so called. To this Jiis belong tho 
rule of abstaining from that which belongs to other persons ; and if 
wo havo in our possession anything of another's, the restitution of it, 
or of any gain which wo havo mado from it; the fulfilling of pro- 
mises, and the reparation of damage done by fault ; and tho recog- 
nition of certain things as meriting punishment among men. 

9 From this signification has flowed another larger sense of Ju$ : 
for, inasmuch as man is superior to other animals, not only in the 
social impulse of which wo have spoken, but in his judgment and 
power of estimating advantages and disadvantages ; and in these, not 
only present good and ill, but also future good and ill, and what 
may lead to each ; we may understand that it is congruous to human 
nature to follow, in such matters also, [the estimate of future good 
and ill, and of the consequences of actions,] a judgment rightly 
framed ; not to bo misled by fear or by the temptation of present 
pleasure, nor to be carried away by blind and thoughtless impulse ; 
and that what is plainly repugnant to such judgment, is also con- 
trary to Jusj that is, to Natural Human Law. 

10 And to this exercise of judgment pertains a reasonable and 
thoughtful assignment, to each individual and each body of men, of 
tho things which peculiarly belong to them ; by which exercise of 
judgment in some cases, the wiser man is preferred to the less wise ; 
in others, our neighbour to a stranger ; in others, a poor man to a 

" In hu Treatise Dt Veritate Rel, Christ. Lib. i. 7, Grotius notices the acta of 
animals, (as ants and bees,) which appear to proceed from some extrinsic Reason ; 
qH*F quidem Ratio non aliud est quam quod Deus vocatur. W. 

C 

xxvi PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

rich man ; according as the nature of each act and each thing requires. 
And this Eome i>ersons have treated as a part of Jits properly and 
strictly so called; although Jua properly so called is really Tery 
different in its nature, and has this for its special office; to Icaro 
to another what is his, to give to him what wo owe. 

11 And wliat we havo said would still hare great weight, eren 
if we were to grant, what we cannot grant without wickedness, that 
there is no God, or tliat ho bestows no regard on human affairs. 
But inasmuch as we are assured of the contrary of this, partly by reason, 
partly by constant tradition, confirmed by many arguments and by 
miracloB attested by all ages, it follows that God, as the author of our 
being, to whom we owe ourselres and all that we have, is to be obeyed 
by us without exception, especially since he has, in many ways, 
shewn himself both supremely good and supremely powerful : where- 
fore he is able to bestow upon those who obey him the highest 
rewards, even eternal ones, as being himself eternal ; and he must bo 
Bupposci to bo willing as well as able to do this; and the moro 
80, if he have promised such rewards in plain language ; which wo 
Cliristians believe, resting our belief on the indubitable faith of 
testimonies. 

12 And hero wo are brought to another origin of Jus, besides 
that natural source ; namely, the free will of God, to which, as our 
reason irresistibly tells us, wo are bound to submit ourselves. But 
oven that Natural Law of which wo have spoken, whether it bo that 
which binds together communities, or that looser kind [which en- 
joins duties,] although it do proceed from the internal principles of 
man, may yet be rightly ascribed to God; because it was by Ilis 
will that such principles came to exist in us. And in this sense, Chry. 
Bippuf and the Stoics said that the origin of Jus or Natural Law was 
not to bo sought in any other quarter than in Jove himself; and it 
may bo probably conjectured that tho Latins took tho word Jus 
from the name Jove, 

13 To this wo must add, that those principles God has made moro 
manifest by tho laws which he has given, so that they may bo under- 
st^)od by those whoso minds have a feeblor power of drawing infor- 
ences : and ho has prohibited tho perverse aberrations of our affec- 
tions which draw us this way and that, contrary to our own interest 
and tho good of others ; putting a bridlo upon our moro Yohoment 
passions, controlling and restraining them within due limits. 

14 Further. Tho Sacred lUstory, besides that part which con- 
sists in precepts, offers another view which in no small degree excites 
tho social affection of which wo have spoken ; in that it teaches us 
that all men are sprung from the samo parents. And thus we may 
rightly say, in this senso also, what Florontinus says in another 
sense, that there is a kindred established among us by nature: and 
in virtuo of this relation it is wrong for man to intend mischief 
towards man. 

PRELBflNARY REMARKS. xxvii 

Among men [all aro not on tho samo footing towards us : as 
for instance,] our paronts aro a sort of Oods to us, to whom obe- 
dience IB due ; not infinito indeed, but an obedience of its own proper 
kind. 

15 In the next place, since it is conformable to Natural Law to 
obserre compacts, (for some mode of obliging themselTcs was neces- 
sary among men, and no other natural mode could be imagined,) 
Civil Rights were derived from this source, mutual compact. For 
those who had joined any community, or put themselves in subjection 
to any man or men, those either expressly promised, or from tho 
nature of the case must have been understood to promise tacitly, 
that they would conform to that which either the majority of the 
community, or those to whom the power was assigned, should deter- 
mine. 

16 And therefore what Camcades said (as above), and what 
others also have said, as Horace, 

Utility, Mother of just and right. 

if we aro to speak accurately, is not true. For the Mother of Right, 
that is, of Natural Law, is Human Nature; for this would load us 
to desire mutual society; even if it were not required for the supply 
of other wants ; and the Mother of Civil Laws, is Obligation by mu- 
tual compact ; and since mutual compact derives its force from Na- 
tural Law, Nature may be said to be tho Grandmother of Civil Laws. 
[The genealogy is. Human Nature : Natural Law : Civil Laws.] But 
Natural Law, [which impels us to society,] is reinforced by Utility. 
For the Author of Nature ordained that we should, as individuals, 
be weak, and in need of many things to mako life comfortable, in 
order that we might be the more impelled to cling to society. But 
Utility is the occasion of Civil Laws ; for tho association or subjection 
by mutual compact, of which we have just spoken (15), was at the 
first instituted for the sake of some utility. And accordingly, they 
who prescribe laws for others, in doing this, aim, or ought to aim, 
at some Utility, to be produced to them for whom they legislate. 

17 Further: as the Laws of each Community regard the Utility 
of that Community, so also between different Communities, all or 
most. Laws might be established, and it appears that Laws have been 
established, which enjoined the Utility, not of special communities, but 
of that great aggregate System of Communities. And this is what is 
called the Law of Nations, or International Law ; when we distinguish 
it from Natural Law. And this part of Law is omitted by Carneades, 
who divides all Law into Natural Law, and the Civil Laws of special 
peoples ; while yet, inasmuch as he was about to treat of that Law 
which obtains between one people and another, (for then follows an 
oration concerning war and acquisitions by war,) he was especially 
called upon to make mention of Law of this kind. 

18 And it is without any good reason that Carneades maintains, 

c2 

• •• 

xxviii PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

as wo have said (5), that justice is folly. For sinco, by his own con- 
fession, that Citizen is not foolish who in a Civil Community obeys 
the Ciyil Law, although, in consequence of such respect for the Law 
he may lose something which is useful to himself: so too that Peoplo 
is not foolish which does not so estimate its own utility, as, on account 
of tliatf to neglect the common Laws between People and People. The 
reason of the thing is the same in both cases. For as a citizen who 
riolates the CItII Law for the sake of present utility, destroys that 
institution in which the perpetual utility of himself and his posterity 
IS bound up ; so too a people which violates the Laws of Nature and 
Nations, boats down the bulwark of its own tranquillity for future 
time. And oren if no utility were to arise from the observation of 
Law, it would be a point, not of folly, but of wisdom, to which wo 
feel ourselves drawn by nature. 

19 And therefore neither is that other saying of Horace [i Sat iii.] 
universally true : 

'Twas fear of wrong that made ns make our laws ; 

an opinion which one of the interlocutors in Plato's Republic explains 
in this way: that Laws were introduced from the fear of receiving 
wrong, and that men are driven to practise justice by a certain com- 
pulsion. For that applies to those institutions and laws only which 
were devised for the more easy maintenance of rights : as when 
many, individually feeble, fearing to be oppressed by those who were 
stronger, combined to establish judicial authorities, and to uphold 
them by their common strength; that those whom they could not 
resist singly, they might, united, control. And wo may accept in this 
sense, and in no other, what is also said in Plato, that Right is that 
which the stronger party likes : namely, that we are to understand that 
Bights do not attain their external end, except they have force to back 
them. Thus Solon did great things, as he himself boasted. 

By linking Force in the same yoke with Law. 

20 But still Rights, oven unsupported by force, are not destitute of 
all effect : for Justice, the observance of Rights, brings security to the 
conscience ; while injustice inflicts on it tortures and wounds, such as 
Plato describes as assaulting tho bosoms of tyrants. The conscience 
of honest men approves justice, condemns injustice. And what is the 
greatest point, injustice has for its enemy, and justice has for its friend, 
Qod, who reserves his judgments for another life, yet in such a manner 
that ho often exhibits their power in this life ; of which we have many 
examples in history. 

21 Tho reason why many persons, while they require justice as 
necessary in private citizens, commit the error of thinking it super- 
fluous in a People or the Ruler of a People, is this : in the first place, 
that in their regard to rights they look at nothing but the utility 
which arises from rights, which in the case of private citizens is evi- 
dent^ since they are separately too weak to protect themselves : while 

\ 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xxix 

great States, which soom to embrace within them all that is requisite 
to support life in comfort, do not appear to hare need of that yirtuo 
which regards extraneous parties, and is called justice. 

22 But, not to repeat what I hare already said, that Rights are 
not established for the sake of utility alone, there is no State so strong 
that it may not, at some time, need the aid of others external to itself: 
either in the way of commerce, or in order to repel the force of many 
foreign nations combined against it. And hence we see that Leagues 
of alliance are sought oven by the most powerful Peoples and Kings ; 
which can have no force according to the principles of those who 
confine rights within the boundary of the State alone. It is most 
true [as Cicero says,] that OTcrything loses its certainty at once, if 
we give up the belief in rights. 

23 If no society whatever can be preserred without the recognition 
of mutual rights, which Aristotle [rather Plato, J. B.] proves by the 
strong instance of a society of robbers ; assuredly that society which 
includes the whole human race, or at any rate, the greater part of 
nations, has need of the recognition of rights : as Cicero saw when he 
said that some things are so bad that they are not to be done even for 
the sake of saving our country (Off* i. 45). Aristotle speaks with 
strong condemnation of those, who, while they will allow no one to 
hold rule among themselves, except him who has the right to do so, 
yet in their dealings with strangers have no care of rights, or the vio- 
lation of rights. 

24 A little while ago we quoted Pompey for his expression on the 
other side ; yet on the other hand, when a certain Spartan king had 
said, Happy that republic which has for its boundaries the spear and 
the sword, Pompey corrected him, and said, Happy rather that 
which has justice for its boundary*. And to this effect he might have 
used the authority of another Spartan king, who gave justice the 
preference over military courage, on this ground; that courage is 
to bo regulated by justice, but if all men were just, they would 
have no need of courage. Courage itself was defined by the Stoics, 
Virtue exercised in defence of Justice. Themistius, in an Oration 
to Yalens, eloquently urges, that kings such as the rule of wisdom 
requires them to be, ought not to care for the single nation only which 
is committed to them, but for the whole human race ; they should 
be, as he expresses it, not philo-macedonian only, or philo-romatiy but 

* Barbeyrao conjectures that this anecdote of Pompey, for ^hich he cannot 
find any other authority, was produced, by Grotius mixing together in his memory 
two stories, both told in Plutarch's Apophthegmaia : one, of a saying of Agesilaus, 
(or Archidamus,) who, when asked how far the Lacedemonian territory extended, 
swung his spear and said. So far : the other story, that when Phraates sent to 
Pompey and begged that the Parthians might have, for their boundary towards 
the Romans, the Euphrates ; Pompey replied that the boundary should be Justice. 
Tydman (in his Preface) defends Grotius from Barbeyrac*s charge of concision in 
this quotation. 

XXX PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

philanthropic. The namo of Minos became hateful to posterity in no 
other way than this : that he tenninated his equity at the boundaries 
of his own government. 

25 It is so far from being proper to admit, what some choose to 
say, that in war all rights cease, that war is never to be undertaken 
except to assert rights ; and when undertaken, is never to be carried on 
except within the limits of rights and of good faith. Demosthenes 
well said, that war was the mode of dealing with those who could not 
be kept in order by judicial proceedings. For judicial proceedings are 
of force against those who feel themselves to be the weaker party : 
but against those who make themselves or think themselves equals, 
war is the proceeding; yet this too, in order to be justifiable, to be car- 
ried on in a no less scrupulous manner than judicial proceedings are. 

26 Be it so then, that, in the conflict of arms, laws must be silent : 
but let this be understood of laws civil, judicial, proper to peace ; not 
of those laws which are perpetual and accommodated to all time. For 
it is excellently said by Die Prusaeensis, that between enemies, written 
laws, that is. Civil Laws, are not in force ; but that unwritten laws 
are, namely, those which nature dictates, or the consent of nations 
institutes. We may learn this from the old Formula of the Romans ; 
/ decide that those things may he sought by a pure and pious war. 
The same old Romans, as Yarro remarked, undertook war tardily, 
and without allowing themselves any licence, because they thought that 
no war except a pious one ought to be undertaken. Camillus said that 
wars were to be carried on no less justly than bravely. Africanus 
said, that the Romans began just wars, and ended them. Again, in 
Livy we read, War has its laws no less than peace. And Seneca 
admires Fabricius as a great man, and, what is most difficult, a man 
innocent even in war, and who thought that there were wrongs even 
towards an enemy. 

27 How great the power of the conscience of justice is, the writers 
of histories everywhere shew, often ascribing victory to this cause 
mainly. Uence have arisen these proverbs; That it is the Cause 
which makes the soldier brave or base : that he rarely comes safo 
back who goes out on the bad side : that Hope is the ally of the 
good Cause : and others to the same effect. Nor ought any persons 
to be moved by the occasional success of unjust designs; for it is 
enough if the equity of the cause has an efficacy, and that a great 
one, in action ; even though this efficacy, as happens in human affairs, 
is often prevented from taking effect, being counteracted by other 
causes. And further; in conciliating friendships, which nations, as 
well as individuals, need, on many accounts, a great effect must bo 
assigned to an opinion that we do not hastily or unjustly undertake 
war, and that we carry it on religiously. For no one readily joins 
himself to those whom he believes to think lightly of right laws and 
good faith. 

28 I, for the reasons which I have stated, holding it to be most 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xxxi 

certain that there is among nations a common law of Rights which is 
of force with regard to war, and in war, saw many and grave causes 
why I should write a work on that subject. For I saw prevailing 
throughout the Christian world a license in making war of which 
even barbarous nations would have been ashamed ; recourse being 
had to arms for slight reasons or no reason ; and when arms were 
once taken up, all reverence for divine and human law was thrown 
o>w&y, just as if men were thenceforth authorized to commit all 
crimes without restraint. 

29 And the sight of these atrocities has led many men, and 
these, estimable persons, to declare arms forbidden to the Christian, 
whose rule of life mainly consists in love to all men : and to this 
party sometimes John Ferns and our countryman Erasmus seem to 
approximate, men much devoted to peace, both ecclesiastical and 
civil : but they take this course, as I conceive, with the purpose with 
which, when things have been twisted one way, we bend them the 
other, in order to make them straight. But this attempt to drive 
things too far, is often so far from succeeding, that it does harm ; be- 
cause the excess which it involves is easily detected ; and then, do- 
tracts from the authority of what is said, oven within the limits of 
truth. We are to provide a remedy for both disorders; both for 
thinking that nothing is allowable, and that everything is. 

30 Moreover, having practised jurisprudence in public situations 
in my country with the best integrity I could give, I would now, as 
what remains to me, unworthily ejected from that country graced by 
80 many of my labours, promote the same subject, jurisprudence, by 
the exertion of my private diligence. Many, in preceding times, have 
designed to invest the subject with the form of an Art or Science ; 
but no one has done this. Nor can it be done, except care be taken 
in that point which has never yet been properly attended to; — to 
separate Instituted Law from Natural Law. For Natural Law, as 
being always the same, can be easily collected into an Art : but that 
which depends upon institution, since it is often changed, and is dif- 
ferent in different places, is out of the domain of Art; as tlio per- 
ceptions of individual things in other cases also is. 

31 If, then, those who have devoted themselves to the study of 
true justice would separately undertake to treat of separate parts of 
Natural and Permanent Jurisprudence, omitting all which derives its 
origin from the will of man alone : — if one would treat of Laws ; 
another, of Tributes; another, of the Office of Judges; another, of 
the mode of determining the Will of parties ; another, of the Evi- 
dence of facts ; we might, by collecting all these parts, form a com- 
plete body of such Jurisprudence. 

32 What course we think ought to bo followed in the execution 
of such a task, we shew by act rather than by words, in this pre- 
sent work; in which is contained by far the noblest part of Juris- 
prudence. 

xxxii PRELIMINARY REMARKS. 

33 For in the First Book, (after a Preface conceming the origin 
of Rights and Laws.) wc have examined the question whether any 
war be just: next, in order to distinguish between public and private 
war, wc have to explain the nature of sovereignty; what Peoples, 
M'hat Kings, have it entire ; what, partial ; who, with a right of ali- 
enation ; who, otherwise ; and afterwards wc have to speak of the 
duty of subjects to superiors. 

34 The Second Book, undertaking to expound all the causes 
from which war may arise, examines what things ai*o common, what 
are property, what is the right of persons over persons, what obliga- 
tion arises from ownership, what is the rule of royal succession, what 
right is obtained by pact or contract, what is the force and interpre- 
tation of treaties, of oaths private and public, what is duo for damage 
done, what is tho sacredness of ambassadors, the right of burying 
the dead, and the nature of punishments. 

35 The Third Book has for its subject, in the first place, what is 
lawful in war; and when it has drawn a distinction between that 
■which is done with impunity, or may even, in dealing with foreigners, 
bo defended as consistent with Rights; and that wliich is really freo 
from fault; it then descends to the kinds of Peace and to Conventions 
in War. 

30 Tho undertaking such a work appesired to me the more wor- 
thy of the labour which it must cost, because, as I havo said, no ono 
has treated tho whole of the argument ; and those who havo treated 
parts thereof, have so treated them that they have left much to the 
industry of others. Of the old philosophers nothing is extant of this 
kind, neither of tho Greeks, among whom Aristotle is said to havo 
written a book called tho Laws of War*, nor of those (the Fathers) 
who wrote as Christians in tho early period of tho Church; which 
is much to bo regretted ; and even of the books of tho ancient 
Romans concerning the Law recognized by their Feciaks, or Heralds' 
College^ we havo received nothing but tho namo. [See Cic. Off. i. 11 ; 
iii. 29.] Those who have made what they call Summce of Cases of 
Consciencef have introduced chapters, as concerning other things, so 
concerning war, concerning promises, concerning oaths, concerning 
reprisals. 

37 I havo also seen special books concerning the Laws of War, 
written partly by theologians, as Francis Victoria f, Henry Gorichem J, 
William Matthcei [Mathison?], Johannes do Carthagenaf; some by 

* But the true reading is AiKatwfiaTa iroXeuiv, the Laws of States, J. B. 

t A Spanish Dominican who lived in the 16th century. The treatise hero 
mentioned is De Indis et Jure Belli, and appears among bis twelve theological 
lectures. 

^ A Dutchman so named from the place of his birth, and chancellor of Co- 
logne. He lived about the middle of the fifteenth century, and wrote a treatise 
De Bella Junto, 

§ Ills book was printed at Rome in 1C09. 

PRELBIINARY REMARKS. xxxiii 

Doctors of Law, as Johannes Lupus'*', Francis Arias f, Joannes h Lig- 
nano]:, Martinus Laudensisf. But all these have said very little, con- 
sidering the copiousness of the argument ; and said it in such a way 
that they have mingled and confounded law natural, law diyino, law 
of nations, ciyil law, and canon law. 

38 What was most wanting in all these, namely, illustrations 
from history, the learned Faber || has undertaken to supply in somo 
chapters of his Semestria: but no further than served his own spe- 
cial purpose, and only giving references. The same has been done 
more largely, and that, by applying a multitude of examples to cer- 
tain maxims laid down, by Balthazar Ayala H, and still more largely by 
Albericus Gentilis'*'* ; whose labour, as I know it may bo serriccable 
to others, and confess it has been to me, so what may be faulty in 
bis style, in his arrangement, in his distinctions of questions, and of 
the different kinds of Law, I leave to the judgment of the reader. 
I will only say, that in the decision of controversies he is often wont 
to follow, either a few examples that are not always to be approved 
of, or else the authority of modern lawyers in opinions given, not a 
few of which are accommodated to the interest of those that consult 
.them, and not founded upon the nature of equity and justice. The 
causes for which a war is denominated just or unjust, Ayala has not 
BO much as touched upon : Gentilis has indeed described, after his 
manner, some of the general heads ; but many prominent and frequent 
cases of controversy he has not even touched upon. 

39 Wo have been careful that nothing of this kind be passed 
over in silence ; having also indicated the sources from which we de« 
rive our judgments, so that it may bo easy to determine any ques- 
tion that may happen to be omitted by us. It remains now that I 
briefly explain with what aids, and with what care, I undertook this 
work. 

In the first place, it was my object to refer the truth of the things 
which belong to Natural Law to some notions, so certain, that no 

* A Datire of Segovia. His Treatise De Bello el Bdlatoribut may be fonnd 
in a large collection called Trticiatiu Tractatuum, Tom. xvi, of theVenice edition, 
1584. 

•f A Spaniard. His book is in the same volume of the same collection, mider 
the title De Bello el fjus JustUia, 

X A natire of Bologna. His Treatise De Bello is in the same rolnme. 

§ His name was Garat. His Treatise De Bello appears in the same volame 
of the Collection. It was reprinted at Loavain in 1(H8, with the Treatise of 
Ayala, spoken of afterwards. 

II Peter du Faar of St Jori, Councillor of the Grand Conncil, afterwards 
Master of Requests, and at last First President of the Parliament of Thoulouse. 
He was scholar to Cujas. His work entitled Semestrium Lihri Tres has been 
several times printed at Paris, Lyons, and Geneva. 

^ He was a native of Antwerp, of Spanish extraction. His Treatise De Jure 
el Offlciia Bellieis was printed at that city in 1507. 

** Professor at Oxford about 1600. His book is De Jure Belli. 

xxxiv PRELBIINARY REMARKS. 

ono can deny them, without doing Tiolenco to his own naturo. For 
the principles of such Natural Law, if you attend to them rightly, 
aro of themselves patent and evident, almost in tho same way ai 
things which are perceived by the external senses; which do not 
deceive us, if the organs are rightly disposed, and if other things 
necessary are not wanting. Therefore Euripides in his Phcenistm 
makes Polynices, whose cause he would have to bo represented ma- 
nifestly just, express himself thus : 

I speak not things hard to be llnder^itood, 
But such as, founded on the rules of good 
And just, aro known alike to leam*d and rude. 

And ho immediately adds the judgment of the chorus, (which consist- 
ed of women, and these too barbarians,) approving what ho said. 

40 In order to give proofs on questions respecting this Natural 
Law, I have made use of tho testimonies of philosophers, historianst 
poets, and finally orators. Not that I regard these as judges from 
whoso decision there is no appeal : for they are warped by their party, 
their argument, their cause : but I quote them as witnesses whoso 
conspiring testimony, proceeding from innumerable different times and 
places, must be referred to some universal cause ; which, in the ques- 
tions with which we are here concerned, can bo no other than a right 
deduction proceeding from tho principles of reason, or some common 
consent. Tlie former cause of agreement points to tlio Law of Nature ; 
the latter, to the Law of Nations : though the difference of these two 
is not to bo collected from the testimonies themselves, (for writers 
everywhere confound tho Law of Nature and the Law of Nations^ 
but from tho quality of tho matter. For what cannot bo deduced 
from certain principles by solid reasoning, and yet is seen and ob- 
served eyerywhere, must have its origin from tho will and consent 
of all. 

41 I hare, therefore, taken pains to distinguish Natural Law from 
the Law of Nations, as well as both from the Civil Law. I have oven 
distinguished, in the Law of Nations, that which is truly and univer- 
sally lawful, true Rights; and guon-Rights, which only produce somo 
external effect similar to that of tho true Rights : for instance, this 
effect ; that they may not bo resisted by force, or may oven be defended 
by force, in order to avoid grave inconvenience. [Such giiosi-Rights 
are thoso of a Master over his slave, where slavery is established by 
Law. W.] How necessary this observation is in many instances, will 
appear in the course of tho work. No less careful have I been to 
separate those things which belong to Jus, or Right, properly and 
strictly so called, (out of which arises the obligation of restitution,) 
and thoso which aro more laxly described by riglitj adjectively; 
because to act otherwise is at variance with some dictate of right 
reason ; concerning which diversity of Jus or Right we have already 
said something above. 

42 Among tho philosophers, the first place is deservedly assigned 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xxxv 

to Aristotlo ; whether wo regard the order of his treatment of these 
sabjccts, or the acutcness of his distinctions, or the weight of his 
reasons. Only it wero to be wished that his authority had not, somo 
ages ago, been converted into a tyranny by others ; so that Truth, in 
the pursuit of which Aristotle faithfully spent his life, suffers no op- 
pression so great as that which is inflicted in Aristotle's name. I, both 
here and in other places, follow the liberty of the old Christians, who 
did not pin their faith to any sect of philosophers; not that they 
agreed with those who say that nothing can be known ; than which 
nothing is more foolish ; but that they thought that there was no sect 
which had seen the whole of the truth, and nono which had not 
seen some part of the truth. They therefore aimed at collecting tho 
truth which was diffused among indiridual philosophers, and among 
sects, into one body: and they thought that this result could bo 
nothing else but tho true Christian doctrine. 

43 Among other points, to mention this in passing, as not foreign 
to our purpose, it appears to me that both somo of the Platonists and 
the ancient Christians had good reason to depart from Aristotle's doc- 
trine, in which he placed the very nature of Virtue in a medium of tho 
affections and actions : which having once laid down, carried him so 
far, that ho compounded Liberality and Frugality, two very different 
virtues, into one virtue ; and assigned to Truth, two opposites which 
are by no means co-ordinate. Boasting and Dissimulation ; and 
fastened upon some things the name of vices, which either do not 
exist, or are not, of themselves, vices ; as tho contempt of pleasure^ 
and of honour, and a lack of irascibility towards men. 

44 That this foundation of virtue, [that it is the medium between 
two extremes,] is not a right one, appears from the example of Justice 
itself ; for the too much and too little which are oppose<l to this, since 
he cannot find in the affections and the consequent actions, he seeks 
them in the things with which justice deals ; which proceeding is, in 
tho first place, a transition to another genus ; a fault which he justly 
blames in others. And in the next place, to take less than is one's 
own, may indeed have a vice adventitiously connected with it, growing 
out of a consideration of what a person, under the circumstances, 
owes to himself and those who depend on him ; but certainly cannot 
be repugnant to justice, which resides entirely in abstaining from what 
is another's. And to this mistake that other is similar, that adultery 
as the fruit of lust, and homicide arising from anger, ho will not allow 
to belong properly to injustice ; though injustice is nothing else in its 
nature than the usurpation of what is another's ; nor does it make any 
difference whether that proceeds from avarice, or from lust, or from 
anger, or from thoughtless compassion ; or on the other hand, from 
the desure of superiority, in which the greatest examples of unjust 
aggressions originate. For to resist all impulses on this account only, 
that human society may not be violated, is what is really the proper 
character of justice. 

xxxvi PRELIMINARY RE5LVRKS. 

45 To return to tho point from whicli I started, it is true that it 
belongs to tho character of certain virtues, that the affections arc kept 
in moderation ; but it does not follow that this is tho proper and uni- 
yersal character of all virtue; but tliat Right Reason, which virtuo 
everywhere follows, dictates that in some things a medium course is 
to be followed, in others, the highest degree of tho affection is to bo 
aimed at. Thus for instance, wo cannot love Qod too much ; for 
superstition does not err in this, that it loves God too much ; but that 
its love acts perversely. We cannot desire eternal happiness too 
much, nor fear eternal misery too much, nor hate sin too much. It 
is tliereforo truly said by Gellius, that there are somo things of which 
the range is not to bo bounded by any limits ; such that the larger and 
fuller they are, the more praiseworthy are they. So Lactautius, after 
discoursing much concerning tho affections, says. The procedure of imV* 
dom ia not shewn in moderating them, but (heir causes ; since they arise 
from external incitements : nor are we to make it our business to restrain 
such affections^ since they may be feeble in tltc greatest crimes, and vehe* 
ment without any crime. It is our purpose to place Aristotle very high, 
but with the same liberty which ho allowed himself, with reference to 
his own master, actuated by his love of truth. 

46 Passages of history are of twofold uso to us; they supply 
both examples of our arguments, and judgments upon them. With 
regard to examples, in proportion as they belong to better times and 
better nations, they have tho more authority ; and therefore we have 
preferred those taken from the Greeks and the Romans. Nor aro 
the judgments delivered in such histories to be despised, especially 
when many of them agree : for Natural Law, as we have said, is in 
a certain measure, to be proved by such consent; and as to the 
Law of Nations, there is no other way of proving it 

47 The opinions of poets and orators have not so much weight ; 
and these we often uso, not so much in order to claim assent to what 
they say, as that wo may give to what wo say something of ornament 
from their modes of expression. 

48 The books written by men inspired by God, or approved by 
them, I often use as authority, with a distinction between the Old 
and the New Law. There are writers who allege the Old Law aa 
a proof of the Law of Nature ; but undoubtedly, without sufficient 
reason; for many parts of that Law proceed from the free will of 
God; which, however, is never at variance with the true Law of 
Nature: and so far, an argument may rightly bo drawn from it; 
provided we distinguish accurately the Command and Will of God, 
which God sometimes executes by means of men, and the Rights of 
men towards one another. We have therefore shunned, as far as we 
could, both that error, and the error contrary to that, of those who 
think that, after the promulgation of the New Covenant, there is no 
longer any use for the old one. We hold the contrary ; both for the 
reasons which wo have now alleged ; and because the nature of tho 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xxxvii 

New Covenant is such, that with relation to the precepts which are 
given in the Old Testament pertaining to the moral yirtuesi the New 
Testament commands the same, or greater virtues of the same kind ; 
and we see that the ancient Christian writers have used the testimony 
of the Old Covenant in this manner. 

49 But in order to see what is the knowledge which the books of 
the Old Testament contain, the Hebrew writers may help us no little ; 
and especially those who were best acquainted with the discourses 
and manners of their countrymen. 

60 I use the New Testament for this purpose ; that I may shew, 
what cannot be shewn in any other way, what is lawful for Chris- 
tians ; which however, contrary to what most writers have done, I 
have distinguished from the Law of Nature : holding it for certain 
that in that more holy Law, a greater holiness is enjoined upon us 
than the Law of Nature of itself requires. Nor have I omitted to 
note, where there are matters which are rather recommended to us 
than commanded ; that we may understand that to deviate from the 
commands is wicked, and makes us liable to punishment: to aim at 
the highest excellence, is the work of a nobler and more generous 
spirit, which will not want its reward. 

51 The Synodical Canons which are authentic, are collections 
fh>m the general precepts of the Divine Law, adapted to special 
occurrences. And these either show what the Divine Law commands, 
or exhort us to that which God enjoins. And this is the office of a 
truly Christian Church : to deliver to Christians the precepts which God 
has delivered to it, and in the manner in which God has delivered them. 

Also the customs which wore received or commanded among those 
ancient Christians who were truly worthy of that great name, may, 
with reason, have the force of Canons. 

Next to these, is the authority of those who, each in his own time, 
flourished among the Christians, with the reputation of pioty and 
learning, and who were never charged with gross error. What these 
assert with great positiveness, as matters of which they are convinced, 
must be allowed to have no small weight in the interpretation of 
what is obscure in the sacred writings : and this the more, in pro- 
portion as we have the assent of a greater number, and as they 
approach nearer to the times of original purity, when neither the 
domination of one, nor the combination of several, had operated to 
adulterate primitive truth. 

52 The Schoolmen, who succeeded them, often shew no ordi- 
nary powers of intellect ; but they fell upon evil times, ignorant of 
good literature ; and therefore it is the less wonderful, if, among 
many things which merit praise, there are some which need excuse. 
Tet when they agree in points of morals, they are not likely to be 
wrong : since they are very clearsighted in discerning what may be 
found fault with in the doctrines of others : while, in their mode of 
maintaining opposite sides of a question, they afford a laudable 

xxxviii PEELIMINAET REMARKS. 

oxamplo of moderation; contending against each other with argu- 
ments ; and not, as the custom has been of late, to the dishonour of 
learning, with railing and abuse, the foul offspring of ill-regulated 
minds. 

63 Of the teachers of the Roman Law, there are three kinds: 
the first, those whoso works appear in the Pandects, the Codex of 
Thcodosius, and that of Justinian, and the laws called Novells. The 
second class contains those who succeeded Imerius ; namely Accur- 
sius, Bartolus, and so many others, who have long borne supreme 
sway in the Courts of Law. The third class includes those who 
have combined the study of elegant literature with the study of the 
law. For the first I hare great deference; for they often supply 
the best reasons to prove what belongs to the nature of Jus ; and give 
their testimony both to Natural Law and to the Law of Nations : yet 
in such a way that they, no less than others, often confound these 
provinces : indeed they often call that Jxu Gentiumy the Law of Na- 
tions, which is only the law of certain peoples ; and that, not even 
by consent, but what one nation has received by imitation of ano* 
ther, or by accident. Also what truly belongs to Jua Oentium they 
often treat promiscuously and indiscriminately with points which 
belong to the Roman Law ; as appears in the titles concerning Cap- 
tives, and Postliminium. We have endeavoured to keep these sub- 
jects distinct. 

54 The second of these classes, regardless of divine law and of 
ancient history, attempted to define all the controversies of kings 
and peoples on the grounds of the Roman Law, sometimes taking 
into account the Canons. But these writers, too, were prevented, by 
the unhappiness of their times, from understanding those laws 
rightly ; being, in other respects, sufficiently intelligent in investigating 
the nature of right and equity : whence it comes to pass, that they, 
while they are good authorities for making new laws, are bad inter- 
preters of laws already made. They are to be listened to with most 
attention, when they give their testimony to such customs as make the 
Law of Nations in our time. 

55 The masters of the third class, who include themselves within 
the limits of the Roman Law, and either never, or in a very slight 
degree, travel into that common or Natural Law, have scarcely any 
use in reference to our argument. They join the subtilty of the 
schoolmen with a knowledge of the laws and canons ; so that two of 
them, Spaniards, Covamivias and Vasquius, did not abstain from the 
controversies even of peoples and of kings : the latter, very freely ; 
the former, more modestly, and not without shewing some exactness 
of judgment. The French have introduced the practice of connecting 
history more with the study of the law: among whom Bodin and 
Ilotoman have a groat name : the former, in the general scheme of 
his work; the latter, in questions scattered through the progress 
of his. Both the opmions and the arguments of these writers will 

PRELIMINARY REMARKS. xxxix 

often rcquiro our consideration, and will supply us with materials 
for truths. 

56 In the whole course of my work I have had in yiow these 
things especially: to make my definitions and reasons as clear as I 
could: to arrange in due order the matters I had to treat of: and to 
distinguish clearly things which were really different, though they 
seemed identical. 

57 I haye refrained from discussing points which helong to 
another subject ; as the Utility of this or that course ; for these belong 
to a special Art, namely, the Art Political ; which Aristotle rightly 
treats as a separate subject, mixing with it nothing of any other kind; 
thus differing from Bodinus, in whom this Art is confounded with 
Jus in our sense. In some cases, however, I have made mention of 
the Utility of acts ; but collaterally only, and in order to distinguish 
that question the more plainly from the question of Right. 

58 The reader will do me injustice, if he judges me to have 
written with a regard to any controversies of our own time; either 
such as already exist, or such as can be foreseen as likely to arise. 
I profess, in all sincerity, that, as mathematicians consider their 
figures as abstracted from body, so did I, in treating of Rights, ab- 
stract my mind from every particular fact 

59 As to the style, I was unwilling, by adding prolixity of lan- 
guage to the multitude of the matters treated of, to weary the reader 
whom I wished to benefit. I therefore have followed a concise and 
didactic mode of treatment : that they who have to manage public 
affairs, may see, at one view, the kinds of controversies which are 
wont to arise, and the principles by which they are to be decided: 
this being known, it will be easy to accommodate their own dis- 
courses to the subject, and to expand the discussion as much as 
they please. 

60 I have adduced the words of the authors themselves, when 
they were such as either carried with them authority, or exhibited 
especial elegance : and this I have sometimes done in Greek authors ; 
but mostly, when either the quotation was short, or one of which I 
despaired of imitating the grace in a Latin translation : such a trans- 
lation I have however added in every instance, for the benefit of those 
who find the Greek difficult. 

61 I beg all readers into whose hands my work may come, to 
take the same liberty in judging of my opinions and expressions 
which I have taken with regard to those of others. They cannot 
be more ready to admonish me when I am in error, than I shall be 
to attend to their admonition. 

And now, if I have said anything which is at variance with sound 
piety, with good morals, with holy scripture, with the unity of the 
Christian Church, with truth in any form ;— let that be as unsaid. 

OF THE 

EIGHTS OF WAR AND PEACE 

BOOK I. 

CHAPTER I. 

What is War. What are Rights. 

Sect. ] 

[. Order of the work. 

IX. 

11. 

Definition and etymology of 

X. 

war. 

XI. 

III. 

Rights, as an attribute of ac- 

XII. 

tions. 

XIII. 

IV. 

A Right, as an attribute of 

XIV. 

persons. 

XV. 

V. 

A Right as a jural claim. 

XVI. 

VI. 

Rights vulgar, and eminent. 

VII. 

Desert, or moral claim. 

XVII. 

VIII. 

Corrective and Distributive 
Justice. 

Law Natural and instituted. 

Natural Law. 

Common with Animals? 

Proofs of Natural Law. 

Instituted Law. 

Human, Jus Gentiam. 

Divine Instituted Law. 

The Hebrew Law does not 

bind us. 

Christian use of the Hebrew 

Law. 

I. [pVXJESTIONS of Rights among citizens cf the same State 
V^ are settled by the instituted Law of the State ; and there- 
fore do not belong to our subject, which is, Rights by nature, not 
Rights by institution.] 

Between persons who are not bound by a common instituted 
Right, as those who have not yet formed a State ; or between those 
who belong to different States — whether private persons, or kings, or 
those whose mutual Rights [and Obligations] resemble those of kings, 
such as Rulers of peoples, or free Peoples themselves — questions of 
Bights pertain either to time of war or time of peace. But war is 
undertaken for the sake of peace ; and, on the other hand, there is 
no question of Rights which may not issue in war : hence we shall 
begin by Rights in war, or, as they are termed, Rights of War: and the 
consideration of War will lead us to the consideration of Peace, the 
end of war. 

n. 1 Wo hare then to treat of War, and of the Rights of War. 
We must then ask, What is War ? What are Rights ? 

Cicero says that War is a contest or contention carried on by force. 
But usage applies the term, not to an action, [a contest,] but to a 

B 

2 WHAT IS WAR. WHAT ARE RIGHTS. [Book I. 

state or condition : and thos we may saj, War ia the state of persona, 
contending bj force, as such. 

Hence we do not exclude private* wars, which preceded public 
wars, and hare the same origin as those. 

2 The name, (Belliim,) comes from an old word Dudtum^ and 
implies the separation of two, (duo;) as peace is unity ^ when two are 
made one. So the Greek irSk€ftos from vokvt, many. 

3 The common use of the word War allows us to include Prirate 
War, though, used generally, it often means specifically public War. 

We do not say that war is a state of just contention, because pre- 
cisely the point to be examined is, Whether there be just war, and 
What war is just And therefore we must distinguish the subject. War, 
from the question which we examine concerning it. 

III. 1 By entitling our Treatise, 0/ the Rights of War, we 
mean, in the first place, to imply the discussion of the questions just 
stated. Whether any war is just, and What is just in war. For Rights, 
Jus, in this case, moans only what is right, that is, just ; and that, 
rather with a negatire than a positire sense; so that that comes 
within the substantire Right, which is not unjust, or wrong. 

That is unjust which is contrary to the nature of a society of 
rational creatures. Cicero, Seneca, Florentinus, reason on the ground 
of man being intended by nature for society. [See the quotations.] 

2 Society is either that of equals, as brothers, friends, allies; 
or It is unequal, as that of parent and child, master and servant, king 
and subjects, God and men : and what is just, is different in the two 
cases. We may call them respectlyely Equatorial Rights and Rec- 
torial Rights. 

IV. Jtu, Right, has another signification, derired from the former, 
as when we say my Right. In this sense Right is a moral Quality by 
which a person is competent to have or to do a certain thing justly. 

Right in this sense belongs to a person, though sometimes it 
follows a thing : as one piece of land may haire a right of way, or 
other easement, over another piece of land. In this case the Right 
still belongs to a person, namely, to the person who possesses the first 
piece. Such rights are called real Rights in comparison with others 
which are merely personal. 

This moral quality, when perfect, is caMed /acultas, a jural claim; 
when less perfect, aptitudo, a fitness, or moral claim. 

V. A Jural Claim, belonging to any one, the jurists call suum, his 
own thing. We shall call this hereafter a Right strictly speaking, or 
a RigJU proper, 

* In including ;7riva^«, and excluding just, in his definition of war, Grotios seems 
to hare in view the definition of Albericus Gentilis ; " Helium est contentio, publica, 
armata, justa.'* For reasons for preferring the latter definition, see Elements of 
Aforality, Art. 1058. The rights of War, as understood in modern times, exclude 
priTate wars, or wars among subjects, and include the assertion of justice. If 
thej did not, there would be no question of Jlights, W. W. 

Chap. I.] WHAT IS WAR. WHAT ARE RIGHTS. 3 

It includesy Power; whether orer one's self, which is Liberty; 

or orer another, which is Authority, for example^ 
paternal, dominical (that of a master OTor a servant ;) 
Ownership ; whether full, as of Property ; 

or less full, as of Compact, Pledge, Credit, to which 
corresponds Debt on the other side. 

YI. But this Right is again twofold : Vulgar, which exists for the 
purpose of prirate use ; and Eminent, which is superior to vulgar Right, 
and is the right which the community has over persons and things 
for the sake of the common good. 

Thus the Royal authority has under it the paternal and dominicaL 
So the power of ownership of the Sovereign over private property 
for the common good is greater than that of the private owners : so 
erery one is more bound to the state in regard to public uses than to 
his private creditor. 

VII. A Fitness is what Aristotle calls a$iap, a moral desert, or claim. 

ym. 1 A Jural Claim, or Right proper, belongs to Expletory 
Justice, or Justice proper. This is what Aristotle calls Contractual 
Justice; but the term is too narrow; for that the possessor of my 
thing should restore it to me, is not a matter of contract ; and yet it 
belongs to this division. Elsewhere he calls it by a better name. 
Corrective Justice. 

A Moral Claim [sometimes called an Imperfect Right] belongs to 
Attributive Justice, which Aristotle calls Distributive Justice, the com- 
panion of the virtues which are useful to our neighbours, as liberality, 
mercy, directive prudence. 

2 Aristotle says that Expletory Justice proceeds by arithmetical 
proportion. Attributive, by geometrical proportion; but this is not 
always true. The two differ, not in their rules, but in the matter 
about which they are concerned. A contract of partnership is ruled 
by expletory justice, but according to geometrical proportion; if there 
is only one person fit for an office, it is by attributive justice given 
to him alone, instead of reckoning proportion. 

3 Equally erroneous is what others say, that Attributive Justice 
concerns things common or public; Expletory, private possessions. 
For if a man bestow his private property in legacies, he uses attri- 
butive justice; and the state, in paying what it owes to private 
citizens, uses expletory justice*. 

See the story in the Cyropsedia, in which Cyrus is blamed for giving 
the big boy the larger coat, which belonged to the little boy : because 
his business was expletory, not attributive justice. 

DC. 1 Ju$ has a third signification, meaning Law in its lai^est 
tense, namely, ''a Rule of moral acts obliging to what is right." 

*' Obliging" is necessary to this signification: for mere Counsel or 
* The remarks in the text go far to prove that the distinction of Contractoal, 
Corrective, or Expletory justice, on the one hand, from Distributive or Attributive 
Justice on the other, is not tenable. W. W. 

B2 

4 WHAT IS WAR. WHAT ARE RIQHTS. [Book I. 

Advice is not included in Jus or Law ; and Permiflsion is not Law, but 
the absence of Law, except so far as it obliges other persons not to 
impede. 

''Obliging to what is right!' not to what is just; for Jua in this 
signification does not include strict Justice merely, but the matter of 
other virtues. Tot what is right is sometimes loosely called /tu^ 

2 The best distinction of Law in this general sense, is that of 
Aristotle, into Natural Law, and Voluntary or Legal Law [or Positire 
Law; ductuov (fivaixhv and hUaiov vofiuchv, Eth. Nicom, t. 10,] or Insti- 
tuted Law, t6 iv raf ci. The Hebrew has a like distinction. 

X. 1 Natural Law is the Dictate of Right Reason, indicating 
that any act, from its agreement or disagreement with the rational 
[and social*] nature [of man] has in it a moral turpitude or a moral 
necessity ; and consequently that such act is forbidden or conmuinded 
by God, tho author of nature. 

2 Acts concerning which there is such a Dictate, are obligatory, 
[morally necessary,] or are unlawful, in themselves, and are therefore 
understood as necessarily commanded or forbidden by God; and in 
this character. Natural Law differs, not only from Human Law, bat 
from Positive Divine Law, which does not forbid or command acts 
which, in themselves and by their own nature, are either obligatory or 
unlawful; but, by forbidding them makes them unlawful, by com- 
manding them makes them obligatory. * 

3 In order to understand Natural Law, we must remark that 
some things are said to be according to Natural Law, which are not 
so properly, but, as the schools love to speak, reduotively. Natural 
Law not opposing them; as we have said [HI. 1] that some things are 
called just, which are not unjust. And again, by an abuse of expres- 
sion, some things are said to be according to Natural Law which 
reason shews to be decent, or better than their opposites, though not 
obligatory. [As monogamy is better, though we cannot strictly say 
that polygamy is contrary to Natural Law. Concerning the use of 
the term Natural Law, or Law of Nature, in such cases^ see E. 3f . 
1054.] 

4 It is to be remarked also that Natural Law deals not only with 
things made by nature herself, but with things produced by the act 
of man. Thus property, as it now exists, is the result of human will : 
but being once introduced, Natural Law itself shews that it is unlaw- 
ful for me to take what is yours against your will. And thus Paulus 
says that theft is prohibited naturcUi jure; Ulpian says that it is 
naturd turpe, bad by nature : Euripides says it is displeasing to God. 

5 Natural Law is so inmiutable that it cannot be changed by . 
God himself. For though the power of God be immense, there aro 
some things to which it does not extend : because if wo speak of those 
things being done, tho words are mere words, and have no meaning, 
being self-contradictory. Thus God himself cannot make twice two 

♦ Added bj Barbejrac, from what followe xii. 1. See alao above, in. 1. 

Chap. I.] WHAT IS WAR. WHAT ARE RIGHTS. 5 

not be four; and in like manner, he cannot make that which is in- 
trinsically bad, not be bad. For as the essence of things, when the j 
exist, and by which they exist, does not depend on anything else, so is 
it with the properties which follow that essence : and such a property 
is the baseness of certain actions, when compared with the nature of 
rational beings. And God himself allows himself to be judged of by 
this rule. [See the quotations. The passage from Aristotle, Eth, 
Nicom, n. 6, is misapplied, as Barbeyrac obserres.] 

6 Tet sometimes, in acts directed by Natural Law, there is a 
seeming of change, which may mislead the unwary; when in fact it 
is not Natural Law which is changed, but the thing about which that 
Law is concerned. Thus if a creditor gives me a receipt for my debt, 
I am no longer bound to pay him; not that Natural Law has ceased 
to command me to pay what I owe, but because I have ceased to owe 
it. So if God command any one to be slain or his goods to be taken, 
this does not make lawful homicide or theft, which words inTolye 
crime : but the act will no longer be homicide or theft, being author- 
ized by the supreme Lord of life and of goods. 

7 Further; some things are according to Natural Law, not 
simply, but in a certain state of things. Thus a community in the 
use of things was natural till property was established ; and the right 
of getting possession of one's own by force existed before instituted law. 

XI. 1 What the Roman lawbooks say of a law of natiure which 
we have in common with animals, which they call more peculiarly 
jxM naturcB, besides the natural law which we have in common with 
men, which they often call jus gentiumf is of little or no use. For no 
creature is properly capable of Jus, which does not by nature use 
general precepts : as has been remarked by Hesiod, Cicero, Lactantius, 
Polybius. [See the quotations.] 

2 If we ever assign justice to brute animals, it is improperly, 
when we see in them some shadow or vestige of reason. There being 
acts which we have in common with brutes, as the rearing of off- 
spring, and others which are peculiar to us, as the worship of God, 
has no bearing on the nature of Jua, 

Xn. 1 That there is such a thing as Natural Law, is commonly 
proved both a priori and a posteriori; the former the more subtle, the 
latter, the more popular proof. It is proved a priori by shewing the 
agreement or disagreement of anything with the rational and social 
nature of man. It is proved a posteriori when by certain or very 
probable accounts we find anything accepted as Natural Law among 
all nations, or at least the more civilized. For a universal effect 
requires a universal cause: now such a universal belief can hardly 
have any cause except the common sense of mankind. 

Hesiod, Heraclitus, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, Quintilian, agree 
that the consent of all nations is evidence of the truth. And Porphyry, 
Andronicus of Rhodes, Plutarch, Aristotle, agree that the more savage 
nations are of less weight in such an estimate. [See the quotations.] 

6 WHAT IS WAR. WnAT ARE RIGHTS. [Book I. 

XUI. Thus much of Natural Law; next of Positiro or Instituted 
Law. [See Sect z. 2.] And this is either Human or Divine. 

XIV. 1 Of Human [instituted] Law, first, as more widely known*- 
This is either the Civil Law, [that is, the National Law,] or Law 

in a narrower, or in a wider sphere. 

The Civil Law is that which governs the State, (CivUas), 

The State, (CiviUu) is a perfect [that is, independent] collection 
of free men, associated for the sake of enjoying the advantages of jui, 
and for common utility. 

Law in a narrow sphere, and not derived from the State, though 
tuhject to it, is various, as paternal precepts, the commands of a mas* 
ter, and the like. 

Law in a wider sphere is Ju$ Gentium^ the Law of Nations, that 
Law which has received an obligatory force from the will of all 
nations, or of many. 

1 have added '* or of manyj* because scarce any Law is found, ex- 
cept Natural Law, (which also is often called Jus Gentium,) common 
to all nations. Indeed that is often Jus Gentium in one part of the 
world which is not so in another ; as we shall shew when we come to 
speak of captivity and of postliminium. 

2 This J%M Ge^ium, Law of Nations, is proved in the same man- 
ner as the unwritten Civil Law, by constant usage, and the testimony 
of those who have made it their study. It is, as Dio Chrysostom says, 
the invention of life and of time. And here the best historians are 
a great help to us*. 

XV. 1 What is Divine [instituted] Law is sufficiently apparent 
from the term itself; namely, that which has its origin from the Divine 
Will; by which character it is distinguished from Natural Law, which 
also may be called Divine, [but which is independent: see $ z. 5]. In 
such Law it may bo said, but with reserve, that God did not command 
the act because it was just, but that it was just because God command- 
ed it. 

2 This Law is given either to the whole human race, or to one 
nation. To the human race, the Law has thrice been given by God ; 
at the Creation ; immediately after the Deluge, and at the coming of 
Christ. These three sets of Laws oblige all men, as soon as they 
acquire a sufficient knowledge of them. 

XVI. 1 There is one nation in particular to which God has 
especially given his Laws, namely, the Hebrew People. See Deut. iv. 7; 
Psalm czlvii. 

2 It is erroneous to suppose (as some Jews have done) that those 
of other nations, in order to be saved, must submit to the Jewish law. 
For the law does not oblige those to whom it is not given; and it tells 
us itself to whom it is given, by saying, '' Hear, O Israel." And the 

* Concerning the distinction of the two senses of Jui Gentium, that of the Ro- 
mans, with whom it means the Law common to all nations, and that of the modems, 
with whom it means the Law between mitions, see JSlemente of Morality, 1051. 

Chap. L] WHAT IS WAR. WHAT AEB RIGHTS. 7 

JewB are perpetually spoken of as under a special coyenant, and 
chosen to be a peculiar people of God ; as Maimonides prores from 
Deut zxxiii. 4. 

3 There were however always liying among the Jews certain '^ de- 
Tout persons," as the Syrophoenician woman, Cornelius, the '' devout 
Greeks" (Acts xviL 4), who are also spoken of in various passages of 
the Old Testament [see the references]. These, as the Jewish doctors 
teach, were bound to obey the laws given to Adam and to Noah, to 
abstain from idols and from blood, and some other matters; but not 
to observe the peculiar Jewish laws : except that some laws expressly 
direct that not only the Jew, but the stranger within his gate should 
be bound by them: [as the law of the Sabbath : Exod. xx. 10]. 

4 It was also permitted to strangers to worship and to sacrifice 
in the temple ; but standing in a peculiar place, separate from the 
place of the Israelites. 

The prophets speaking to strangers ; Elisha to Naaman, Jonah to 
the Nlnevites, Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, and other prophets to the 
Tynans, Moabites, and Egyptians ; never say that they were required 
to submit to the Law of Moses. 

5 The same is true of circumcision ; with this difference, that the 
Law of Moses bound the Israelites only, the law of circumcision, all 
the posterity of Abraham ; whence the Jews imposed circumcision on 
the Idumeans. Therefore the other peoples who used circumcision 
were probably descended from Ishmael or from Esau, or from Ke- 
turah [Abraham's wife. Gen. xxv. 1]. 

6 In all other cases, the reasoning of St Paul, Rom. ii. 14, ap- 
plies. The Gentiles are a law to themselves: the uncircumcision, 
keeping this law, is counted for circumcision [v. 26]. And this was 
acknowledged [see the example]. But circumcision was sometimes 
undergone by strangers for special objects [see the text]. Yet some 
in later times perversely held that there was no salvation out of the 
pale of Judaism. 

7 Hence we learn that we are not bound by any part of the 
Jewish law, peculiarly so called ; because all obligation extraneous to 
Natural Law comes from the will of the Lawgiver ; and there is no 
indication that it was the will of God that others besides the Israelites 
should be bound by that law. We have therefore no occasion to prove 
the abrogation of this law; for it could not be abrogated with regard 
to those who were never bound by it. With regard to the Jews, the 
obligation of the Ritual Law was removed on the promulgation of the 
Gospel, as was revealed to St Peter, Acts x. 15. The rest of the Jewish 
Law was abolished by the dispersion of the Jewish nation. 

8 What we Gentiles have gained by the coming of Christ is, not 
that we are freed from the law of Moses: but that, wherever formerly 
we could only have an obscure hope founded on the goodness of God, 
we now have a Covenant, and may be gathered into one Church with 
the descendants of the Patriarchs, the Law being taken away, which 
was the partition- wall between us ; Eph. ii. 14. 

8 WHAT IS WAR. WHAT ARE RIGHTS. [Book I. 

XVII. 1 Since then the law of Moses cannot impose any direct 
obligation upon us, let us see if it can be of any other use in questions 
of the Rights of War, and the like. 

2 (1) In the first place, the Jewish Law shews that what is com- 
manded by that law is not contrary to Natural Law. For Natural Law 
being, as we hare said [x. 6] perpetual and immutable, God, who is 
never unjust, could not command anything against that Law. Add 
that the Law is called right, pure, holy, just, and good. [See the quo- 
tations]. 

This is true of precepts : with regard to permissions, we must dis- 
tinguish. Permission, as a mere fact, [that is, by saying nothing, as the 
law does concerning actions altogether indifferent,] need not be con- 
sidered. Permission legal, is cither plenary, which gives a right to do 
a thing entirely lawfully; or less full, which only gives impunity among 
men, and a Right not to bo impeded by any other person. Permission 
of the former kind, no less than Precept, proves that the matter so 
stated is not against Natural Law. With regard to permission of the 
latter kind, the case is different. But this inference [from the Law of 
Moses to the Natural Law] rarely occurs : because when the words of 
permission are ambiguous, it is more convenient to infer, from the 
Natural Law, the kind of the permission, than from the kind of the 
permission, to infer the agreement with Natural Law* 

3 (2) We remark also : that it is now lawful for the Rulers of 
Christian states to make laws of the same purport as the laws of 
Moses ; except those Mosaic Laws of which the whole substance be- 
longed to the time when Christ was expected, and the Gospel not yet 
revealed; or except Christ has commanded the contrary generally; or 
specially. With these three exceptions, there cannot be devised any 
case in which that which was formerly instituted by the Law of Moses 
should not bo within the lawful sphere of instituted law at present. 

4 (3) In the third place : whatever is conmianded by the law of 
Moses, connected with the virtues which Christ requires from his dis- 
ciples, that, at least, if not more, is due from Christians. The foun- 
dation of this remark is this: that the virtues which are required of 
Christians, as humility, patience, kindness, are required in a greater 
degree than they were under the Jewish Law : and that with good 
reason; because the heavenly promises are more and more clearly 
given in the Gospel. And hence, the Old Law is declared not to have 
been perfect, nor faultUss: and Christ is called the end of the Law; 
and the Law a echoolmaster to lead us to Christ, [See the references 
in the text.] 

For example, the Old Law concerning the Sabbath, and the Law 
concerning Tithes, shew that Christians are obliged to give up not less 
than a seventh part of their time to divine worship ; and not less than 
a tenth part of their goods for the support of those who minister in 
sacred things, and the like pious uses. 

CHAPTER 11. 

Whether War ever be just 

8kct. L War not contrary to Na-^ YI. la War contrary to the Gospel f 

tural Law. Prcnnonitions. 

II. A8 appears from History, Yll. Arguments from the Gospel 

III. And General Consent, against War, 

IV. War not contrary to Jut Gen- VIII. Arguments answered, 

tium, IX. Opinions of the early Chris- 

V. War not contrary to Divine tians against War: 
instituted Law before the Gos- X. In defence cf War, 
peU 

HAVING seen what are the fountains of Jue or of Law, let us 
come to the first and more general question, which is this: 
Whether any war he just ; or, Whether it ever he lawful to make 
war. 

I. 1 This question, and others which will follow, are first to he 
treated with reference to Natural Law. Cicero repeatedly speaks of 
certain First Principles, and certain other truths, the consequences of 
these, but of higher yaluo than those. There is, according to him, 
a First Principle of Self-preserration. An animal, from its birth, is 
urged to care for and preserre itself to choose the means of preserving 
its good condition, to shun destruction, and every thing which leads to 
its destruction. Thus there is no one who does not prefer to have the 
parts of his body sound and whole, rather than maimed and distorted. 
The first business of each is to preserve himself in the state of nature; 
the next, to retidn what is according to nature, and to reject what is 
contrary to it. 

2 After this Principle, there follows a notion of the Agreement of 
things with Reason, which is superior to the body; and this Agree- 
ment, in which what is reasonable (honestum) becomes our object, is 
seen to be of more importance than those things to which alone the 
first impulse of appetite tended. The first Principle [of self-preser^ 
▼ation] commends us to Right Reason ; but Right Reason ought to be 
dearer to us than those things by which we were first led to use it. 

This is allowed by all who are of sound mind, without demonstra- 
tion. Hence in examining what agrees with Natural Law, we must 
first see what agrees with that first principle of Self-preservation; and 
afterwards proceed to that which, though subsequent in origin, is of 
greater dignity; and must not only accept it, if it be offered, but seek 
it with all care. 

3 This object, what is reasonable, {honestum,) has different ranges 
In different cases, according to the diversity of the matter. Sometimes 
it lies (as it were) in a point, so that if you depart from it by tho 

10 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. [Book I. 

smallest space, you fall into a fault : sometimes it has a wider field, so 
that the thing in question may be either done laudably, or omitted or 
done otherwise without prarity, according as we pass from the exist- 
ence to the non-existence of certain conditions'^. Between black and 
white, we find intermediate and mixed degrees, which approach the 
one or the other. And it is in this latter class of cases that laws, both 
dirine and human, are mainly occupied ; aiming at this, that what of 
itself was only laudable, may become a duty. As we hare said abore, 
that when we examine concerning Natural Law, we inquire whether 
anything can be done not unjustly ; and then that is understood to be 
unjust, which has a necessary repugnance with a rational and social 
nature. 

4 In the first principle of nature [Self-preservation] there is 
nothing which is repugnant to war: indeed all things rather faTOur it: 
for the end of war, the prcservatioa of life and limb, and the retention 
or acquisition of things useful to life, agrees entirely with that princi- 
ple. And if force be requisite for this purpose, still there is in this 
nothing at variance with nature ; for all animals are provided by na- 
ture with means for the very purpose of self-defence. So Xenophon, 
Ovid, Horace, Lucretius. Galen observes that man is an animal 
bom for peace and war, not bom with weapons, but with hands by 
which weapons can bo acquired. And we see infants, without teach* 
ing, use their hands for weapons. So also Aristotle. [See the passages 
in the text.] 

5 Again, Right Reason and the nature of Society, which are 
next to be considered, do not prohibit all force, but that only which is 
repugnant to Society; that is, that which is used to attack tiie Rights 
of others. For Society has for its object, that every one may have 
what is his own in safety, by the common help and agreement. Which 
consideration would still have place, even if property were not intro- 
duced : for even then, each one would have a property in hb life, limbs, 
liberty; and these could not be attacked without wrong done to him. 
And also to use things which lay in common, and to take as much of 
them as nature should require, would be the right of the person who 
first took occupation of them ; and he who should prevent the exercise 
of this Right, would do the occupier wrong. And this is much more 
easily understood now, when property has taken a shape by law or 
usage: as Cicero says. [See the passage in the text.] 

6 Therefore it is not contrary to the nature of Society to take 
caro of the future for one's self, so that the Rights of others be not 
infringed: and thus, even force, which does not violate the Right 
of another, is not unjust. So Cicero, Ulpian, Ovid. [See the pas- 
sages.] 

II. 1 Our doctrine, that all war is not contrary to Natural Law, 

* Thus polygamy may be blameless, permitted, or criminal, according to the 
state of law. Monogamy may be laudable when polygamy is permitted ; but may 
be elevated into a duty in a better state of society. W. W. 

Chap. IL] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 11 

is further proved from the sacred history. Abraham made war upon 
the four kings who had plundered Sodom, and was thereupon blessed 
by M^chisedoc This he did without the special mandate of God, as 
appears by the history: he must therefore haye been justified by the 
Law of Nature : for he was a most holy and wise man, as eren heathen 
authors declare. I do not use the history of the seven people, whom 
God gave up to be rooted out by the Israelites : for the Jews had a 
special command for thus dealing with people gtiilty of enormous 
crimes; whence these wars are in Scripture called the wars of the 
Lord, as being undertaken by the command of God, and not by the 
will of man. An example more to the purpose is that in which the 
Jews, under Moses and Joshua, resisted the attack of the Amalekitcs : 
(Exod. xyii. 8), which God did not command beforehand, but approved 
when it was done. 

2 But further, God prescribed to his people general and per- 
petual laws concerning the mode of carrying on war (Deut. xx. 10. 
15) : shewing plainly by this that a war may be just, without a special 
mandate : for the case of the nations of Canaan is here expressly dis- 
tinguished from the case of other nations. And inasmuch as nothing 
is there said as to what are just causes of war, this shews that they 
are assumed to be known by the light of nature. Thus we have 
Jephthah's war against the Ammonites concerning the occupation of 
land (Judges xi. 13) : David's war against the same people for the 
insult done to his ambassadors (2 Sam. x. 4) : so the Apostle to the 
Hebrews (xi. 32) speaks of Gideon and Barak and Samson and 
Jephthah and David and Samuel and others, who through faith sub- 
dued kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of 
the aliens : when, as the context shews, '* faith" includes the belief that 
what is done is pleasing to God. [The quotation 1 Sam. xxv. 28 
should have come in earlier.] 

III. 1 What we say is proved by the consent of all nations, and 
especially of wise men. There are the noted passages in Cicero's 
Oration for Milo, in which he appeals to the testimony of nature for 
the right of self-defence. To the same purpose Josephus the his- 
torian, Caius and Florentinus the jurists. [See the quotations.] 

2 The equity of this is so manifest, that even in brute animals, 
among which, as we have said, there are no rights, but only a shadow 
of them, we still distinguish between force used in committing injury, 
and in repelling it. Thus Ulpian, after saying that an animal which is 
devoid of reason cannot commit wrong, still adds, that if rams or bulls 
fight, Q. Mutius had ruled that a distinction was to be made, and that 
if the one who had been the aggressor was killed, the action would not 
lie ; but if the one who had given no provocation was killed, the action 
was good. [The misquotation from Pliny adds nothing to the argu- 
ment] 

rv. 1 By Natural Law, then, [Jure ncUuraU or Jure gentium] it 
is plain that all wars are not condemned. 

12 WHETHER WAE EVER BE JUST. [Book L 

2 That by the Toluntary or instituted Law of nations [see Chap, u 
§ ix. 2] wars are not condemned, we have eridence enough in the his- 
tories, laws and customs of all nations. Indeed Hermogenianus has 
said that wars were introduced Jure gentium, by Natural Law : which 
we are to understand thus : that by the Jua gentium a certain form of 
war was introduced, so that wars which take this form, have, jure gen- 
tiumf certain effects. And hence we have a distinction, of which we 
shall afterwards make use, into a war formal according to Ju$ gentium, 
which is also called a just or legitimate war, a complete war; and in- 
formal war, which may still be legitimate or just [in a more general 
sense,] that is, agreeable to justice. Informal wars, if there be a rea- 
sonable cause for them, are not supported by Jus gentium, but neither 
are they resisted by it, as will heret^r be shewn. Liyy and Floren- 
tinus say that Jus gentium directs us to repel force by force. [See 
the passages.] 

y. 1 Concerning Instituted Divine Law [Chap. i. § zr. l] there 
is more difficulty. Nor is the objection valid, that Natural Law is 
immutable, and therefore cannot be changed, oven by God : for this is 
true as to what is commanded or forbidden by Natural Law, but not 
as to what is only permitted. Things of that kind are not properly 
under Natural Law, but extraneous to it, and may be forbidden or 
commanded [by Instituted Law]. 

2 The first passage usually brought from Scripture, to shew that 
wars are unlawful, is the law given to Noah (Gen. iz. 6, 6). What is 
there said. Tour blood of your lives I will require, at the hand of man 
will I require it, some understood in the most general sense ; and what 
is said afterwards. Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shaU his blood 
be sited, they regard as a threatening, not an approval. I cannot assent 
to either opinion. The interdict concerning the shedding of blood is 
not of wider extent than the command. Thou shalt not Ml: and this, it 
is plain, does not prohibit either capital punishment or wars. And 
the one law, as well as the other, does not constitute any new offence, 
but only declares and repeats the Natural Law, obliterated by evil 
custom. Whence the words [sheddeth man's bloodl] are to be under> 
stood as including criminality in the act: as the word homicide does not 
mean any killing of a man, but the intentional killing of an innocent 
man. What is added, his blood shaU be shed in turn, appears to me to 
imply, not the mere fact, but the Law of justice. 

3 My explanation of the matter is this. It is naturally equitable 
that whatever evil any one has inflicted, the same ho shaU suffer, 
according to what is called the Law of Rhadamanthus. So Seneca. 
Cain, with a sense of this natural equity said (Gen. iv. 14), Every one 
thatfindeth me sluill slay me. In the earliest times, however, for various 
reasons, this was not enforced ; the manslayer was indeed shunned by 
men, but not put to death : as Plato directs in his Laws : and as 
Euripides states the usage of Greece in his Orestes, So Thucydides ; 
Lactantius. 

Chap. H.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 13 

4 The example of Cain was regarded as establishing a law, so 
that Lamech (Gen. ir. 24) promised himself impunity, from this ex- 
ample, after the like deed. 

5 But since before the deluge, in the age of the giants, ylolence 
had become general, when after the deluge, God restored the race of 
man, he proyided by increased seyerity against the recurrence of the 
eyil: and repressing the lenity of the former time, he gaye his per- 
mission to that which was naturally equitable, that he who slew a 
homicide should be blameless. Which afterwards, when tribunals for 
high crimes were instituted, was confined to the judges. Tet a yestige 
of the ancient usage remained in the Right of the ayenger of blood, 
eyen under the Law of Moses, of which we shall hereafter speak. 

6 We haye a strong confirmation of this interpretation in Abra- 
ham, who, though he must haye known the law giyen to Noah, took 
arms against the four kings. So Moses directed the Israelites to 
fight against the Amalekites, not specially consulting God on this 
point. Add to this, that capital punishments are applied not only to 
homicides, but to other criminals, not only among other nations, but 
in the chosen people of God. Gen. xxxyiii. 24. 

7 In fact men had proceeded from like to like, by the light of 
reason, in their conjecture of the dirine will, and had judged that 
what was the appointed punishment of homicides was equitable also 
towards other great criminals. For there are things which are to 
man of no less yalue than life, as good fame, yirginity, conjugal 
fidelity : and things without which life cannot be safe, as a reyerence 
for the soyereign authority which holds society together: so that 
those who assail these objects are held as no better than homicides. 

8 Connected with this is the tradition extant among the Jews, 
that there were given by God to the sons of Noah seycral laws ; 
which are not all recorded by Moses, because it was enough for his 
purpose to giye them afterwards as included in the particular law of 
the Hebrews. Thus it appears. Ley. xviii. 6, that there was an 
ancient law against marrying persons near of kin, though no such law 
is preyiously mentioned by Moses. And the Jews say that among 
the laws given to Noah, were precepts that not only homicide^ but 
adultery, incest, and robbery should be punished with death. And 
this is confirmed by Job, xxxi. 11 ; This is an heinotu crime ; yet it it 
€in iniquity to be punished by the judges. 

9 Moreover the law given by Moses gives reasons for capital 
punishments, which are valid among other nations as well as the 
Jews: as Lev. xviii. 24, &c., DeJUe not yourselves, ifc. Psal. ci. 5, 
Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him tfnll I cut of, Prov. xx. 8, 
A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil 
with his eyes. And especially concerning homicide, it is said. Num. 
xxxv. 33, that the land cannot be cleansed of the blood tJiat is sited therein 
hut by tJie blood qf him that shed it. 

Further, it is absurd to suppose that the Hebrew people were in- 

14 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. [Book I. 

dolged with the privilege of protecting public and prirate interests by 
capital punishments, and defending themselres by war, and that other 
kings and nations at that time had no such privilege : and that, this 
being so, those kings and nations were yet never rebuked by God for 
the practice of capital punishment and of war, as they were often re- 
buked for other offences. 

10 On the contrary, we must suppose that, as the law of Mossi 
was the expression of the divine Will, the other nations would do well 
and piously to take example by that law : which it is probable that 
the Greeks, and especially the Athenians, did: whence arises the so great 
similarity of the old Attic Law, and the Laws of the Twelve Tribes 
therefrom derived, with the Laws of the Hebrews. 

TI. 1 The arguments adduced against war from the Gospel are 
more specious : and in examining these, I shall not assume, as many do^ 
that there is in the Gospel nothing, besides the precepts of belief 
and institution of the sacraments, which is not matter of Natural Law: 
for that, in the sense in which it is commonly understood, I do not 
believe. 

2 I willingly acknowledge that nothing is commanded us in the 
Gospel which has not a natural reasonableness : but I do not see why 
I should grant that we are bound to nothing by the Laws of Ghrist 
beyond what we are bound to by the Law of Nature. And when men 
maintain the contrary, it is wonderful to see what pains they are com* 
pelled to take to prove that some things which are forbidden by the 
Gospel, are also unlawful by the Law of Nature; as concubinage, 
divorce, plurality of wives. These things are such that reason itself 
dictates that it is better to avoid them ; but not such that they are 
seen to be criminal without the divine law. 

Again, who can say that such a Precept as that, 1 Job. iii. 16, We 
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren ; is binding by the Law 
of Nature ? Justin Martyr says that to live according to nature is 
the condition of him who has not yet come to believe. 

3 Nor shall I follow those who make another hu^e assumption, 
that Christ in delivering the precepts. Matt. v. et sqq. is only speak- 
ing as the interpreter of the law given by Moses. For a different 
notion is suggested by the words so often repeated : Te have hoard it 
§aid by them of old time : But I eay tinto you. Where the apposition 
shows, what the Syriac and other versions express, that veteribuB 
rather means to them of old time than by ihem: as vobis means to you, 
not by you. And these men of old time were those who lived at the 
time of Moses : for what is ascribed to them is not the dogmas of doc- 
tors of the law, but the doctrines of Moses, either in words or in 
sense : as appears by the examples. Thou sJujtU not killf $c. An ey§ 
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. Thou shalt lave thy neighbour (the 
Israelite), and hate thine enemy, the seven expelled nations, to whom 
the Jews were forbidden to shew mercy : to whom are to be added 
the Amalekites. [See the references.] 

Chap, n.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 15 

4 To the understanding of the words of Christ, it is to be obserred 
that the Law given by Moses is taken in two senses : first, according 
to that which it has in common with other laws established by men, 
as restraining grave crimes by visible punishments, and keeping the 
Hebrew people in a state of civil society; in which sense, by it, every 
transgression and disobedience received a just reward, Heb. ii. 2 ; and in 
which sense, Heb. vii. 16, it is called the law of a carnal commandment; 
and Rom. iii. 27, the law of works : and secondly, as requiring also 
purity of mind, and some acts which may be omitted without tempo- 
ral punishment, in which sense it is called the spiritutU law, Rom. vii. 
14, rejoicing the heart. Psalm xiz. The Lawyers and Pharisees, con- 
tented with the former part, regarded not the second part, which is 
better, nor inculcated it on the people. That this is true, we learn 
not only from the New Testament, but also from Josephus and the 
Hebrew doctore. 

5 Yet even with regard to this second part, it is to be observed 
that the virtues which are required of Christians were either recom- 
mended or enjoined to the Hebrews ; but they were not enjoined in 
the same degree and with the same breadth as to the Christians. And 
in both these respects [degree and breadth] Christ opposes his inter- 
pretation to that of the ancients ; whence it appears that his words do 
not contain a bare interpretation. ^ 

It is useful to know this, not only with reference to the point 
now in hand, but also to many other points, that we may not exagge- 
rate the authority of the Hebrew law. 

Vn. 1 To proceed then to the passages which shew that war is 
not made unlawful by the law of Christ. 

(1) The first is 1 Tim. ii. 1, 2, 3, I exhort, therefore, that first of all 
mipplicaiums, ifc. We are here taught three things : that it is agree- 
able to God that kings be made Christians ; that kings when made 
Christians continue kings; and that Christian kings enable other 
Christians to lead a quiet and peaceable life. So Justin Martyr men- 
tions prayer for kings and princes; and in the Constitutions of 
Clement the Church prays for Christian Magistrates. 

2 But how do kings secure peace and tranquillity to their subjects? 
This he teaches, Rom. ziii. 4, He is the minister of Ood to thee for 
good, $c. The sword implies all controlling power, as also sometimes 
among the Jurists ; but still, in such a manner that the highest kind 
of that power, the actual use of the sword, [that is, capital punish- 
ment and war J is not excluded. This place is illustrated by Psalm ii., 
which though verified in David has a fuller accomplishment in Christ. 
[See the passages in Acts and HebrewB.] That Psalm exhorts the kings 
of the earth to kiss the Son lest he he angry : that is, to do him service 
in their capacity of kings. [See the passages quoted from Augustine.] 

3 (2) The second passage is, that already partly cited, Rom. xiii. 
2We is no power hut of Ood, The powers that he are ordained of God, 
ife* : whence the apostle infers that we are to obey and honour the 

16 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. [Book I. 

powers that are orduned ; and that, from our hearts ; and that he 
who resisteth the power rosisteth the ordinance of God. By ordinance 
we cannot understand merely what God will not preyent, as he per- 
mits bad actions : for such permission would not impose any obliga. 
tion of honour or heartfelt obedience. On this supposition tiie Apos- 
tle, in speaking so highly of the powers that be, would give a reason 
which is equally true of thefts and robberies. It follows then that the 
powers thus ordained, are approved by God ; and since God cannot 
approTO contradictory things, that this power is not at yariance with 
the will of God rerealed by the Gospel, and obligatory on all men. 

4 Nor is this argument refuted by the consideration, that the 
powers that be in 8t Paul's time, were not Christian. For in the 
first place, this is not universally true. Sergius Paulus, the Proprsstor 
of Cyprus, had become a Christian ; not to mention the ancient story 
concerning the king of Edessa, perhaps distorted, but yet with a foun- 
dation of truth*. 

But in the next place, the question is not whether the persons wore 
impious, but whether their office was impious; which the Apostle 
denies, when he says that even at that time it was ordained of God, 
and therefore was to be honoured from the heart, which is God's 
peculiar dominion. And thus Nero and king Agrippa might have 
submitted themselves to Christ, and have retained respectively the 
imperial and the royal power ; which could not have subsisted without 
the power of the sword and of arms. And thus as under the Old Law, 
sacrifices were pious, though celebrated by impious priests, so govern- 
ment is a pious office, though it be held by an impious man. 

5 (3) The third argument is taken from the words of John the 
Baptist; who, when he was asked by the Jewish soldiers, (of which 
nation there were many thousands in the Roman army, as is manifest 
firom Josephus and other writers,) What they should do, to avoid the 
wrath of God ; did not tell them to cease to be soldiers, which he 
ought to have done if such were the will of God ; but told them to 
abstain from extortion, and to be content with their wages. 

Since the words of the Baptist contain a manifest approval of a 
military life, many answer, that the exhortations of the Baptist and 
the precepts of Christ are widely different; so that the one might 
teach one thing, the other, another. This I cannot admit; for 

John and Christ announced their doctrine in the same manner ; 
Repentf for tht kingdom of heaven ie at hand, Matth. iii. 2 ; iv. 17. 
Christ says that the kingdom of heaven, (that is the new law, for it 
is the Hebrew manner to call a law a kingdom,) is taken by force, 
from the times of John the Baptist, Matth. xi. 12. John is said to 
have preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins: 
Mark i. 4. The Apostles are said to have done the same in the 
name of Christ, Acts ii. 38. John reqm'res fruits worthy of repent- 
ance, and threatens them with destruction who do not bring forth 
* Barbejrao remariu that the learned hold the etoiy of Abganu a 'mera&bula.* 

Chap. II.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JIJST. 17 

flucb, Matth. iii. 8 and 10. He requires works of love beyond the law, 
Luke ill. 11 ; He that hoik two coaiSj S^c. The law is said to have en- 
dured until John, that is, a more perfect doctrine began with him, 
Matth. xi. 13. The beginning of the Gospel narrative is John: Mark 
L 1. Luke i. 77. John was on this account greater than the pro- 
phets, Matih. xi. 9, Luke tH. 26 ; being sent to give knowledge of 
salyation unto the people, Luke i. 77 ; and to preach the Gospel, Luke 
iii. 18. Nor does John anywhere distinguish Jesus from himself by 
the difference of their precepts, (though what is indicated in a more 
general and confused and rudimentary manner by John, Christ, the true 
light, deliyers clearly,) but by Jesus being the Messiah that was to 
come. Acts xix. 4, John i. 29 ; that is, the king of the kingdom of hea- 
yen, who was to ^re the Holy Spirit to them that believed on him, 
Matth. iii. 11. Mark i. 8. Luke iii. 16. 

6 (4) In the fourth place, there is this argument, which appears 
to me to have no small weight. If the right of inflicting capital 
punishments^ and of defending the citisens by arms against robbers 
and plunderers, was taken away, there would follow a vast license of 
crime and a deluge of evils ; since even now, while criminal judg- 
ments are administered, violence is hardly repressed. Wherefore if 
the mind of Christ had been to induce such a state of things as never 
was heard of, undoubtedly he would have set it forth in the clearest 
and most special words, and would have commanded that none should 
pronounce a capital sentence, none should wear arms : which we no-r 
where read that he did : for what is adduced to this effect is either 
very general or obscure. Equity and common sense teach us that, 
in order to avoid that sense of passages which would lead to ex- 
treme inconveniences, we may limit the range of general terms, and 
explain ambiguitiesy and even depart in some degree from the pro- 
priety and received use of words. 

7 (5) In the fifth place, it cannot be shewn by any argument that 
the law of Moses concerning the judgments of tribunals ceased to be 
in force before the city of Jerusalem was destroyed, and with it, the 
existence and the hope of the Jewish nation ceased. For there is 
neither in the law of Moses any term appointed for the force of the 
law, nor do Christ or his Apostles anywhere speak of the cessation of 
that law, except in so far as such an event may, as we have said, be 
comprehended in the destruction of the Jewish State : on the contrary, 
Paul says that the high priest was appointed to judge persons accord- 
ing to the law. Acts xxiii. 3. Christ himself, in the preface to his pre- 
cepts, says, that he was not come to destroy the law, but to fulfil it, 
Biatth. v. 17. Now in what sense this is to be understood of the 
Ritual Law, is plain enough ; for the lineaitnents which shadow out an 
object are fulfilled when the perfect form of the thing is exhibited. 
But how can this be true of the Judicial Law, if Christ, as some hold, 
took it away by his coming ? But if the obligation of the Law re- 
mained as long as the Jewish State continued, it follows that Jews, 

0 

18 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. [Book I. 

eren though convorted to ChriBtianity, if they were Bummoned before 
a magiBtrste, could not refuse, and ought not to judge otherwise than 
Moses had commanded. 

8 Weighing the whole case, I do not see the slightest reason for 
thinking that any pious men, at that time hearing the words of Christ» 
could think otherwise. I acknowledge that before the time of Christ 
some things were permitted, cither as matters of impunity, or aa 
not destroying purity of mind, (a distinction which we need not dwell 
upon here,) which Christ did not permit to his followers ; as, to pufc 
away a wife for every cause, to sue one at law for satisfiEM^on; bnfc 
between the precepts of Christ and those permissions, there is a direr- 
sity, not a repugnance. For he who does not put away his wife, or 
who remits a satisfaction due to him, does nothing against the law : 
on the contrary, he conforms to the Law in the highest degree. But 
the case of a judge is altogether different ; for him the Law does 
not permit, but commands him to punish the homicide with death ; 
and he himself is guilty before God if he does not do this. And if 
Christ forbids him to punish the homicide with death, he commands 
what is altogether contrary to the Law ; he destroys the Law. 

9 (6) The sixth argument shall be from the example of Cornelius 
the Centurion, who both received from Christ the Holy Ghost, the 
undoubted sign of justification, and was baptized in the name of Chxisfc 
by the apostle Peter : but we do not read that he gave up the mili- 
tary life, nor was exhorted by Peter to do so. 

Some reply that when he was instructed by Peter in the Christian 
religion, he was also instructed of the unchristian character of his 
military life. This would be to the purpose, if there were any plain 
and certain interdiction of a military life in the precepts of Christ. 
But when there is nowhere such a thing in any clear form, it was 
plainly necessary that something should have been said on the subject 
in this place, where it was specially required ; in order that the ages 
to come might not be ignorant of the rules of its duty. And that 
Luke, when conyersion led to any special change in the occupation of 
the converts, did not omit to state it, we see elsewhere. Acts xiz. 19» 
Many of tJiem also which wed curious arts brought their books, ife. 

10 (7) A seventh argument of a like kind we draw from what is 
said of Sergius Paulus, as already partly noticed. For in the history 
of that convert there is no indication of his having abdicated the office 
of magistrate, or having been admonished to abdicate. Now what is 
not narrated, when, as we have said, it was highly important that it 
should be narrated, must be supposed not to have happened. 

11 (8) An eighth argument is, that the Apostle Paul, when he was 
apprized of the Jews lyiil^ in wait for him, directed the fact to be 
made known to the captain, and when the captain had furnished 
soldiers, as a guard for him in his journey, he made no opposition, 
and did not warn the captain or the soldiers that it was displeasing to 
Qod to repel force by force. And yet Paul was one who neither 

Chap, n.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 19 

omitted nor allowed others to omit any occasion of teaching men 
then: duty, 2 Tim. iv. 2. 

12 (9) A ninth argument is, that if a thing be good and right, the 
end to which it tends cannot be otherwise than good and right. Now 
to pay taxes is right, and is a thing oren binding on the conscience, 
as the Apostle Paul explains : but the end to whidi taxes are subser- 
vient, [that is, one end among others,] is that the government may be 
able to miuntain forces for the purpose of defending good citisens and 
restnuning bad men, Rom. xiii. 8, 4, 6. Tacitus and Augustine both 
make this remark. [See the text.] 

13 (10) We have a tenth argument from Acts xxr. 11, where Paul 
says, Jf Ihe an ojftmd&r^ or Aata wmmxiUd anything worthy of death, I 
rejfue not to <2ie. Whence I collect Paul to hare been of the opinion, 
that OTon after the publication of the Gospel-law, there are some 
crimes which equity allows, or even requires, to be punished with 
death ; which also Peter teaches, 1 Epist. ii. 19, 20, If when ye he luf» 

feted/or your/aultsye$haUtakeitpatwaly. If the will of Qod had then 
been that there should no longer be capital punishments, Paul might 
have cleared himself indeed ; but he ought not to have left men to 
think that then, no less than preriously, it was lawful to put criminals 
to death. But when we hare proved that capital punishment may 
lawfully be practised after the coming of Christ, we have also proved, 
as I conceive^ that war may be made lawfully, for example against an 
armed multitude of evildoers ; who must be overcome in battle that 
they may be dealt with by justice*. For the power and the number 
of the evildoers, though it may have its weight in prudential delibera- 
tion, does not affect the question of what is right. 

14 (11) An eleventh argument is, that in the Revelation, wars of 
the righteous against the wicked are predicted with manifest approval, 
zviii. 6, and elsewhere. 

15 (12) A twelfth argument may be this : that the law of Christ 
took away only the law of Moses in so far as it separated the Gentiles 
from the Jews : Ephes. ii. 14. But such things as are reckoned good 
by nature and the assent of the most civilized nations, it was so far 
from taking away, that it comprehends them under the general precept 
of all virtue, everything of good report, Phil. iv. 8. 1 Cor. xi. 13, 14. 
Now the punishment of criminals, and defensive war, are held praise- 
worthy by their nature, and come under the virtues of justice and 
beneficence. 

And hence^ in passing, we may note the error of those who deduce 
the right of the Israelites to make war from the fact alone, that God 
bad given them the land of Canaan. That indeed was a just cause, 
but not the only cause. For before that time pious men, acting by the 

* We may howerer remark that to treat the army of an enemy as a body of 
•Tfldoers, is not the true Tiew of war, nor necessary to its jnstlfication. War is a 
relation between two States ; and the Right of making war is a necessary Right of 
a State. See j^tonaitf of jtforoltty, 775. 

C2 

20 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST [Book I. 

light of reason, had mado war; and the Israelites themselves did so 
for other causes, as David, for the insult done to his amhassadora. 
For the possessions which any one has by human right are his no less 
than if God had given him them : and this right is not taken away by 
the OospeL 

yni. Let us now see what arguments are offered in support of 
the opposite opinion, that the pious reader, judging fairly, may see 
which side preponderates. 

1 (1) First, it is usual to adduce the prophecy of Isaiah, ii. 4; that 
the people shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears 
into pruning-hooks ; that nation shall not lift up sword against nation, 
neither shall they learn war any more. But either this prophecy ia 
to be received conditionally, like many others ; — ^namely, that we are 
to understand that this would be the state of things, if all nations 
should receive and fulfil the law of Christ; to which end God de- 
clares that nothing is wanting on his part. For it is certain that if all 
be Christians, and live as Christians, there will be no wars : as Amobius 
and Lactantius remark. [See the text.] 

Or it may be understood absolutely ; in which case the facts shew 
that it is not yet fulfilled, and that its fulfilment, like the conversion 
of the Jews, is still to be looked for. But in whichever way you take 
it, nothing can be inferred from it against the justice of wars ; so long 
as there are persons who do not allow the lovers of peace to live in 
peace, but use force against them. 

2 From the fifth chapter of Matthew, many arguments are usually 
drawn ; and in order to estimate the value of these, we roust repeat 
what has been said already; That if the intention of Christ had been 
to take away all capital punishment, and the right of making war, he 
would have done this in the most express and special words, in con- 
sideration of the magnitude and novelty of the thing: and all the 
more on that account, that no Jew could think otherwise than that 
the laws of Moses which concerned the Jewish State and tribunals 
were to retain their authority over Jews, as long as the State existed. 
With this previous remark, let us consider in order the force of the 
particular passages. 

3 (2) The second argument, then, in favour of the opposite opinion 
Is taken from these words : Ye have heard that U hath hem saidj An eye 
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth : but leay untoyouj that ye resist not the 
evU man : but whosoever shaU smite thee on thy right cheeky turn to him 
the other also. Hence some infer that no injury is to be resisted or 
satisfaction for it to be required, either pubUdy or privately. But 
this is not what the words say: for Christ is not here addressing 
magistrates, but those who are assailed : nor does he speak of wrongs 
of all kinds, but of such as a blow on the cheek ; for the subsequent 
words restrict the generality of the preceding. 

4 So in the following precept. If any man wiU sue thee at law^ and 
take away thy coat, let him have thy eloke also : it is not every appeal 

Chap. H] WHETHER WAB EVER BE JUST. 21 

to a judge or an umpire which is forbidden, according to the inter- 
pretation of Paul, who does not forbid men baring matters at law, 
1 Cor. yi. 4 : only he forbids the Christians to go to law before the hea- 
then tribunals : and this he does by the example of the Jews, among 
whom this maxim was current ; He who refers the concerns of the Is'- 
raelites to the judgment of strangers, pollutes the name of Qod : but 
Christ, in order to exercise our patience, directs us that with regard to 
matters which may easily be replaced, as our coat, or if need be, our 
cloke along with our coat, we should not contend at law ; but though 
our right be indisputable, abstain from prosecuting it judicially. Apol« 
lonius Tyanaus said that a philosopher ought not to quarrel about 
paltry pelf. TJlpian says. The prastor does not disapprove the act of 
him who thought it a good thing to have nothing, that he might have 
nothing to go to law about. For this temperate notion of those who hate 
lawsuits is not to be condemned. What Ulpian here says is approved by 
good men, is what Christ makes his command, choosing the matter of 
his precepts from the most approved and becoming examples. But 
you cannot infer from this that even a parent or a guardian is not to 
defend before the judge, if he be compelled, the means of subsistence 
of a child or a ward. A coat and a cloke are one thing, but the neces- 
sary means of subsistence another. In the Clementine Constitutions 
it is said of a Christian, If he have a lawsuit, let him try to bring it to an 
end, even if he have thereby to suffer loss. What is commonly said of 
moral rules applies here also, that right dealing does not lie in a point, 
but has a certain appropriate latitude. 

5 So in what follows. Whosoever will impose service as for one mile, 
go with him two : our Lord does not speak of a hundred miles, a dis- 
tance that would carry a man quite away from his business, but of one, 
and if need be, two; which is a trifling amount of walking. The 
meaning then is this ; That in matters which are not very inconveni* 
cnt to us, we are not to insist upon our right, but to give up even more 
than is asked, that our patience and kindness may appear to all. 

6 It is added, Oive to him thai asketh thee, and from him thai would 
borrow of thee turn not thou away. If you carry this to an indefinite 
extent, nothing can be more harsh. He who does not care for his own 
is worse than an infidel, says St Paul, 1 Tim. v. 8. Let us then follow 
Paul, the best interpreter of his master's law, who, when exciting tho 
Corinthians to beneficence towards those of Jerusalem, says, 2 Cor. 
TiiL 13, Not thai other men may be eased and ye burdenedy but that your 
abundance may be a supply for their want. The like expressions are 
used by heathen authors, as Livy, Xenophon. [See the text.] 

7 As the Hebrew law allowed a liberty of divorce, to moderate tho 
harshness of men towards their wives; so to restrain private revenge, 
to which the nation was very prone, tho law allowed the injured man 
to require from the injurer compensation or satisfaction, not with 
his own hand, but before the judge. This was followed in the law of 
the Twelve Tables, which authorized retaliation. But Christ, a teacher 

22 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST, [Book I. 

of a better patience, is so far from approring the injured man who 
demands such Batisfaction, that he will hare some injuries not even 
repelled either by force or judicially. But what injuries ? Such as are 
tolerable : not that the same course of action may not be laudable in 
more atrocious attacks : but because he contents himself with a patience 
within certain limits. And thus he takes as his example a blow on the 
cheeky which does not endanger the life or maim the body, but onl j 
expresses a contempt which does us no harm. 

In like manner Seneca, Pacurius, Ceecilius, Demosthenes, distin- 
guish between contumely and injury. [See the text.] And Seneca 
says that the pain of contumely is the feeling of the humiliated mind 
recoiling from an act or deed which assails our honour. 

8 In such circumstances Christ commands patience : and that he 
may not be met by the common objection that By bearing one mjwy 
you indU another, he adds, that we are rather to bear a second injury 
than to repel the first ; since wo thereby receire no evil except what 
has its seat in a foolish persuasion. 

To giro the cheek to the smitor, is a Hebraism implying to bear 
patiently, as appears, Isaiah 1. 6, Jerom. iii. 3. Tacitus uses a similar 
expression. 

9 (3) A third argument is usually drawn from that which follows 
in St Matthew, Te have heard thai U haih been taidf Thou ghalt love 
thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy ; But I eay unto you. Love your 
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and 
pray for them, that despitefvXly use you, and persecute you. There are 
who think that such lore to enemies and assailants is inconsistent 
botli with capital punishments and with war. 

But this is easily refuted if we consider this precept of the Hebrew 
Jaw more nearly. The Hebrews were commanded to love their neigh- 
bour, that is, the Hebrew ; for so the word neighbour is there taken, 
as we sec, Lerit. xix. 17, Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart: 
thou shalt in anywise rebuke thy neighbour ; compared with rerse 18, 
Thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge against the children of thy 
people, but thou slialt love thy neighbour as thysdf. But notwith- 
standing this, the magistrate was commanded to put to death the 
manslayor and other great criminals : notwithstanding this, the eleven 
tribes justly made war upon the tribe of Benjamin for a heinous crime, 
Judg. XX. : notwithstanding this, David who fought the battles of the 
Lord, rightly won by arms from Ishbosheth the kingdom promised to 
him. [2 Sam. iii. 1.] 

10 Let it be granted then that the word neighbour is now to be 
extended more widely so as to include all men : for all nations are 
now received under one common rule of grace ; no people is cut off 
from God; still there will be the same permission for all nations 
which there then was for the Israelites, who were then commanded 
mutual love, as all men now are. 

But if you allege that a greater degree of love is enjoined in the 

Chap. II.] WHETHER WAB EVER BE JUST. 23 

OospeHaWy this also may bo conceded, prorided we make this resorTe, 
that all are not to be loved equally, but, for example, a father more 
than a stranger : and thus, the good of the innocent is to be preferred 
to the good of the guilty, public good to private good. Now capital 
punishments and just wars arise from our love of the innocent. See 
ProT. zxir. 11, If tAott forbear to deliver them that are draum unto 
deathf and those that are ready to be slain, $c. And thus the pre- 
cepts of Christ respecting loving and helping all are to be fulfilled in 
such a way that a greater and juster love do not interfere. There is 
a noted ancient saying, Itieae great a cruelty to be indulgent to all as 
to none, 

11 Add that we are commanded to love our enemies by the exam* 
pie of Gk>d, who makes his sun to rise on the unjust. Yet the same God 
punishes some evil deeds in this life, and will hereafter punish them 
In the heaviest manner. And the same argument solves what is said on 
this subject about the injunction to Christians to be merciful. For Qod 
is called merciful, gracious, longsuffering, Jonah iv. 2, Exod. xxxiv. 6 ; 
and yet Scripture everywhere speaks of his wrath, that is, of his inten- 
tion to punish, in reference to the rebellious, Num. xiv. 18, Rom. ii. 8. 
And of this wrath, the magistrate is constituted minister, Rom. xiii. 4. 
Moses is praised for his extreme gentleness; yet Moses inflicted 
punishment, even capital punishment, on the guilty. We are every* 
where commanded to imitate the gentleness and patience of Christ. 
Yet Christ it was who inflicted the most severe punishment on the 
disobedient Jews ; Matth. xxii. 7. [In the parable. He destroyed those 
murderers, and burnt up their city,] The Apostles imitated the gentle- 
ness of their master ; and yet they used their divinely-given power 
for the punishment of evil-doers : 1 Cor. iv. 21, ShaU I come unto you 
with a rodf v. 5, To deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of 
thejiesh; 1 Tim. i. 20, Whom I have delivered unto Satan, 

12 (4) The fourth passage which is objected is Rom. xli. 17, 
Recompense no man evUfor evil, $c. But here too the same answer as 
above is evidently applicable. For at the very time at which Qod said, 
[as here quoted by St Paul,] Vengeance is mine, I will repay, [Deut. 
zxxii. 35] capital punishments were practised and laws concerning 
war were given. So again they are commanded to do good to their 
enemies, Exod. xxiii. 5 : If thou meet thine enemas ox or his cus going 
astray, i^c, (that is, among their fellow.citizens ;) and yet this did not 
prevent, as we have said, either capital punishments, or wars among the 
Israelites themselves. And therefore the same words, or similar pre- 
ceptSy though at present having a wider application, are not now to be 
wrested to such a sense. And this the less, because the division of 
ohapters, as we now have it, was not made by the Apostles, nor in 
their age, but much later, for convenience of reading and reference : 
and therefore what now begins chapter xiii. Let every soul be subject to 
^ higher powers^ and what follows, must be taken in connexion with 
tfie precepts against recompensing evil for evlL 

24 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUBT. {Book L 

13 In this part of his teaching, St Paul says that the public autho* 
rities are the ministers of God, and ayengers to execute wrath (that 
is to inflict punishment,) upon eril-doers. And thus he already distin* 
guishes between punishment for the sake of the public good, which the 
magistrate inflicts in the place of God, and which is to be referred to 
the vengeance reserved to God ; and the vengeance of the passion of 
revenge, which he had before interdicted. For if that punishment 
which is inflicted for the sake of the public good is to be compre- 
hended in that interdict, what would be more absurd than, that when 
he had said that capital punishments are not to be inflicted, he should 
add, in this the public powers are ordained by God, to require punislK 
ment in God's place? 

14 (5) A fifth passage alleged by some is 2 Cor. x. 9, JPor though 
tve walk after the JUffh we do not war after the Jlesh; for the weapona 
of our warfare are '.lot carnal, tfe. But this passage is nothing to 
the purpose. For both what precedes and what follows shews that 
St Paul intends by the term Jlesh the weak condition of his own body, 
as it appeared to the eye, and on account of which he was despised. 
To this he puts in opposition his weapons, that is, the power given 
him to coerce the refractory, such as he had used against Elymas, the 
incestuous person at Corinth, Hymenieus and Alexander. This is the 
power which he says is not carnal, that is, weak, but on the contrary, 
most mighty. What has this to do with the right of capital punish- 
ment or of war? Rather on the contrary, because the Church at that 
time was destitute of the aid of the public authorities, therefore God 
had rabed up for its defence that miraculous power; and this accord- 
ingly began to fail as soon as there were given to the Church Chris- 
tian Emperors ; as the manna failed when the Jews came into a land 
that bore fruit. 

15 (6) The passage adduced from Eph. vi. 11, Put on the whola 
armour of God, that ye may he able to stand against the wiles of the deviL 
For we wrestle not against flesh and Mood, (supply only, after the He- 
brew usage,) but against principalitiest $c. : refers to the warfare which: 
Christians have to carry on as being Christians ; not that which they 
may have in common with other men under certain circumstances. 

16 (7) The passage of St James which is adduced in the seventh 
place, iv. 1, Whence are wars and fightings among you, l$c, : contains 
nothing universal. It only says that the mutual wars and fightings,, 
by which the Hebrews were then universally plagued, (a part of which 
history wo may see in Josophus,) arose from causes not laudable; 
which is the case even now, as we grieve to know. That avarice and 
ambition are the causes of wars, has often been remarked. [See the 
passages from Tibullus, Strabo, Lucan, Plutarch, Justin, Cicero, Maxi. 
mus Tyrius, Jamblichus.] 

17 (8) What was said to Peter, He that smiteth with the sword shall 
perish with the sword, since it does not properly refer to war in its. 
common aspect, but to private war, (for Christ himself gives this reason. 

Chap. H.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST- 25 

for prohibiting or noglecting his defence, that his kingdom was not of 
this world, Joh. xviii. 36,) will be better discussed in its own place. 

IX. 1 When we have to inquire into the sense of any writing, we 
commonly assign great weight both to subsequent usage, and to the 
authority of the learned : and this is to be attended to also in the sacred 
writings. For it is not probable that the Churches, which were con* 
fitituted by the Apostles, should either suddenly or universally have 
gone astray from the precepts which, being briefly expressed in writings 
the Apostles had more fully explained in their oitd instructions, or 
by the usages which they had established. Now those who argue 
against war are accustomed to adduce some sayings of the ancient 
Christians ; on which I have three remarks to make. 

2 (1) The first is, that from these passages, nothing more can be 
collected than the priyate opinion of certain indiriduals, not the public 
judgment of the Church : add to which, that the persons whose sayings 
are quoted are mostly writers who like to go in a path of their own, 
and to teach in a very high strain ; such are Origen and Tertullian. 
But eyon these writers are not consistent with themselves. For the 
same Origen says that bees are an example appointed by God to shew 
that just wars may be carried on if it be necessary : the same Tertul- 
lian who in other places seems to disapprove of capital punishment, 
says also. Nobody hut a criminal tuill deny that it if a good thing when 
criminals are punished. And as to a military life, ho hesitates. In the 
treatise De Idololairia, he seems to incline against it ; but in the treatise 
De Corona JlfUitis he distinguishes in favour of the condition of those 
who were soldiers before they were Christians. He know that such had 
continued soldiers, which they would not have done if they had under- 
stood that a military lifo was forbidden by Christ ; any more than 
soothsayers, magicians, and other professors of forbidden arts were 
permitted to practise their art after baptism. In the same book ho 
addresses a certain Christian soldier, O glorious soldier in Qod. 

3 (2) The second observation is, that the Christians often avoided 
or disparaged a military life on account of the circumstances of the 
time, which scarcely permitted a soldier's life to go on without some 
acts inconsistent with the Christian law. We see in Josephus that the 
Jews asked, and in some cases, received excuse from military duties 
on the ground of their interfering with their national usages. [See 
the passages in the text.] Very similar are the difficulties which Ter« 
tullian objects to the military profession of his time ; as in the book 
De Idololatria^ There is no eonsistem^ between the military oath (sacra" 
mentvm) and the divine sacrament : namely, because the soldiers had to 
swear by the heathen gods, Jupiter, Mars and others; and in the book 
De Corona Militis, he says, Shall he keep guard in front of the temples 
whichshe has renounced, and sit in places such as the Apostle eondemnSf 
and be the dtfendtr by night of those powers which his exorcisms have 
driven away in the day f And again. How many other things are there 
in the duties of a soldier which the Christian must interpret^ transgress 
uonsi 

W irif mf EA WAR inrRB be just. [Book L 

4 /*; TU U#iH r4;m«rk wkS^ I malue it thai, diat the Clirw. 
HImm //f iIm 0ni iAtnm w«r« Miim«Uyl bj so ardeot a dears to do 
m\iU WM l#M»i« UMi lliifX t^um M««pt«d the dinne «oiMieb as if thej 
\ttiA \tmm t^fmtMMUU, Tbuf AtlMfmKorai mji that the Chrirtiaiis do 
$i4fi rmiU fry tlMi law tli#i«M «rbo plunder tbem ; fialTian sayi thai wo 
am ^fftrriMi^iid l#i ylra up tliat «rbicb It tho tobjeet of a rait, that wo 
ffiay U rf/l of \h\KiUUm. And, tp^wking generally, foch b perhaps tho 
|4Hidifmty of Oliridtfan eottniel, and tho tchomo of the highest Ghris- 
IUmi lifuf slfll il U un Mmu\n,w\. In like manner, many of the early 
fiUUttn dlMfi|trorii of oailis altogether, without making any exception; 
though I'iMif hhnnolf on an important occasion used an oath. In 
UiIm «viiy f 4iMttiititiiiN NAyN tlmt a righteous man (by which he means a 
<)hiiNiliifi) will not ho a solilieri hut ho also otsorts that ho will not 
Im M »allfir. 1 low iimiiy of tho ancient Ohriitian writers exhort their fol- 
lowor« iHiHhiHi hooimkI msrriagosl And all theio things are laudable, 
ii«milluiit, vfiry agrwrnhlo to (jod, hut are not required of us by any law 
«if iio<t0MHlly. And thciso romsrka will luflioe for lolTing the objections 
lo ilio UwhihioM of war taken fVom the early Christian writers. 

X. I llut now to coiiflrni our case, in the first place there are 
iiol wanting wrltors on our side, more ancient than those just quoted, 
who aMunut that bi»th capital punlsliments and wars may be lawfully 
Html by OhrUtlauM. (Honutiis Aloxaiulrinus says that the Christian» if 
h0 U %^\\w\ to ««inplr«s will bo llko Moses, a liring law to his subjects, 
will iHiwar^l tho gmul and puuUh tho bad. And in another place^ 
%lv«i^rlUliij| tho drtMM of tho Christian, ho says ho will go barefoot, 
itA\H^t| ho hap|H»n to l»o a soldlor. And in the Constitutions which 
lH>ai^ Iho Hamo k4 iMoiiions Kiunanus, it is said that, No$ <M prnttm^ to 
«4^mM •> unUk^^k ^mI i^nfy liUl <^/*aii itmocmt mow: hmi thai which ts 
f^j/Al IH Ma <H«ai#k it i$ /^r th$ HMyiflrdMw alim* fa JMi%f«. 

)» klul sollh^c asido luritalo authorities, let us come to the p«blio 
auth\44i^v s^ Iho Churchy which ought to bo of the greatest weight I 
iM\v tKv4i thai ««>Kliors wvro i»ct^Hr ntj^^'led fVom baptiun* or exeotnmift^ 
%Mi.«^lvd» s>ii iKal aswuHt; which should have been done and wonld 
haxv b«Hmk ^JK^Mv if a iMiUlary Ui^ had been al Tarianee with the Chrw-' 
liaM w^vnaul, lu iho i\>iistitttiiotis alnMidY «|uoted we T«ad» A wUttr^ 
iNWi*«V ^'V'^^l^ a a> ft# tmll^fht to ^tdttmrn jrvm wii^lmc$ ^Mmi 4trtortiom^ 
yMi^i tK* >4 ^>^HtifHi mA ki* Muj^M. (/' hi c^m/Qrm a/ this. Ut kirn ^ odl- 
^H4itvsL iVrtulUiUK i^ hi» .t^^^iu^QiK speaking in the charKter of tho 
VHiAmttaiMk «\>Kk H <^ .Kt tt-JlA jnm ^ M*iVr% do 4v>\iMr9; A Ihtle belbro 
ho had wwd : W^ j«v 40>M^^ii^ )o jifiMK itmi m «m ktmm ji*M ^MU t^ 
«4iit|bM»'0«w*M« ^' yiMu" A»cMf> c jir«Mir c«lisK istVwmX Mittlm^ tpicni> ctmncilw^ 
v-vttm «%M»r <.>MM^ tH iho saiifee NMk he hatd Qamfimi thas a shower 
%a* niHH tu aiwMN»r K> Uw uf>^yvm of Chriitiatt sohliera in the army ^ 
M. .Vtu^u*. ^ (h^ J^ v^vM^ he $a^ that the sotdier who bad o^a 
«Ml (he cnHUi >*4ia a ittore «eiKtthM man than hia brechf«0» ^n^ ho 
she«a thai he hod ioan« Vhriiiian i^Oow-^dieiSL 

4 -VMi»ihi^ihasftMiiesohheoi,whoMifiii^;KHiii^ 
fcr ChnM,. Mcei^iid i^osa ihe Chucvh cho wne hooour 3» ** 

Chap. H.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 27 

martyrs: among these are recorded three companions of St Paul; 
Cerialis mider Decius ; Marinus imder Valerian ; fifty persons under 
Aurelian ; Victor, Maurus, and Valentinus, soldier-master under Maxi« 
mian; about the same time Marcellus the Centurion, and Sere* 
lianus under Licinius. Cyprian writing oonoeming Laurentinus and 
Ignatius, two African Christians, says, They formerly served in ik$ 
armies of fnefif but being true ctnd spirihtal soldiers of Qod^ they over^ 
threw the devil by the confession of Christy and by their suffering obtained 
as their rewardf the palms and immortal crowns given by their divine 
Master, And henoe it appears what the Christian community thought 
of a soldier's profession, eren before the emperors were Christians. 

4 That the Christians at that time did not like to be present at 
capital punishments, ought not to seem strange, since Christians were 
often the subjects of such punishments. Add to this that the Romaa 
laws were too harsh to agree with Christian kindness, as the Silanian 
Law may serre to shew*. But after Constantino had begun to farour 
and encourage the Christian religion, capital punishments were still 
not discontinued. Constantino himself established a capital punishment 
of a peculiar kind for parricides and child-murderers ; though in other 
rospeots very merdful, so that he was blamed by many for his excossiTO 
lenity. Also he had in his army many Christians, as history teaches 
us, and inscribed his banner with the name of Christ. From that time 
also the military oath was changed into the form, which is extant in 
Vegetius, By God, and Christy and the Holy Ohost, and by the majesty 
of the Emperor^ which next to €hd is to be reverenced and beloved by man* 
kind, 

5 MoreoTor, out of so many bishops who had brared the extremest 
sufferings for religion, there was not at that time a dngle one, who 
tried to scare Constantino from capital punishments and war, or 
Christians fhmi military serriee, by the prospect of the dirioo anger: 
though many of them were most strenuous guardians of religious 
discipline, and not at all giren to pass orer what concerned the duty, 
either of the Emperor, or of others : such as was Ambrose in the time 
of TheodosiuSt who in his serentfa Sermon says : It is not soldiering 
which is a sin, but soldiering for plunder : and in his Ihaies : The 
courage which dtfends our country from barbarians abroad^ or the help* 
less from harm at home^ or society from robbers, is mere justice. This 
argument seems to me so strong that I require nothing more. 

6 Not that I am ignorant that bishops and Christian men often 
interposed with their instructions to avert punishment, especially 
capital punishment; nor that a practice was introduced that those who 
had taken refuge in the Church, should not be given up except on the 
assurance that their lives would be spared ; and also that at the time 
of Easter, criminals who were in prison were set free. But any one 
who examines these circumstances with care will see that they are the 
marks of Christian kindness, seising every occasion of clemency; not 

* (The Law thst when a man was Ulkd ia hb own hoiiie^ aU hb slaves ihcniM 
b« pnt to death. See Tacit Ann, xsr, 43.] 

28 WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. [Book L 

manifestations of an opinion condemning all capital punishments ; and 
accordingly the places and times and interposition which procured 
such indulgence were limited by certain exceptions. 
• 7 (1) Here some object to us the twelfth Canon of the Council 
of Nicsea, which directs that, If persons called by grace, have first 
renounced the military profession (cingulum militise deposuerunt,) and 
Iken returned to t7, as dogs to their vomit ; let them, after being Hearers 
for three years, be Penitents for ten years*; with power in the bishop to 
modify their sentence according to the evidence of their repentance. 

Here the mention of a penitence of thirteen years indicates at once 
that there is question not of some slight and ambiguous, but of some 
graro and undoubted crime. 

8 And in fact there is no doubt that Idolatry is the crime in ques- 
tion ; for what had been siud before in the eleyenth Canon, must be 
understood as tacitly repeated here : as is customary in Canons. Now 
Licinius, as we learn from Eusebius, made men quit the military profes- 
sion except they would sacrifice to the heathen gods, which Julian after- 
wards imitated ; on which account Yictricius and others are said to 
have given up the military profession (ji^ngulum ahjecisse) for Christ. 
The same thing had before been done in Armenia under Diocletian 
by one thousand one hundred and four persons, of whom there ia 
mention in the Martyrologies ; and by Menna and Hesychius in Egypt. 
And thus at the time of Licinius many renounced the military profes^ 
sion ; among whom was Arsacius, who is named among the Confessors, 
and AuxentiuSf who was afterwards bishop of Mopsuesta. And thus 
those who, pricked by conscience, had once left the military profession, 
could not return to it under Licinius, except by renouncing the faith 
of Christ ; and this transgression was the more grievous, inasmuch aa 
their former act shewed that they had knowledge of the divine law ; 
wherefore those defaulters are punished even more severely than they 
who are mentioned in the preceding Canon, who, without danger to 
their life or fortune, had renounced Christianity. But to interpret the 
Canon which we have quoted as referring to a military life in goneral^ 
is contrary to common reason. For history clearly testifies that those 
who under Licinius had renounced military life and had not returned 
to it under Licinius, in order that they might not violate the Christian 
faith, had the option given them by Constautine, whether they would 
bo excused military service or enter the army ; and no doubt many of 
them did the latter. 

9 (2) Some object to us the epistle of Leo, which says. It is 
contrary to ecclesicutical Rule, to return to a military life after act of 
penitence. But we are to recollect that penitents, no less than clerical 
persons and ascetics, were required to lead a life not only Christian, 
but of eminent purity, that as great an example might be given for 
correction as had been given for sin. In like manner in the record of 
the ancient usages of the Church, which, to give it authority, is com- 

[* There were four degrees of Penitence in the early Cborch, TIp6a'K\a9<ritp 

Chap. II.] WHETHER WAR EVER BE JUST. 29 

monly called the Apostolic Canons^ it is directed : No Bishop, Priegt, 
or Deacon, shall be a soldier, or shall have the characters of a Roman 
officer, along with his sacred Junction, The things which are Ccesar^s are 
for CcBsar ; those which are Ood^s are for Ood. Which passage shewg 
that those who did not seek the honour of the clerical profession were 
not forbidden to be soldiers. 

10 More than this; those were forbidden to be adn^itted to the 
clerical order who after baptism had either held a magistrate's office, 
or a command in war ; as we may see in the epistles of Syricius and 
Innocentius and in the Council of Toledo. In fact, clerical persons 
were taken not from Christians of every kind, but from those who had 
given an example of a most correct life. Add to this, that the obli- 
gations of military service and of some magistracies was not perpetual; 
but those who were devoted to the sacred ministry, were not allowed 
to be drawn from it by any other daily care and labour. On which 
account the sixth Canon also directs that No Bishop, Priest, or Deacon 
should administer secular cases, and the eightieth, that he shall not 
even involve himself in public administration ; and the sixth of the 
African Canons, directs that he shall not undertake a trust or advocacy 
in the affairs of others ; as Cyprian thinks that they should not even 
undertake the office of guardian. 

11 We have the express judgment of the Church on our side in 
the council of Aries, held under Constantino : for the third Canon of 
the Council says thus : Those who cast away their arms in peace shall 
abstain from the communion t that is, those who leave the army in a 
time when there is no persecution raging ; for that is what the Chris- 
tians meant by peace, as appears in Cyprian and others. Add to this 
the example of the soldiers under the Emperor Julian, Christians of 
no common proficiency, who were ready to render testimony to Christ 
by their deaths : they were willing to fight in defence of the State^ 
but when commanded to use their weapons against Christians, they 
acknowledged the Emperor of Heaven. Of like character had before 
been the Theban Legion under Diocletian, of which we shall speak 
hereafter. 

12 At present it may suffice to quote their expressions, which 
describe the office of the Christian soldier with compact brevity: We 
offer to you our arms as ready to use them against any enemy, though we 
re/use to stain tJiem with the blood of the innocent* Our right hands knew 
the way to fight against the impious and (he adversary, hut they have not 
the art of butchering the good man and the feUoufcitizen, We reooUect 
that we have taken arms for our citizens rcUher than against them^ We 
have always fought for justice, piety, the protection of the innocent ; those 
hone hiJtherto been the rewards of our labours. We have fought for owr 
faith : and how shall we preserve our faith towards thee (meaning the 
Emperor), if we do not shew our faith towards Oodf 

[The quotation fh>m Basil seems an after-thought.] 

CHAPTER III. 

Of War public and private. Of SovereigfUy. 

Sect. I. War pubUe and private, 
I U Not all private war uniavful. 
IIL Even bp the Gatpel Law. 

IV. War formal and informal. 

V. War bp subordinate mapiim 
iratet. 

VI. What i$ CivU Power 9 
\IL What ie Sovereignty $ 

VIIL The Sovereignty of the People f 
IX. The mutual subjection of King 

and People 9 
IL. Cautions. Use of words, 
XI. A Right, and the mode of havm 
ing a right to be distinguished. 
XII. There are aUettable sove» 

reignties. 
XIIL And others less full. 

XIV. Some subordinate powers are 

alienable. 
XV. Different ways i^ seleeHng a 

king*s guardian, 
XVL Sovereignty as afflteted by prO' 

XYIL Sovereignty sometimes divided 

into subjective parts. 

XVIIL But not because consent of an 

assembly is required, 

XIX. Other eases mistaken. 

XX. True examples. 

XXI. Members of an uneguai alRm 
ance may have sovereignty* 

XXII. Also Tributaries, 
XXUI. And Feudal subjeeU. 
XXXV, DutincHon of the JRight, and 

its Exercise, 

I. 1 The first and most necessary partition of War is this» thai 
War is priyate, public, or mixed. Public war is that which it carried 
on under the authority of him who has jurisdiction; prirate, that 
which is not so ; mixed, that which is public on one side and priyate 
on the other. Let us speak of private war first, as the more ancient. 

2 That priyate war may be lawful, so far as Natural Law goef» 
I conceive is sufficiently apparent from what has been said above, when 
it was shewn, that for any one to repel injury, even by force, is not re- 
pugnant to Natural Law [Chap. n.]. But perhaps some may think that 
after judicial tribunals have been established, this is no longer lawful: 
for though public tribunals do not proceed from nature, but from the 
act of man, yet equity and natural reason dictate to us that we must 
conform to so laudable an institution ; since it is much more decent 
and more conducive to tranquillity among men, that a matter should 
be decided by a disinterested judge^ than that men, under the influ- 
ence of self-love, should right themselves according to their notions 
of right So Paulus the Jurist, and king Theodoric. [See the pas* 
sages.] 

II. 1 It is not to be doubted, indeed, that the licence which 
existed before the establishment of public justice is much restricted. 
Yet still it continues to exist ; namely when public justice ends : for 
the law which forbids us to seek our own by other than judicial pro- 
ceedings, must be understood to apply only when judicial aid can be had. 
Now judicial aid ceases either momentarily or continuously. It ceases 
momentarily when the judge cannot be waited for without certain 

Chap. HI.] OF WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. 31 

danger or loss. It ceases continuously either de jure or de/aeio: de 
jurey if any one be in an unsettled place, as at sea, in a desert, in an 
uninhabited island, or in any other place where there is no political 
gOTemment : defadOf if the subjects do not obey the judge, or if the 
judge openly refuses to take cognizance. 

2 What we hare said, that eren after judicial tribunals are esta- 
blished, all priyate war is not repugnant to Natural Law, may also be 
understood from the Jewish Law, in which Orod thus speaks by Moses, 
Exod. zxii. 2i If a Ihitf he found breaking up, and he smitUn that he die^ 
there shall no hlood he shed for him : if the sun he risen upon him, there 
shall hlood he shed for him. For this law, making so nice a distinction^ 
appears not only to giro impunity to the slayer, but to explain Natural 
Law : and not to be founded in any peculiar divine mandate, but in 
common equity; and accordingly we find that other nations have 
followed the same. The Law of the Twelve Tables is well known, 
doubtless taken from the old Attic Law : If a man commits a robbery 
by night, and if any one kill him, it is justifiable homicide. And thus, by 
the laws of all nations which we know, he is deemed innocent who 
defends himself being in peril of life ; which manifest consent is a proof 
that such a course is not at variance with Natural Law. 

III. 1 Concerning the more perfect Instituted Divine Law (Chap. i. 
§ XV.), namely the Evangelical Law, there is more difficulty. That 
God, who has more Right over our lives than we ourselves have, might 
have demanded from us forbearance to such an extent, that even when 
brought privately into danger, we should be bound to allow ourselves 
to be killed rather than kill another, I do not doubt. The question is, 
whether he did intend to bind us to this. It is usual to adduce for the 
affirmative two passages which I have already quoted with reference 
to the general question : / say unto you that ye resist not evil, Matth. v« 
39, and Rom. xii. 19, Avenge not yourselves, dearly beloved. A third pas- 
sage is those words of Christ to Peter, (Matth. xxvi. 52), Put up thy 
sword within the sheaih,for all they that take the sword shall perish with 
the sword. Some add to these the example of Christ, who died for 
his enemies, Rom. v. 8, 10. 

2 Nor are there wanting among the ancient Christians, those who 
though they did not condemn public wars, thought that private self- 
defense was forbidden. We have already (Chap. n. § 10, No. 5) adduced 
the passages of Ambrose in defense of war : there are passages in Au- 
gusUne more numerous and more clear, known to alL Yet the same 
Ambrose says. Perhaps when he said to Peter, who offered him two 
■words. It is enough: it was as if he said, that the use ofsueh weapons vmu 
lawjul tUl the Oospel: the Law was a teacher of equity, the Gospel, of 
truth. And the same writer in another place : A Christian, if he should 
come m the way of an armed robber, may not return his blows; lest m 
dtfending hit eafety he should stain his piety. And Augustine, As to 
the law which permits such (robbers and other violent transgressors) 
to be put to deathf I reprehend it not; but how lam to defend thorn whot 

32 OF WAE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Booe L 

put men to deaths I do not see. And in another place, As to puiting men 
to death that other men may not be killed by them, I cannot approve of , 
fucA dMide ; except the agent be a eoldier, or a puhlie officer, or do thitf fiat 
for hinuelf, but for others, having received legitimate authority. And 
Basil was of the same opinion. 

3 But the opposite opinion, as it is the more common, bo does it 
seem to us the more true, that such forbearance Is not obligatory r 
for in the €k>spel, we are told to love our neighbour as ourselTes, but 
not better than ourselves; nay even, when an equal evil impends 
over ourselves and another, we are not forbidden to consult our own 
safety rather than that of others, as we have shewn above from St Panl, 
when he explains the law of kindness. Perhaps some one may nrgp 
in reply, that though I may prefer my own good to the good of my 
neighbour, this does not hold of unequal goods: and that I most 
rather give up my life than that the aggressor should be permitted to 
fall into eternal damnation. But wo may answer that the person 
attacked may also need time for repentance before he dies, or may 
think so on probable grounds, and that the aggressor may possibly 
have time for repentance before his death. But in truth we are not 
to estimate the moral consequences of a danger into which a man 
throws himself, and from which he can relieve himself. 

4 Certainly the Apostles, even to the last, with the knowledge and 
under the eye of Christ, travelled armed with sword, which also other 
Galileans, travelling from their country to Jerusalem, did for fear of 
robbers, as we learn from Josephus ; who says also that the Essenes, 
most blameless men, did the same. Hence when Christ said that a 
time was at hand such that men should sell a garment to buy a sword^ 
Luke xzii. 36, the Apostles answered that they had two in that com- 
pany: which company consisted of the Apostles alone. And though 
what was said by Christ, was in truth, not a command but a proverbial 
expression, signifying that most grave perils were impending, as clearly 
appears from the opposition of the former time, which had been safe 
and prosperous, verse 35, When I sent you without purse, ^c. ; yet 
it shows what was customary, and what the Apostles thought lawfiil. . 

Now it is rightly said by Cicero, that It would not be lawful to 
carry a sword if it were not lawful under any circumstances to use U. 

5 The other passage, Hesist not evil, is more universal than that 
which follows, Oive to every one that asketh : which nevertheless admits 
of exception, namely, that we are not to overburthen ourselves. Nay 
more : This precept concerning giving has nothing added to it of a 
restrictive force, but is limited only by the sense of equity : whereas 
the precept, not to resist, has the explanation added in the example of 
a buffet on the cheek ; that it may be understood to oblige us precisely 
then when we are assailed by an injury such as a buffet, or something 
of the same kind : for otherwise it would have been more suitable to 
say, Jlesist not an injurious aggressor j but give up your lives rather than 
use arms. 

Chap. HI.] OP SOVEREIGNTY. S3 

6 In the words to the Romans, Avenge not yourselves, the Greek 
word means to avenge, not to d^end, [See the passages.] And this is 
plain from the context : for he had just said, Rom. xii. 17» Hecom" 
pense no man evil for evil; which is a description of Tindictive, not of 
self-defensire conduct. And Paul supports himself by reference to 
Deut. zxzii. 36, where the meaning of the word, and the sense of the 
passage, shews that self-defense cannot be intended. 

7 What is said to Peter does contain a prohibition of using the 
sword, but not in self-defense : for he had no reason to defend himself; 
since Christ had just said concerning his disciples. Suffer them to 
depart ; and that, in order that the words which he had uttered might 
be fulfilled: Of those whom thou hast given me 1 have lost none: 
John xriii. 8, 9 : nor to defend Christ, for he would not allow himself 
to be defended. And hence in St John he adds the reason for this 
prohibition : The cup which my Father has given me, shaU I not drink 
iif Terse 11 ; and in Matthew ho says, How then shall the Scriptures he 

fulfilled, w^h »ay that so it must bef St Peter then, according to his 
fervid temper, was moved by the desire of revenge, not of defense. 
Add to this, that he was using weapons against those who came in the 
name of the public authorities : and whether these may in any case be 
resisted, is a peculiar question, to be specially treated hereafter. What 
the Lord adds. All they that take the sword shall perish by the sword, 
IB either a proverb borrowed from common usage, which meant that 
blood leads to blood, and therefore that the use of arms is always 
full of peril ; or, as is the opinion of Origen, Theophylact, Titus, and 
Euthemius, it denotes that we are not to take vengeance out of the 
bands of God, since it is what he will fiilly exact in his own time : and 
this is plainly expressed, Revelation xiii. 10, He tJuU killeth with the 
Mword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith 
of the saints. And this agrees with what Tertullian says, So sufficient 
is God, as one in whom our patience may trust : if xve leave our injuries 
to him, he is our avenger ; if our losses, our reeompenser ; if our pains, 
our physician ; if our death, our restorer to life. What a privilege of 
patience it is to make Ood our debtor ! And at the same time the words 
of Christ seem to contain a prophecy of the punishment which the 
Roman sword was to exact from tiie sanguinary Jews. 

8 With regard to the example of Christ, who is alleged to have died 
for his enemies, it may be answered, that all the acts of Christ are full 
of Wrtoe^ and such as may be laudably imitated, as far as is possible, 
and will not fail of their reward ; but they are not all such as proceed 
from a law, or make a law for us. Por that Christ died for his enemies 
and for the ungodly, was what he did, not in pursuance of any law, but 
from a special covenant with his Father ; who promised, on that con- 
dition, not only eternal glory, but also an endless offspring, Isaiah liii. 
10. And so Paul describes this as a special and exceptional and 
unparalleled act, Rom. v. 7 : Scarcely for a righteous man will one die. 

D 

84 OF WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [BoosL 

And Christ commandfl us to put our life in peril, not for any one, but 
for the brethren^ 1 John ill. 16. 

9 As to the opinions adduced from Christian writers, partly thej 
i^pear to be rather counsels, and the recommendation of an elevated 
purpose, partly they are the private opinions of those writers, not the 
common jud^ent of the Church. For in the rery ancient Canons 
which are called Apostolic, he especially is excluded from the com- 
munion, who in a quarrel had slun his adyersary at once, in heat of 
blood. And this opinion Augustine, whom we hare quoted on the 
opposite side [§ n. Art 2], appears to approve. 

IV. [And now of Public War.] I Public War is either formal, 
according to the Law of Nations, or less formal What I here call 
formal, is commonly called legitimate, in that sense in which a l^ti* 
mate will is opposed to a codicil, and a legitimate marriage, to the co- 
habitation of slaves : not that a man may not lawfully make oodicils, or 
a slave cohabit with a woman ; but because a Will and a Marriage 
have peculiar effects by the Civil Law, which it is important to note. 
For many, not understanding the word legitimate^ think that all ware 
which are not legitimate are unlawful and unjust. In order that a war 
may be formal according to the Law of Nations, two things are 
required ; first, that it be carried on on both sides by the authority of 
those who have a political sovereignty ; next, that certain formalities 
be employed, of which we shall speak in their place. Since both these 
oonditions are requisite, one alone without the other is not sufficient. 

2 An informal public war may both want those formalities, and be 
made against private persons, and by the authority of any magistrate. 
And if we look at the matter without reference to ciril laws, it would 
seem that every magistrate has the right of making war, both to pro- 
tect the subjects conmiitted to his charge, and to exercise his juris- 
diction, if opposed by force. But because by war the whole State is 
brought into danger, therefore it is provided by the laws of almost 
every nation, that war is not to be made except by the authority of 
the Sovereign Power. Plato has such a provision in the last book of 
his Laws. And in the Roman Law, ho was held guilty of high treason 
who without the authority of the Sovereign made war, levied troops, or 
formed an army: the Cornelian law said, without authority of the 
People, So it is in the Codex of Justinian : and so argues Augustine. 
[See the text.] 

3 But as all precepts, however universal, are to be interpreted 
according to equity, so is this law. For in the first place, there can 
be no doubt that he who is at the head of any jurisdiction may, through 
the officers of his court, compel by force a few contumacious persons 
to obey him, when there is no need of major force for the purpose. 
And again, if the danger be present and pressing, so that there is no 
time to consult the Sovereign, here also necessity makes an exemption. 
On the ground of such a right as this, L. Pinarius, the commander 

Chap. HL] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 85 

of the garrison of Ennay being aware that the townsmen had the inten- 
tion to rerolt and join the Carthaginians, by a sndden onslaught on 
them kept possession of the town. And eren without great necessity, 
in order to obtain satisfiiction for injuries which the king neglects to 
prosecute, Fimncis Victoria gaye the citizens of towns the right of 
making war. But this opinion is deserredly repudiated by others. 

V. 1 In what events the right of using arms is to be allowed to 
subordinate magistrates, and whether such a war is to be called a 
public war, the Jurists differ. Some affirm, some deny. If indeed we 
call that JMI5K6 which is done by the authority of the magistrate, there 
can be no doubt that suchVars are public wars ; and that therefore those 
who in such cases oppose the magistrates, incur the punishment of 
contumacy against their superiors. But if public be taken in a higher 
sense, for that which is formal, as beyond controyersy it often is, those 
are not public wars ; for the full right of public war requires both the 
authority of the Soyereign and other conditions. Nor is this disproyed 
by the &ct that in such struggles men haye their goods taken from 
them, and licence is granted to soldiers : for those features are not so 
peculiar to public war that they may not haye place in other cases. 

2 But this too may happen ; that in an extensive empire, the sub- 
ordinate powers may have, as a matter conceded to them, the right of 
making war : and if this be the case, the war must then be considered 
as made by authority of the Sovereign power ; for when a superior 
gives another the right of doing anything, it is held to be done by 
the authority of the giver. 

8 A more difficult controversy is, whether, when there is no such 
mandate, a conjecture of the will of the Sovereign be sufficient. To 
me it seems that this is not to be admitted. For in this state of things, 
it is not enough to consider. What would be the wish of the Sovereign 
if he were consulted : but rather this : What the Sovereign, in the 
case when the business admits of delay, or is of doubtful prudence, 
would wish to be done without consulting him, if a general rule on 
this subject were to be established. For however in any particular 
case the reason [for consulting the Sovereign] may seem to vanish on 
examination, the general rule of not incurring the dangers [which 
arise from not doing so] does not cease to have weight: and this 
cannot be done, if eyery [subordinate] magistrate judges for himself 
in such cases. 

4 [Examples.] Thus Cn. Manlius was rightly accused by his officers 
of having made war on the Gallo-Grecians without the command of 
the Roman people : fbr though there had been legions of those Galli 
in the army of Antiochus, yet, peace being concluded with Antiochus, 
the question, whether that offence was to be further visited upon the 
Gallo-Greoians, was to be decided by the Roman people, not by Cn. 
Manlius. [Again] because Caesar had made war on the Germans, Cato 
advised that he should be given up to the Germans : but in this, I 
conceive that he did not think of Bight, so much as wish the city to 

J>2 

36 OF WAE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Book L 

be deUrered from the fear of a master. For the Germans had assisted 
the Gauls, the enemies of the Romans, and therefore there was an injury 
.to complin of, if the Romans had just cause for their war against the 
Gauls. But Cffisar, when he had had Gaul assigned him as a prorince, 
ought to have been content to expel the Germans from it, and ought 
not, without having any danger on that side, to hare followed the 
(Germans within their own frontier, without first consulting the Roman 
people. Hence the Germans had not the right of demanding that 
Caesar should be surrendered to them, but the Romans had the right 
of calling Cessar to account. So the Carthaginians answered the 
Romans in a similar case ; [when Hannibal had besieged Saguntum.] 
/ do not conceive that the question between us is whether Saguntum wcu 
besieged by priveUe or by public authority, but whether the siege VHUjuetir 
fiable or not. For iiis a question between us and our officer whether he 
acted by our authority or his own; our dispute with you is, whether the 
treaty allowed the act. 

6 Cicero defends the act both of Octavius and of Decimus Bmtut 
who of their o?m motion made war upon Antony. But, even if 
Antony had deserved to be treated hostilely, the decision of the Senate 
and the people should have been waited for, whether it was for the 
interest of the State to overlook the act [of Antony] or to avenge it; 
to treat for peace, or to rush into arms. For no one is bound to use 
his Right to his own loss. And if Antony was judged a public enemy, 
it was for the Senate and people to determine by whom the war was 
to be conducted. So when Cassius asked the Rhodlans for soldiers to 
help him according to their treaty, they replied that they would send 
them if the Senate ordered them. 

6 Warned by this and other examples, we must recollect not to 
give our approval to everything which is said by authors, even of 
great name ; for they are often governed by the time, or by partial 
affections, and stretch their measure to their block. We must endea- 
vour to form a clear and unbiassed judgment, and avoid setting up aB 
examples cases which ought to be excused rather than praised. 

7 Since then it is said that a public war must not be carried on 
except by the authority of the person in whom the Sovereignty resides; 
it will be necessary, for the understanding of this question, and in 
order to decide other points concerning war, that we should under* 
stand what this Sovereignty is, and who has it; and this all the more^ 
inasmuch as learned men, in our time, arguing the question rather 
with a view to some present object than according to the truth, have 
made a subject, in itself not simple, still more entangled. 

VI. [Of Sovereignty.] 1 The Moral Faculty or Attribute of 
governing a state, which is commonly called the Ciril Power, is de- 
scribed in Thucydides by three characters, when he says that a city is 
aMnfOfjLos, aMdiKot, avrorcX^r ; has its own laws, tribunals, and magis- 
trates. Aristotle makes three parts of the administration of the State; 
consultation concerning public affairs, election of magistrates, and 

Chap. HI.] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 87 

administration of Justice. To the first part he refers deliberation con- 
cerning peace, war, treaties, laws ; he adds the infliction of death, or 
exile, forfeiture, bribery ; that is, as I interpret him, public offences, 
haying before spoken of the administration of justice in private cases. 
Dionysius of Halicamassus notes three points especially; the Right of 
creating magistrates, the Right of making and abrogating laws, and the 
Right of deciding on war and peace : and again in another place, he 
adds the case of sacred things, and the conyocation of the assemblies. 

2 We may easily diyide this subject in such a way that there shall 
be neither defect nor redundance. He who rules Uie State rules it 
partly by himself, partly by others. By himself, he is either employed 
about general matters, or about particular. He is employed about 
general matters, in making laws and in rescinding them ; both with 
regard to sacred subjects (so far as the care of those belongs to the 
State) and secular. The particular matters about which he is em- 
ployed are either directly public, or priyate, but with a reference to the 
public. Directly public, are public acts, as making war, peace, trea- 
ties; or money matters, as taxes and commercial duties, and the like; 
among which is comprehended that dominium eminens which the State 
has for public uses, oyer its citizens and the property of its citizens. 
This art is by Aristotle called by the general name irdkiruajy that is 
civile and fiovXtvruaj, deliberative. Priyate matters are controyersies 
between indiyiduals which the public interest requires to be settled by 
public authority. The art which deals with them is called ducatrriierj^ 
judicicd. The part of goyemment which is executed by others, is 
executed either by magistrates, or by other commissioned persons, 
among whom are ambassadors. And in these things consists the Ciyil 
Power. 

VII. 1 That Power is called Sovereign, whose acts are not sub- 
ject to the control of another, so that they can be rendered yoid by 
the act of any other human will. When I say any other, 1 exclude the 
Soyereign himself, who may change his determination, as may his suc- 
cessor who has the same authority, and therefore the same power, not 
another power. Let us see then in what subject this Soyereign power 
resides. The subject in which a power resides is either conunon or 
special ; as the common subject in which the sight resides is the body, 
but the special subject is the eye. And in like nuinner the common 
subject in which the Soyereignty resides is the State, which we haye 
before described as a perfect [independent] community. 

2 We exclude therefore peoples which haye put themselyes in sub- 
jection to another people, such as were the provinces of the Romans. 
Such peoples are not by themselves a State, as we now take that word, 
but the inferior members of a great State, as servants are members 
of a family. Again, it sometimes happens that several peoples have 
the same head, though each of these peoples constitutes a perfect 
community; for though several bodies cannot have one head in the 
natural body, they may in the moral body; for there, the same per- 

88 OR WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [BooeI. 

•on may be separately r^arded as the head in his relation to different 
bodies. Of which there may be a certain indication in this, that 
when the reigning house is extinct, the right of goTemment reyerts to 
each people separately. And thus it may happen that several States 
are combined in a close federal connexion, and make one Sytiem, and 
yet each is a separate State. [Strabo, Aristotle.] 

3 Therefore the common subject of Sovereignty is the State, un- 
dentood in the way we have described. The special subject is one or 
more persons according to the laws and customs of each nation. 

Yin. 1 And here we must first reject their opinion who say 
that the Sovereignty everywhere belongs to the People ; so that U has 
the power of controlling kings, and of punishing them if they abuse 
their power. What evil this opinion has caused, and may cause» any 
wise man may see. We refute it with these arguments. 

A man may by his own act make himself the slave of any one : as 
appears by the Hebrew and the Roman law. Why then may not a 
people do the same, so as to transfer the whole Right of governing it 
to one or more persons? And it is not to the purpose to say that we 
are not to presume such a £Etct; for this question is not, wha^ is to be 
presumed in a case of doubt, but what may lawfully be done. Nor is 
it to the purpose to allege the inconveniences which follow or may fol- 
low from such a course : for whatever form of government you take» 
you will never escape all inconvenience. 

2 But as there aro many ways of living, one better than another, 
and each man is free to choose which of them he pleases ; so each na- 
tion may choose what form of government it will : and its right in this 
matter is not to be measured by the excellence of this or that form, 
concerning which opinions may* be various, but by its choice. 

3 Nor is it difficult to conceive causes why a people may resign 
the whole power of its own government, and transfer it to another ; 
as for example, if it be in great peril and cannot find a defender on 
other conditions : or if it be in want and cannot otherwise obtain suste- 
nance. So the Gampanians of old submitted themselves to the Romans, 
[see the text from Livy] and some peoples, which wished to do so, were 
not accepted. What then prevents a people from giving itself up to 
some powerful man in the same manner ? Or again, it may happ^i that 
a large landowner will not allow persons to dwell on his land on any 
other condition : or if any one have a large body of slaves, he may 
manumit them on condition of being his subjects and paying his 
taxes. So the Germans did. [See the text from Tacitus.] 

4 Add to this that, as Aristotle says that some men are slaves by 
nature, so some nations are more prone to be governed than to 
govern. So the Cappadocians, when the Romans offered them their 
liberty, refused it, and declared they could not live without a king. 
So it was said that it was absurd to give freedom to Thracians, My- 
sians, Getans, because they had no heart for it. 

5 Also many may be moved by the examples of nations which have 

CHAP.m.] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 89 

lired happily for many generations under the role of kings; as the 
cities of Asia under Eumenes. And sometimes the condition of the 
Btate is such that it cannot be safe except under the rule of one ; as 
many prudent men have thought was the case with the Roman State 
at the time of Augustus. On these and other accounts, it not only may, 
but does often happen, that many subject themselves to the rule and 
power of another. 

6 Moreover civil authority, or the right of goyeming, may also 
be acquired by legitimate war. And all this applies to a gOTemmeni 
by a body of Nobles, as well as by a single Ruler: and no State was 
ever so popular, that some were not excluded from public voting; as 
strangers, paupers, women and children. 

7 Some peoples have other peoples under them, not less subject 
than if they were under kings: and thus that interrogation, la ih$ 
CoUcAiiM people iu awn master f And the Gampanians, when they 
had given themselves up to the Romans, are spoken of as not being 
their own masters. Acamania and Amphilochia are described sub* 
jects of the Etolians; Persea and Gaunus, as dependencies of the 
Rhodians; Pydna, as given by Philip to Olynthus. The towns which 
bad been under the Spartans, after they were taken from their rule, 
had the name of Eleutherolacones, Free Laconians. Gotyora is spoken 
of by Xenophon as a city of the Sinopians. Nicsea in Italy was ad- 
judged to the Massilians, as we read in Strabo, and the island Pithe- 
cusa to the Neapolitans. So in Frontinus we read that the town Ga- 
latia was adjudged to Gapua, Gaudium to the colony of Beneventum, 
with their territories. Otho gave the cities of the Mauri to the pro- 
vince of Bntica, as it is recorded in Tacitus. All which acts must 
be rejected, if we are to hold the doctrine that the right of govern- 
ing is always subject to the judgment and will of those who are 
governed. 

8 That there are Kings who are not subject to the will of the 
People, even taken in its totality, both sacred and profane history 
testify. The kings of Israel were appointed by €K>d, and were said 
to be anointed over the people, over the Lord's inheritance^ over all 
IsraeL [See the passages quoted 0. T. : and also Horace.] 

9 Seneca described three forms of government ; — by the people, by 
a senate, or by a monarch : [and the latter is considered as absolute.] 
So Plutarch speaks of those who have authority not only from the 
laws, but over the laws. Otanes in Herodotus speaks of irresponsible 
authority. So Dio Prusseensis and Pausanias oppose kingly power to 
responsible power. 

10 Aristotle says that some kings have the power which, in other 
places, the nation has over itself. So when the Roman rulers had 
acquired a really royal power, the People is said to have transferred 
to them all its authority and power. Hence Antoninus said that God 
alone if the judge of the Prinee, Dio says, of such a Prince, that he is 
free to do and not to do what hs pleaeee. Such a power was that in 

40 OP WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Book L 

ancient Greece of the Inaohld» at ArgoB. [See the Ohonu in the 
Supplice$ of ^schyluB.] 

11 Very different was the power of the kings at Athens, as Theseos 
speaks in the Supplicea of Euripides. [See the passage.] For Theseus, 
as Plutarch explains, was only a Leader in war, and Guardian of the 
laws, heing in other respects on a level with the citizens. Hence kings 
who are subject to the people are only improperly called kings. So 
after Lycurgus, the kings of the Lacedoemonians are sud to be kings in 
name^ not in reality, by Polybius, Plutarch, and Cornelius Nepos. And 
this example was followed in other parts of Greece, as at Argos. [See 
the passage from Pausanias.] And so the senate judged of the kings 
at Cuma, as Plutarch notes. Aristotle denies that such kingly gOTem. 
ment is a peculiar form of government, since it is only a part in an 
aristocratical or democratical constitution. 

12 Sometimes we find, in peoples not generally governed by kings, 
examples of a temporary kingly authority, not subject to the people. 
Such was the authority of the Amymones among the Cnidians, and of 
the Dictators in the early times of Rome, when there was no appeal 
to the People : whence Livy says that the edict of the Dictator was 
obeyed as a divine law, there being no choice but to obey. And Cicero 
speaks of the Dictature as controlling the regal power. 

13 The arguments on the other side [that all kings are responsible 
to the people] are not difficult to answer: for 

(1) First, the assertion that ho who constitutes any authority is 
superior to the person so constituted, is only true in that constitution 
which depends perpetually on the will of the constituent body : not in 
that which, though voluntary at first, afterwards becomes compulsory: 
thus a woman constitutes a person her husband, whom afterwards she 
is obliged for ever to obey. And in this strain is the speech of Yalen- 
tinian to his soldiers. [See the passage.] 

Nor is it true, as is assumed, that all kings are constituted by the 
people ; which we have already shown by the example of a landowner 
accepting tenants on condition of their obeying him ; and of nations 
conquered in war. 

14 (2) The other argument is taken from the maxim of the philo- 
sophers, that all government exists for the sake of the governed, not 
of the governors ; whence they conceive it follows that, the end being 
more noble than the means, the governed are superior to the gover- 
nors. 

But it is not universally true that all government is for the sake of 
the governed : for some kinds of government are for the sake of the 
governor, as that of the master in his family ; for there the advantage 
of the servant is extrinsic and adventitious ; as the gain of the physician 
is extrinsic to the art of medicine. Other kinds of government are for 
the sake of common utility, as the marital. So some kingly govern- 
ments may be established for the good of the kings, as those which 
are won by victory : and these are not therefore to be called tyran- 

Chap. DL] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 41 

niee; since it/ranny^ as we now understand it, implies injustice. Some 
governments too may hare respect to the utility both of the goTemor 
and the goremed; as when a people in distress places a powerful 
king oyer it to defend it. 

But I do not deny that in most goTemments, the godd of the 
gOTemed is the object ; and that, as Hesiod, Herodotus and Cicero say, 
kings are constituted for the sake of justice. But it does not follow, as 
our opponents infer, that peoples are superior to kings : for guardian- 
ship is for the sake of the ward, and yet the guardian has authority over 
the ward. And we are not to allow them to urge that if a guardian 
neglects his duty to his ward, he may be superseded ; and that there- 
fore kings may be so. For this is the case with a guardian, because he 
has a superior, (the State) ; but in political goyemment, because we 
cannot hare an infinite gradation of superiors, we must stop at some 
person or body, whose transgressions^ having no superior judge, are 
the province of God; as he himself declares. And he punishes them, 
if he deem fit to do so ; or tolerates them, in order to punish or to 
try the people. 

15 So Tacitus says that the vices of Princes are to be tolerated 
like bad seasons ; and may alternate with better. And M. Aurelius 
said that the magistrates judge private men; Princes, the magistrates; 
God, Princes. In Gregory of Tours is a passage to the same effect. 
So the Essenes hold, in Porphyry : so Irenseus, and the Clementine 
Constitutions. [See the test.] 

16 Nor is it an objection to this, that peoples are described as 
being punished for the faults of kings: for that does not happen 
because the people did not punish the king or control him, but because 
it consented, at least tacitly, to his transgressions*. Although indeed, 
God might punish the King by his supreme power without the help of 
the people. 

IX. 1 Some assert that there is a mutual subjection, so that the 
whole people ought to obey the king when he rules rightly, but when 
a king rules ill, he is subject to the people. If these reasoners were to 
say that those things which are manifestly iniquitous are not to be 
done, though commanded by the king, they would say what is true, 
and confessed by all good men : but this [resistance or disobedience] 
does not include any authority, or right of control. 

If any people intended to share the power of government with the 
king, (on which point we shall have something to say hereafter,) such 
limits ought to be assigned to the power on each side as might easily 
be recognized by distinctions of places, persons, and matters. 

2 But the goodness and badness of an act, [the allegation that the 
king rules well or ill,] which are often matters of great doubt, especially 
in political affairs, are not fit marks to make such distinctions. Whence 

* I suppose the opponent would ask, how the people conld shew that it did not 
tadtly consent to the khig*8 transgressions, otherwise than by controlling or 
punbhing bin. W. W. 

48 OF WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Book L 

ihe moAt extreme confusion must follow, if the king and the people 
claim cognisance of the same matter by the allegation of good and 
eril conduct. Such a disturbed state of things no people, so far as I 
know, oyer thought of introducing. 

X. 1 Haying thus remored the opinions which are f&Ise, it re- 
mains that we lay down some cautions, which may shew us how to 
judge rightly in whom the Sorereign authority in each nation resides. 

The first caution is this : that we are not to be deceived by ambi- 
guous names or mere external appearances. For example, in the 
Latin there is a customary opposition of Goremor (Prinoaps,) and 
King ; as where Caesar says that the father of Vincetorex acquired 
the goTomment of Qaul, but was put to death because he aimed at the 
kingly power ; and where Piso, in Tacitus, says that Gennanicns was 
the son of a Roman goyemor, not of a ParUiian king; and where 
Suetonius says that Caligula was within a little of conyerting the 
office of a Goyemor into a royal estate; and where in Yelleius, 
Maroboduus is said to haye imagined to himself, not a goyemment 
constituted by the choice of subjects, but royal authority. 

2 Tet we often find these two names confounded : for the Lacedse- 
monian goyemors of the posterity of Hercules, after they were subjected 
to the Ephori, were called neyertheless Kings, as we haye seen. And 
in ancient Germany there were Kings whom Tacitus asserts to haye held 
their authority by force of persuasion, not of command : and Liyy says 
that King Eyander govemed more by personal might than by l^gal 
office ; and Aristotle and Polybius call the Sufiete of the Carthaginians, 
King ; as also Diodorus ; so likewise Solinus calls HannoELing of the Car- 
thaginians : and Strabo says of Scepsis in the Troad, when, joining 
the Milesians, they formed a republic, that the posterity of the old 
Kings retained the royal name and something of the royal honour. 

3 On the other hand, the Roman emperors, when they had ac- 
quired unquestioned and unconcealed absolute powers, continued to 
be called PrmcipeSf not Kings. 

Also the ensigns of royal power are assigned to the €k>yemor in 
some cities which are free ; [as to the Doge at Venice. Cfronovius.'] 

4 The Estates of the Realm, or assemblies which represent the 
yarious classes of the community, ''Prelates, Nobles, and Burgesses," 
are sometimes only a Great Council of the King, serying to make him 
acquainted with the complaints of the people, which are often not 
ui^ged in the Priyy Council ; and to enable him to decide what is best 
on such subjects. But in other places these Estates haye the right 
of taking cognisance of the acts of the Prince, and eyen of prescribing 
laws by which he is bound* 

5 Many think that the distinction of Soyereignty and subordinate 
authority is to be found in the difference of succession and election : 
what comes by succession they hold to be soyereign ; not what comes 
by election. But this is certainly not uniyersally true. For succession 
is not a charter which determines the force of authority, but a con- 

Chap, m.] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 43 

tiniiation of authority already existing. The authority bestowed by the 
election of the family is continued by snccession : whaterer amount 
of right the first election gires, the succession transmits the same. So 
the Lacedaemonian kings, though not absolute^ were hereditary. The 
distinction is noted by Aristotle and Thucydides. On the other hand, 
the Bonian empire was absolute, yet elective. 

XL 1 A second caution is this. We must distinguish between 
what a thing is, and what is the kind of possessicm of it. A thing is, 
for example^ a piece of land; also, in this sense, a road, an act, a 
right of way. Now such a thing may be held plena jure, in full right of 
property ; or jmre itfu/ruduorio, as tenant for life ; or jure temporcniOf 
as tenant for a time only. Thus the Roman Dictator held his au« 
thority as temporary tenant; most kings, both elected and hereditary, 
by usufructuary right; but some kings, in full right of property; as 
those who hare acquired their power in a legitimate war, or in whose 
power any people has put itself absolutely, for some sufficient motiye. 

2 The Dictator was SoToreign, though temporary. For the nature 
of moral things [such as power] is known from their operations, and 
those faculties or powers which haye the same effect must be called 
by the same name. Now the Dictator, during his office, performed all 
the acts which the most absolute king can perform; nor could his 
acts be rendered Toid by any one. And the duration of a thing does 
not alter its nature. If indeed you ask concerning the dignity, the 
mt^isty of the office, undoubtedly it is greater in a perpetual office. 
In the same manner those Regents are Sorereigns for the time, who 
gOTom during the nonage, insanity, or captiyity of the king, and whose 
power is not reyocable before a certain legitimate period. 

3 The case is different with goyemors whose authority may be 
reyoked at any time; as the kings of the Goths and the Vandals. 
These are not soyereign. 

XIL [There are monarchies pUno jure,'] 

1 Some oppose this, because, they say, men are not things, and 
cannot be possessed plow jure^ as things. But personal liberty is one 
thing, ciyil liberty, another. Men may have personal liberty, so as 
not to be slaves; and yet not have ciril liberty, so as to bo free dti- 
aens. LibertoB and regnum are constantly opposed in the Roman 
writers. [See the passages.] The question is not concerning the 
liberty of indiriduah, but of a people : and a people which is not thus 
free, IB Baid to he non iui jwr%8f non mcB potesUUis. [See the passages.] 

2 When a people is transferred &tHn one Soverdgn to another, it 
is property, not the persons, but the right of goyeming them, which is 
transferred ; as a freedman (libertus) may be assigned by his patron to 
one of his sons. 

3 AgiUn, they object that if the king has conquered another nation 
[and so made them his» pUnojuref] he has won them by the dangers 
and labours of his dtizens, and therefore the acquisition is theirs, fiut 
this will not hold. For the king may hare supported the army out oi 

44 OF WAE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Book I. 

his own property or patrimony. For though he has only the usufniot 
of his patrimony, he may do what he likes with that. So in the CItII 
Lawy when a property is adjudged from a tenant to the heir, the yearly 
fruit is not refunded, because that belongs not to the heir, but to the 
property. 

A khig then may hare authority over a people propria jur€f so that 
he can even alienate the kingdom to another. This has eren been 
done : as by Solomon to Hiram (or Hierom) king of Tyre. 

4 And often in Qrecian history. [See the examples.] 

6 And in Roman history. Attains left his kingdom, Asia, to 
the Romans by will: so did Nicomedes, Bithynia; so did Appion, 
Cyrenaica. 

6 [Other examples.] 

Xm. 1 Some sovereignties are not held pUno jure : namely, those 
which are bestowed by the will of the people. In this case, the king 
is not to be presumed to have the right of alienation. So Crantziui 
notes, as a thing without precedent, Unguin giving Norway by testa- 
ment The bequests of kingdoms by Charlemagne, Louis, and others, 
were to be taken rather as a commendation than an alienation : and 
accordingly Charlemagne desired to have his testament confirmed by 
the Frankish nobles. So Philip, king of Macedon, commended his 
nephew as king to the cities of Bii&cedonia. 

2 Loui^ restoring the city of Rome to Pope Paschal is not to the 
point; for the Franks might properly restore to the Roman people that 
authority over the city of Rome which they had received from the 
Roman people ; and the Pope might be considered as representing 
the people. 

XIV. Some powers lower than sovereignty are held pUnojure : as 
marquisates, counties, baronies, are sold, bequeathed, or otherwise 
alienated, much more commonly than kingdoms. 

XV. 1 The distinction between patrimonial and non-patrimonial 
kingdoms is seen in the mode of appointing a Regent or Guardian, 
when the king, from age or disease, cannot act. In non-patrimonial 
kingdoms this is done by public law, or that failing, by consent of the 
people : in patrimonial kingdoms, by the father, or the family. Thus 
in Epirus, the Regents wore appointed by the consent of the people : 
in the kingdom of Asia, by the will or testament of the sovereign. 

2 Whether the king be, in addition, the owner of the land, as the 
king of Egypt after Joseph, and the kings of the Indian nationSy 
makes no difference in this matter. 

XVL [Sovereignty is not destroyed by grants of rights from the 
Sovereign.] 

1 The third observation is, that the authority does not cease to be 
sovereign, although the Ruler makes certain promises to his subjects, 
or to God, even of matters relating to the government. I do not now 
speak of promises to observe Natural Law and Divine Law, or the Jtu 
ffmtiwn, to which all kings are bounds even without promise; but of 

CHAP.m.] OF SOVEREIGNTY. 46 

the concession of roles to which they could not be bound without 
promise. The truth of this appears from the analogy of the master 
of a funily, who, though ho should have promised to do something 
which pertains to the government of the family, does not thereby 
cease to hare the supreme power in the family, so far as family mat- 
ters are concerned. Nor does a husband lose his marital power, by 
Tnf^lring cortidn promises to his wife. 

2 But still it must be confessed, that when this is done, the sove- 
reignty is in some degree limited, whether the obligations respect the 
exercise of certain acts, or directly aflfect the power. In the first case, 
an act done against the promise becomes unjust, because, as we shall 
elsewhere shew, a legitimate promise gives a Right to the promisee : in 
the second case, the promise is null by reason of defect of the power 
of making it. But it does not follow from this that the person so 
promising has a superior; for the promise is null, in this case, not by 
the act of superior power, but by Natural Law. 

3 Thus the Persian king was absolute and irresponsible ; yet he 
took an oath on his accession, and could not change laws duly made. 
[See the examples.] So the kings of the Ethiopians. So the kings of 
the Egyptians, who were absolute, were obliged to many observances : 
if they violated these, they could not be accused in their lifetime ; but 
after their death they were accused, and buried with certain solemni- 
ties. So those Hebrew kings who had reigned ill were buried in 
places out of the Royal burial-ground. 2 Chron. xxiv. 25 ; xxviii. 27. 
And this was an excellent institution, preserving the sacredness of tho 
kingly power, and yet restraining kings from violating their faith by 
the fear of a future judgment. So the kings of Epirus swore to reign 
according to the Laws. 

4 But suppose the condition to be added, that if the king violate 
his promise he should lose his kingdom ? Even so, his sovereignty does 
not cease ; it becomes a mode of possessing the kingdom, narrowed by 
the condition, and not unlike to a temporary sovereignty. So the king 
of the Sabseans, as Agatharoides related, was completely absolute, but 
if he quitted his palace, was liable to be stoned. 

6 So an estate which wo enjoy by a trustee is ours no less than if 
it were possessed in full property ; but it ceases to be ours when the 
conditions of the trust direct. Such conditions belong to other con- 
tracts, as well as to the tenure of government. Some leagues with 
neighbours seem to have been made with such a sanction. 

XVII. 1 The Sovereignty may be divided according to its jwterUial 
or its titbjective parts. 

The Sovereignty consists of the parts which we have mentioned 
[see § Ti.j, with the addition of irresponsibility : but it may be divided 
either according to the powers [deliberative, judicial, &c.] or the 
subjects who are governed. Thus the Roman Empire, though one» 
was often divided, so that one Ruler had the East, another the West ; 
or into three parts. So too it may happen that a people when it 

46 OF WAE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [Book L 

ehooees a king, may teaerve oertain acts to itself and may oommit 
others to the king, pUno jure. This is not the case wheneTer the king 
is boond by certain promises^ as we liaTe shewn; [§ xn.] but is to be 
understood to happen then, when dther the partition of power is 
expressly instituted, concerning which we hare already spoken; or if 
a people, hitherto free, lay upon the king some perpetual precept; 
or if anything be added to the compact, by which it is understood that 
the king can be compelled or punished. For a precept is the act of 
a superior, at least in the thing commanded : to compel, is not always 
the act of a superior ; for by Natural Law erery creditor has the Right 
of compelling his debtor to pay; but to compel is at rariance with the 
nature of an inferior. Therefore in the case of such compulsion, a 
parity of powers at least follows, and the Sorereignty is diyided. 

2 Many persons all^;e many inconymiences against such a two- 
headed Sovereignty; but in political matters nothing is quite free 
from incouYoniences ; and Rights arise, not from what seems to one 
or another couTenient, but from the will of him who is the origin of 
Bights. For example, the kings established by the Heradidie in Argos, 
Messena, and Sparta, were bound to goyem within the rules of the law ; 
and so long as they did so, the people were bound to preserre the 
throne to them. 

Also such engagements hare been made, not only between the king 
and his people, but among different kings, and among different peo- 
ples; and between kings and neighbouring peoples; each giring such 
a ^^uaranUe to the other. 

XVni. 1 There is no partition of the Sorerelgnty, in cases when 
kings allow their own acts not to be yalid except when approved by some 
assembly'*'. For acts which are thus rescinded are to be understood 
to be rescinded by the authority of the king; who proWded such a 
eaution against fkllacious representations. So Antiochus the Third 
sent a rescript to the magistrates, that if he commanded anything con- 
trary to the Laws, they should not obey him : and Gonstantine directed 
that widows and orphans should not be compelled to come to the 
Emperor^s court for judgment, though a rescript of the Emperor to 
that effect should be produced. 

2 The case is like that of a testament in which it is added that no 
subsequent testament shall be yalid ; for this clause has the effect of 
making a later testament presumed not to be the real will of the testator. 
But as this clause may be rescinded by an express and special signifl. 
cation of the will of the writer, so may that direction of the king. 

XIX. I do not here use the authority of Polybius,who refers the 
Roman State to the class of mixed Soyereignty. For at that time, if 
we look, not at the acts, but at the right of acting, it was merely demo- 
cratical : for both the authority of the Senate, which he regards as ao 
aristocracy, and that of the Consuls, whom he considers as kings, was 

* Afl the king of Fnmoe has his edicts registered bj the Fsriiament. Oro* 

Chap. UL] OP SOVEREIGNTY. 47 

Bubject to the People. And the same is to be Biud with respect to 
other political writersy who regard external appearances and daily 
administration^ rather than the question of Rights. 

XX. Examples of mixed Soyereignty. [See the text] 

1 The Hebrew kings were absolute, like other oriental monarohs : 

2 The Hebrew king had pecoliar exceptions from the law : 

3 Tet some oases were reserved to the Sanhedrim. 

4 Mixed soyereignty among the Macedonians: the €k)thones: the 
Pheaoians: 

6 Under the Roman kings : 

6 In Rome under the early Consuls : 

7 In Athens at the time of Solon. 

These points being settled, let us examine certain questions which 
often occur in this matter. 

XXI. 1 First, Whether one who is bound by an unequal alliance 
can have sorereign power. 

By an unequal alliance, or unequal league, I do not mean one in 
which the parties hare a different amount of power ; as the league of 
the Thebans with the Persians at the time of Pelopidas ; and of the 
Romans with the Massilians, and afterwards with king Masanissa ; 
nor a league which has a transient operation, as when he who was an 
enemy is reeeiyed into amity, on condition of paying the expences of 
the war, or any other consideration ; but a league which by the force 
of the compact gives a permanent precedence to one of the parties : 
when for instance, the one party is bound to preserve the authority 
and majesty of the other, as was the case in the league of the Etolians 
with the Romans. [See the explanation in the text.] To this relation 
are referred what are called- the Rights of Protectorate, Advocacy, 
Patronage, and the Rights of the Mother-cities in Greece over their 
Colonies. [See Thucydides.] So the league between Alba and Rome* 

2 This is the diaracteristic of an alliance between unequals; 
that the greater share of power goes to the stronger, the greater share 
of advantage to the weaker. [Andronicus Rhodius.] And a people is 
free which is not under the power of any other, oven though there be 
a league in which it is stipulated that it shall preserve the majesty of 
another people : [as Proculus pronounced.] Since therefore a people 
bound by such a league is free, it follows that it preserves its sovereignty. 

The same may be said of a king; for there is an entire analogy 
between a free people, and a king who is truly a king. Proculus adds, 
that though one of the peoples be superior, both are free ; superior is 
here understood not of power, but of authority and dignity. So Clients 
are free, yet inferior to Patrons. 

3 Clients are under the protection of their Patrons (in fide patro* 
norum) ; so in an unequal alliance, the inferior people is under the 
protection of the people superior in dignity. They are under their 
patronship, not under their authority, sub patrocinioy nan sub ditione. 
There are many examples of this distinction, in Appian, Livy, Cicero, 

4a OP WAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [BookL 

Strabo. [See the text.] As private patronflhip does not take away per- 
sonal liberty, so public patronship does not take away public liberty* 
which cannot exist without sovereignty. Other kings, on the contrary, 
were really subjects of the superior power, as the kings of Armenia to 
the Romans, the kings of Cyprus to the Persian king. [See the an- 
thorities: Qronorius adds, for the Armenians, FlortUf 4, 12.] 

4 Proculus adds that We (the Romans) t<ike cognisance ofcnmmcUi 
tfi thtfoderate cities; which seems at Tariance with what we bare said. 
To understand this, we must know that there may be four kinds of 
controversies in such cases. First, if the subjects of the people or 
king which is under the protection of another, be charged with viola- 
tion of the terms of the league : secondly, if the peoples or kings 
themselves be so charged : thirdly, if the allies, who are under the 
protection of the same people or king, have a dispute among them- 
selves : fourthly, if the subjects complain of wrong done them by those 
under whose authority they are. 

In the first case, if the offence be apparent, the king or people is 
bound either to punish the offender, or to give him np to the party 
whom he has wronged ; but this holds good, not only in unequal, but 
in equal alliances, and even when there is no league in existence, as 
we shall hereafter shew. They are also bound to see that compensa- 
tion be made, which was the office of the RectipercUoree at Rome. [See 
the definition of BecuperoHo from Festus.] But one of the allied states 
has not a direct Right of seizing or punishing the subject of another. 
So when Annibal seized Decius Magius the Campanian, he pleaded 
against this as contrary to the federal Rights, and was set at liberty. 

6 In the second case, one ally has the power of compelling another 
to abide by the terms of the league, and even of punishing, if this be 
not done. But this also is not peculiar to unequal alliances ; for the 
same holds in an equal alliance. For in order to justify any party in 
doing himself justice upon a wrong-doer, it is sufficient that he be 
not himself the subject of the offender; a case elsewhere to be 
treated. And therefore this is practised between kings and peoples 
not federate. 

6 In the third case, as, in equal alliances, the dispute is commonly 
referred to a convention of the allies who are not interested in the 
dispute, as we read that the Greeks, antient Latins, and Oermans used 
to do ; or otherwise, to arbiters, or to the Head of the League as a 
common arbiter : so, in unequal alliances, it is commonly agreed that 
disputes are to be settled by reference to him who is the superior in 
the alliance. But this also does not prove superior authority ; for 
even kings are accustomed to have pleas before judges appointed by. 
themselves. 

7 In the fourth case, the allies have no Right of Cognisance. So 
when Herod made accusations against his sons to Augustus, they 
pleaded that he himself, both as father and as king, had cognisance of 
them. So when some of the Carthaginians complained to Rome 

Chap. IIL] OF SOVEREIGNTY. 49 

agaiDBt Axmibal, Sctpio said that the Senate ought not to interfere in 
the interior matters of Carthage. And so Aristotle says that an Alli- 
ance differs from a single State in this ; that Allies provide against 
their own mutual injuries, but not against the mutual injuries of the 
citizens of one of the Allied States. 

8 In unequal alliances, the words commaiid and obedience are some- 
times used with reference to transactions between the superior and 
inferior: but this does not refute what we hare said. Such terms are 
either used of things tending to the common good of the alliance, or 
to the prirate advantage of the superior. 

In common things, at times when the common convention is not 
assembled, the Head of the League usually gives conmiands to the 
allies ; as Agamemnon to the Greek kings ; and the Lacedsemonians, 
and afterwards the Athenians, to the Greek States. [See Thucydides 
and Isocrates.] The Latins call this commanding; (imperare;) the 
Greeks, more modestly, ordering; (Taaa-tty.) [See Thucydides, Pliny.] 
This being done by the Head of an equal Alliance, may naturally be 
done by the Superior in an unequal Alliance. This kind of imperiwn, 
ffycfu^Mo, does not take away liberty. So the Rhodlans say in Livy: 
BO the Greek cities are described in Diodorus; so Dio Prusseensis 
says of the Athenians ; so Csesar of the Suevi. 

9 In matters relating to the utility of the Superior in an unequal 
alliance, his requirements are called commands, not of Right, but as 
producing the effect of commands : as the requests of kings are often 
called commands ; [so Livy] and as the patient is said to command his 
physician : [more conmionly the physician is said to command the 
patient J, B,] 

10 But yet, true it is, that he who is superior in an alliance, if he 
be much the more powerful, often gradually obtains a real imperium, 
especially if the alliance be perpetual, with the Right of introducing 
garrisons into the towns; as the Athenians did when they allowed ap- 
peals to be made to them by their allies, which the Lacedsemonians 
never did ; at which time Isocrates compares the power of the Athenians 
to an empire. So the Latins complained that under the figment of an 
alliance with Rome they were in slavery. So the Etolians spoke of 
the vain pretence and empty name of liberty ; and the Achseans after- 
wards, that the alliance was a slavery, having no security of liberty. 
So Civilts, in Tacitus, complains that it was not an alliance, as for- 
merly, but that they were treated like slaves ; and again, that their 
wretched slavery was falsely called peace. Eumencs, in Livy, says 
that the allies of the Rhodians were allies in name only ; in reality, 
subjects and under command: and the Magnesians say that Deme- 
trias, free in appearance, is really at the beck of the Romans ; and 
Polybius says tiiat the Thessalians, in pretence free, were really under 
the power of the Macedonians. 

11 When this happens, and such Power becomes a Right, a case 
which we shall have to treat hereafter, then those who had been Allied 

E 

60 OF WAB PUBLIC AND PRIVATE. [BookL 

become Subjects ; or at least there is a partition of the Soyerotgnty ; 
which, as we have aboTe said, may take place in certain circum- 
stances. 

XXn. The payment of money to the Superior does not destroy 
Sovereignty ; whether it be a compensation for injury done, or a con- 
sideration for protection. Such cases happened among the Greeks ; 
and to the kings of the Hebrews and of the neighbouring nations after 
the time of Antonius : but such payment is a confession of weakness, 
and may derogate something fVom the dignity of the State which 
makes it. 

XXni. 1 The question of the Feudal Relation is more difficult; 
but it may be easily solved by what precedes. This contract is pecu- 
liar to the German nations, and is nowhere found except where the 
Germans have established themselves. In it two things are to be 
considered, the Personal Obligation, and the Right of Real Pro- 
perty. 

2 The Personal Obligation is the same, whether any one [the 
Superior Lord] by the Feudal Law possesses the Right of Lordship^ 
or any other Right, over a thing situated at a distance from him. As 
such an Obligation would not take away the Right of personal liberty 
[in the person subject to such command], so neither does it take 
away from a king or a people the Right of Sovereignty, which is 
civil liberty. This is most apparent in those Free Fie& which are 
called Frank Fvefsy which consist solely in the Personal Obligation, 
without any Right to Real Property. For these are only a kind of 
unequal alliance, such as we have spoken of ; in which one party pro- 
mises to the other aid, [for instance, Military Service,] and the other 
party promises Protection and Guardianship. Even if the condition 
be aid promised [by the Vassal] against every other party, which is 
what is now called a Liege Fief^ that does not detract anything from 
his [the Vassal's] sovereignty; not to mention that there is always 
included a tacit condition, that the war be just; which we shall treat 
of elsewhere. 

3 As to the Right of Real Property [belonging to the Feudal 
Vassal], that is doubtless such, that the Right of Lordship, if it 
be held in virtue of the Fief, may be lost by the extinction of the 
Tenant's family, and also for certain crimes. But in the mean time 
it does not cease to be Sovereign ; for, as we have repeatedly said, 
(§ XI. I) we must distinguish between what a thing is, and the kind 
of possession of it. And we find that many kings were established 
by the Romans on that condition, that if their family failed, the au- 
thority should revert to the Romans ; as in Paphlagonia. 

XXIV. And thus in political authority, as in private property, 
we must distinguish Right from the use of Right ; or [in the language 
of the Schoolmen] the oc^im primus from the <ietus secundus, A king 
who is an infant has the Right, but cannot exercise it ; so one who is 
insane, captive, or who lives in the territory of another so that his 

Chap. IH.] OF SOVEREIGNTY. 51 

actions with regard to the exercise of his remote kingdom are not 
freely done. In all these cases there are to be established Quardians 
or Regents. So Demetrius, when he was living under constraint in 
the power of Seleucus, forbad that credence should bo given to his 
Seal or his Letters, and directed every thing to bo administered as if 
he were dead. 

E2 

CHAPTER IV. 

Of Wars of Subjects against Superiors. 

Sect. 1 

;. Tfie state of the question. 

XI. 

Against a King who aete 

II. 

Such wars not ordinarily law* 

hostilely towards the whole 

Jul by Natural Law, 

People. 

III. 

Nor by the Hebrew Law, 

XIL 

Against a King who has lost 

IV. 

Nor by the Gospel Law, 

his Kingdom. 

V. 

The early Christians, 

XUL 

Against a King who holds only 

VI. 

War of Subordinate Magis- 

part of his Kingdom, 

trates against the Sovereign 

XIV. 

The Right of Resistance, 

unlawful. 

XV. 

Obedience to an Usurper, 

VII. 

Case qf extreme Necessity, 

XVI. 

Resistance to an Usurper by 

VIII. 

Right of war against thePrince 

the Right of War, 

of a free People : 

XVII. 

, By antecedent Law, 

IX. 

Against a King who has abdi' 

XVIIL 

By command of the Sovereign, 

cated. 

XIX. 

In no other cases. 

X, 

Against a King who has alien^ 

XX, 

Private judgment qfsuoh ease* 

ated his Kingdom, 

is wrong. 

I. 1 TTTAR may be carried on by priyato persons against priyate 
W persons, as by a trayeller against a robber; and by 
sovereigns against sovereigns, as by David against the king of the 
Ammonites ; and by private persons against those who are sovereigns 
of others, but not of them, as by Abraham against the king of Babylon 
and his neighbours ; and by sovereigns against private persons, either 
their own subjects, as by David against the party of Ishbosheth, or 
not their own subjects, as by the Romans agiunst the pirates. 

2 But we have now to inquire only whether it be lawful either 
for private or for public persons to carry on war against those who 
have over them an authority either sovereign or subordinate. 

And in the first place, it is not controverted that those who are 
armed with the authority of the supreme power may take arms against 
inferior authorities ; as was the case when Nehemiah was armed with 
the edict of Artaxerxes against the chiefs of the neighbouring country. 
So the Roman emperors concede to the owner of the soil the liberty 
to expel those who would lay down the lines of a camp there. 

But we inquire what is lawful against the supreme power, or in- 
ferior powers acting under the authority of the supreme power. 

3 It is beyond controversy among all good men, that if the per- 
sons in authority command any thing contrary to Natural Law or the 
Divine Precepts, it is not to be done. For the Apostles, in saying 
that we must obey God rather than man, appealed to an undoubted 
rule, written in the minds of all, which you may find, almost in the 
game words, in Plato. But if we receive any injury from such a cause. 

Chap. IV.] OP WARS OF SUBJECTS, &c. 63 

or in any other way from the will of the Supreme Power, we are to 
bear it rather than resist by force. 

n. 1 By Natural Law, all have the Right of repelling wrong. But 
ciril society being instituted to secure public tranquillity, the State 
acquires a Superior Right oyer us and ours, as far as is necessary for 
that end. Therefore the State may prohibit that promiscuous Right 
of resisting, for the sake of public peace and order : and it is to be 
presumed to have intended this, since it cannot otherwise attain its 
end. If this prohibition does not exist, there is no State, but a mul- 
titude without the tie of society. So the Cyclops are described by 
Homer and Euripides ; so the [hypothetical] Aborigines, and the Getuli, 
by Sallust. [See the references.] 

2 Such a prohibition of force, then, is the usage of all society. It 
is the general pact of human society , says Augustine, to obey kings. So 
^schylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Tacitus, Seneca, who took it from 
Sophocles, and Sallust. [See the passages. The line Indigna digna 
habenda sunty rex quce/acit, is a parody of a line in Plautus, rex being 
put for herus, Captiv, n. I. 6. J. B,] 

3 Hence the majesty, that is, the dignity of the Sovereign, whether 
he be king or people, is defended by so many laws, so many penalties. 
The soldier, who, when the centurion has to scourge him, resists and 
seizes the vine-stalk (the instrument of punishment), is cashiered ; if 
he breaks it on purpose, or lays a hand on the centurion, his offence is 
ei^ital. And Aristotle says. If a magistrate stirikes any one, the blow is 
not to be returned, 

m. So in the Hebrew law, he was condemned to death who was 
disobedient either to the high priest, or to a Ruler of the people, ap- 
pointed by God in an extraordinary manner. The passage I Sam. viiL 
11, [This will be the manner of the king over you : He vnll take your sons, 
^c] if carefully examined, appears not to imply a true Right, (for a 
very different course of conduct is prescribed in the law when the 
duty of the king is spoken of;) nor a mere Fact; (for the fact of a 
king doing this would not be peculiar, since some private persons also 
do injuries to others ;) but a Fact which has a peculiar effect, that thig 
being done by the king, there is an obligation of not resisting. And 
therefore it is added that the people so oppressed shall cry out to God 
for help, namely, because no help of man is to be had. So that this 
exercise of power is called the king's Eight, as the judge is said to do 
Right to the parties, even when he judges wrong. 

lY. 1 In the New Testament, Christ, when he commands us to 
give to Cesar the things that are Cesar's, gives it to be xmdorstood that 
his disciples must pay as much obedience to the powers that be as 
was due from the Hebrews to the Hebrew kings ; if not more ; and 
this, joined (if need be) with endurance of evil. Paul interprets this 
excellently, Rom. xiii. 2 et seqq. In the subjection which he re- 
eommends, he includes the obligation of not resisting; and not only 
the obligation to this which arises from fear, but that which flows from 

54 OF WARS OF SUBJECTS [Book I. 

a sense of duty, and is an obligation, not towards man only, but to- 
wards God. He adds two reasons; first, that God has approved the 
order of command and obedience, both formerly in the Hebrew Law 
and now in the Gospel ; wherefore the public powers are to be re-* 
garded by us as if they were ordained of God ; for a person makes that 
his act to which he imparts his authority. The other reason is, that 
this order promotes our good. 

2 But some will say it is not for our good to suffer iiyuries. Here 
some reply, with more truth than pertinence to the apostle's meaning, 
that these injuries also are for our good, because our endurance of 
them will not lose its reward. To mo it appears that the Apostle con« 
sidered the general end which is proposed in such order, namely, the 
public tranquillity, in which that of indiWduals is comprehended. And 
it cannot be doubted that, for the most part, we gain this good by the 
public powers ; for they further the happiness of the subjects for the 
sake of their own happiness. Hence the wish. May iksrt he thoie whom 
ycu may ruU [as Fun&dius says to Sulla, Florus 3, 21]. It is a Hebrew 
proyerb that If there were no public power, one man woidd swaUow 
another cdive : of which also Chrysostom gives the sense. 

3 If the Rulers at any time are misled by excessife fear or anger, 
or other passions, so as to deviate from the road that leads to tran- 
quillity, this is to be held as the less usual case, and compensated by 
the alternation of better times. And Laws are content to respect what 
commonly happens ; as Theophrastus and Cato remark. [See.] Excep- 
tional cases must submit to the general rule ; for though the reason of 
the rule does not specially hold in that special case, yet the general 
reason of the rule remains; and to this special facts must be subjected. 
This is better than living without a rule, or leaving the rule to every 
one's will. So Seneca. [See.] 

4 To this effect is the memorable passage in the speech of Pericles, 
as stated by Thucydides. Livy expresses it more briefly. So Plato, 
Xenophon, Jamblichus. [See.] 

6 This public order of command and obedience is inconsistent with 
the private license of resisting. See Dio Cassius. 

6 St Peter speaks to the same effect as St Paul. So the Clemen* 
tine Constitutions. We are taught that subjection is due to masters, 
even to the harsh ; and the same is to be referred to kings ; for the 
reason [in St Peter] holds equally good of kings. And we are taught 
also that the subjection required of us includes endurance of evil. So 
of parents in Publius Syrus, Elian, Justin, Livy : of kings, in Tacitus, 
Claudian. [See.] 

y. 1 The custom of the early Christians, the best interpreters of 
the law of our Lord, did not deviate from this rule. For though very 
wicked men held the Roman empire, and there were not wanting per- 
sons who opposed them on pretence of relieving the State, the Chris- 
tians never took part in their attempts. And so the Clementine Consti- 

Chaf. IV.] AGAINST SUPEEIORS. 55 

tations enjoin ; and Tertullian boasts that the Christians had no share 
in the murder of the Roman Emperors. [See the passages.] 

2 Ambrose, though fearing harm not only to himself but to his 
flock from Yalentiniauy would not use the excitement of the people as 
a means of resistance ; as he says in his Epistles. [See.] The same 
Ambrose would not use the forces of Maximus against the Emperor, 
though both an Arian and an oppressor of the Church. So when Ju- 
lian the Apostate was pursuing the most destructiTe counsels, he was 
repressed only by the tears [not the arms] of the Christians. And yet 
his army consisted almost entirely of Christians. Add to this that 
Julian's cruelty was not only a wrong to the Christians, but brought 
the State into great danger. So Augustine. 

YI. 1 Some learned men of our time, yielding too much to the 
influences of time and place, have persuaded first themselves (for so I 
belieye) and then others, that this, though true of priyato persons, is 
not true of inferior magistrates ; that they hare a right of resistance, 
and ou^t to use it; which opinion is not to be admitted. For those 
inferior magistrates, though public persons with regard to their infe- 
riors, are private persons with regard to their superiors. All authority 
is subject to the Sovereign authority; and what is not done by that 
authority ia a private act. [See the Scholastic reasons.] 

2 The state of things thus defended is like that fabled in heaven, 
when the minor Deities rebelled against Jove. The subordination of 
all to the Supreme Power is recognized by common sense; in Seneca ; 
Papinius ; Augustine. [See.] 

3 And also by Divine Authority ; expressed by Peter, Paul, Samuel. 

4 And so also the state of public religion depends on the will of 
the King and the Council. (Synedrium.) The engagement of the 
magistrates and the people to be faithful to God, after the king, is to 
be understood, as far as is in their power. We do not road of the 
images of false gods being thrown down, except by command either of 
kings, or of the people when free. When this is done by force against 
the consent of the kings, it is related as a testimony of Divine Provi- 
dence BO permitting ; not in approval of the human act. 

6 On the contrary is urged Trajan's saying when he gave the 
dagger to the Praetorian Prefect : Use it for me if I rule rightly ; i/ill, 
(tgainai me. But Trajan wished to avoid assuming kingly authority, 
and to be a true Governor (Princeps), and as such was subject to the 
will of the Senate and people ; whose commands the Prefect was to 
execute, even against the Prince. So M. Antoninus would not touch 
the public money without consent of the Senate. 

YII. 1 Whether in a very grave and certain danger the rule of 
non-resistance holds, is a more difficult question. For the laws of God 
may admit of exemption in cases of extreme necessity. So the He- 
brew law of the Sabbath did; and this exception is approved by 
Christ; as also in the case of the shew-bread. And so other laws of 
tiie Hebrews did. Not that God has not the Bight of our obedience 

56 OF WABS OF SUBJECTS [Book I. 

under certain death ; but that some laws are of sncli a nature tliat it 
is not credible that they were given with so rigid an intention : Btill 
more in human laws. 

2 Tet even human htwa may command some actB of Tirtne with 
oertain danger of death ; as the military rule of not quitting our post. 
But this is not lightly to be supposed the intention of the lawgiyer; 
nor do men appear to have accepted it so, unless extreme necessity 
require. For laws are and ought to be made, with a sense of human 
weakness. The law of which we speak (that of non-resistance) seems 
to depend on those who first formed dyil society, and from whom the 
Rights of Rulers are derived. And if these could be asked whether 
ihey would impose on all this burthen, that they should prefer to die 
rather than in any case resist a superior by force, it is probable they 
would answer that they would not : unless perhaps with this addition ; 
except resistance would involve extreme disturbance of the State^ and 
the death of many innocent persons. And what benevolence would 
recommend in such circumstances, we may confidently ascribe to 
human law. 

3 It may be said that the rigid obligation of bearing death rather 
than resisting a superior, proceeds not from humane but from Divine 
Law. But it is to be noted that Ci?il Society is the result, not of 
Divine precept, but of the experience of the weakness of separate 
fiunilies to protect themselves; and is thus called by Peter an crdir 
fUMnee of marif though it is also an ordinance of God, because He 
approves it. And God, approving a human law, must be conceived 
approving it as human, and in a human manner. 

4 Barclay, the most strenuous asserter of royal authority, yet 
allows that the people, or a eomiderable part of it, has the Right of 
protecting itself against extreme cruelty, though he asserts the whole 
people to be subject to the king. I can understand, that in proportion 
as what is preserved [by the rule of non-resistance] is more valuable^ 
BO much the more serious a matter is the equitable construction, which 
allows an exception to the words of the law. But still, I do not 
venture indiscriminately to condemn, either individttala or a wUnority 
of the people who thus have recourse to the ultimate means of neces- 
sity, provided they do not desert a respect for the common good. So 
David gathered the discontented to him, and had above four hundred 
armed men ; of course, to repel violence. But this was not till David 
knew that Saul sought his life. And he did not seize upon cities^ 
but hid himself in desert places or in foreign countries, avoiding to 
do harm to those of his nation. 

5 So the MaccabecB were not justified by the general right of 
resistance; for Antiochus was king, and they had no legal right of 
resistance. They were justified by extreme danger. 

6 And even in such a case, the person of the king is to be re* 
Bpected ; as was done by David. 

7 Nor are those who resist to throw false reproaches on any one;. 

CbAP. rr.] AGAINST SUPEBIORS. 57 

bot on the king^ not eren true ones. Still more are they to abstain 
from laying handa on^m. [See the heathen authorities.] 

8 Whether what was lawful for Darid and for the l^uxuibees be 
lawfbl for Christians^ is a grarer question, since their Master, com- 
manding them to bear their cross, seems to require a more exact 
patience. And certainly Christ counsels flight to Christians who are 
in danger of death, (that is, those who are not bound to their place 
by duty,) but nothing beyond flight. So Peter says that Christ luu 
l^ tis an eaoampUy 1 Pet. ii. 21, and that we are to rejoice if we suffer 
as Christians, 1 Pet. It. 12, 13, 14. And by such patience the Chris- 
tian religion grew strong. 

9 And so the ancient Christians teach: Tertullian; Cyprian;. 
Lactantins ; Augustine. [See the passages.] 

10 So Cyril holds concerning the sword of Peter. So the Theban 
legion did not resist when decimated for refusing to sacrifice. 

11 [The speeches of Mauritius the captain of the Theban legion, 
and of the soldiers, are to the same effect.] 

12 [As also the speech of Ezuperius their standard-bearer.] 

13 Then the butchery followed. The old martyrology tells the 
story of their suffering without resisting.* 

14 Those who professed the Sfioownow (the Son of ons subtianee 
vfUk ih$ Faihtr) were put to death without resistance by Yalens. 

15 He who follows such examples, if he so lose his life, sares it» 
as Christ has declared. 

Yin. But on this rule of non-resistance there are some remarics 
to be made. 

First, those Rulers who are subject to the people, whether by ori- 
ginal institution or by subsequent oonTontlon, if they transgress 
against the laws and the State, may not only be resisted, but put to 
death, as Paosanias at Lacedcmon. So Mezentius in Virgil is resisted. 

IX. Secondly, if the king or other ruler has abdicated his power, 
or manifestly re^irds it as denlietf lost to him, he may thenceforth be 
treated as a priTate person. But he is not to be regarded as possess- 
ing it as derelict, merely because he uses it negligently. 

X. Thirdly, says Barclay, if the king alienates the kingdom or 
brings it into subjection to another, he forfeits it. At this I stop. 
Such an act, if the kingdom be electiye or hereditary, is null ; and 
Ml act which is null, cannot ha?e any effect in law. I think that the 
law of the jurists concerning tenants for life, which tenants, as we hare 
said, Budi kings resemble, is more applicable ; namely, that if they 
transfer their right to another, the act has no effect. And when it is 
said that the tenant's interest rererts to the ^lord, it is to be under- 
stood that it does so at the legal time. 

But if the king take measures to transfer or subject his kingdom to 
another, I do not doubt that he may be resisted in that design. The 
authority Is one thing, the manner of holding it another ; and the 
* Bat Barbeyrao njt tho itory is 'men fabnhu* 

68 OF WARS OF SUBJECTS [Book I. 

people may reeiBt the latter being changed : for that is not compre- 
hended in the authority. As Seneca says in a similar case ; We are 
to obey a father s hut not in his wish to become not a father. 

XI. Fourthly, if the king act, with a really hostile mind, with a 
Tiew to the destruction of the whole people, Barclay says that the 
kingdom is forfeited ; for the purpose of gOToming and the purpose 
of destroying cannot subsist together : so that he who professes him- 
self tho enemy of the whole people, ipsofacto^ abdicates his kingdom. 
But this can hardly happen in a person of sound mind, who goyems 
one people only. K he goyem seyeral peoples, he may wish to destroy 
one of them for the sake of another, that he may found colonies 
there. 

Xn. Fifthly, if the kingdom be bestowed by commission from a 
superior ; and if the king either commit felony against the lord of the 
fief, or if there be a clause in the grant, that if the king do so and 
•o, his subjects are released from the tie of obedience ; then also the 
king falls back into a priyate person. 

XnL Sixthly, if the king haye a part only of the Soyereignty, 
another part being in the Senate or the people, and if the king inyade 
the part which is not his, he may justly be opposed by force, because 
in that part he has not authority. And this I oonceiye may be, 
although the law directs that the power of making war be in the king. . 
For this must be understood of external war. And since each party 
has its portion of the Soyereignty, it must also haye the right of. 
defending that part When this is the case, the king may lose his 
portion of the Soyereignty by the right of war. 

XrV. Seyenthly, if in conferring the royal authority, it be stated 
that in a certain eyent, the king may be resisted ; although by that 
means there is not a part of the Sorereignty withheld, yet a certain 
natural liberty is retained by the subjects and exempted from ihe< 
royal authority. He who alienates his right [as the people here does] 
may linut by compact the right so alienated. 

XV. Next concerning Usurpers. 

1 We speak now of an Usurper of the kingdom, not after he has 
by long possession or treaty acquired a Right, but so long as his pos- 
session remains illegitimate. And during such possession, the acts of 
goyemment which he exercises may ha?e an obligatory force, not 
from his Right, which is null, but because it is probable that the In- 
timate goyemor would wish that it should be so, rather than that laws 
and tribunals should be abolished and confusion ensue. Cicero says 
that the laws of Sylla were highly cruel, yet he thought it necessary 
to preserre them. So also Florus judges. 

2 But in matters which are not thus necessary, and which tend to 
strengthen tho unjust possession of the Inyader, he is not to be obeyed, 
if he can be disobeyed without extreme danger. 

XVL But whether such an Usurper may be put down by [priyate] 
force, or put to death, is a question. 

Chap. IV.] AGAINST SUPERIORS. 59 

And first, if be hare seized the kingdom by an nnjust war, not 
legitimate according to the Law of nations, and no treaty has 
followed, it appears that the Right of War remains ; and that eyery- 
thing is biwful against him which is lawful against an enemy, who may 
be slain even by a private person*. Against traitors and public ene- 
mtes, says Tertulllan, every man is a soldier. So every one is allowed 
to do justice on those who desert the army. 

Xyn. The same may be true in virtue of a law, existing before 
the usurpation, which gave every one the right of killing him who did 
this or that before his eyes : for instance, surrounded himself with a 
body-guard, seized a fort, put a person to death without lawful judg- 
ment, made magistrates without the regular choice. Such laws 
existed at Athens and Rome. 

Xym. To kill the usurper will be lawful for one who has 
authority from the legitimate power : and along with such we must 
reckon the guardians of royal wards, as Jehoiada was to Joash, when 
they put down Athaliah, 2 Chron. xxiii. 

XIX. 1 In other cases than these, I cannot grant that it is 
allowable to a private person to put down by force, or to put to death, 
the usurper of a kingdom : for it may be that the legitimate governor 
would rather that the usurper should be left in possession, than that 
occasion should be given to dangerous and bloody movements, which 
generally follow, when those are killed who have a strong faction in 
the people, or have friends in other nations. Whether the legitimate 
government would wish that peril to be incurred, is uncertain; and 
without knowing their will, force is not justified. Cicero said, To me 
any peace with my feUow-dtizens seems better than civil war. So Favo- 
nius, T. Quintios, in Livy : so Aristophanes. [See.] 

2 Whether liberty or peace be better, is a most difficult point ; on 
which individuals ought not to assume the office of judges. [See 
Tacitus, Cicero, Lucan (i. 351), Sylla (in Plutarch de Oenio Socrat. 
p. 676.)] 

3 So Plato says we are not to do violence to our country, or to 
our parents. So Sallust, Plutarch, Ambrose, Thomas Aquinas. 

4 The killing of Eglon king of Moab by Ehud, Judg. iii. 16, is 
no precedent ; he had a special mandate from God. So God in 
other cases exercised his judgments, as by Jehu against Joram, 
2 Kings ix. 

XX. As a general consideration, a private person should not 
assume the judgment of a controverted point, but follow possession. 
So Christ commanded tribute to be paid to Ceesar because his image 
was on the coin, that is, because he was in possession of the empire. 

* This is not tho modem Law of War, which makes a diBtinction between 
Qfmbatants and Non-Comhatanis. See Elements of Morality, vi. 1060. 

CHAPTER V. 

Who may lawfully make War. 

Sect. I. The Effective Catuet of War HI, Or Irutrumenial, (at tervanU 
are either Principal^ {in our and subjects,) 

own matters) lY. By Natural Law none are form 
II. Or Auxiliary, (in another's) bidden war, 

I. A S ui other things, so in the actions of the will, there are com- 

XX. inonly throe kinds of eflSlcient causes ; the principal, the auxi- 
liary, and the instruments. The principal effectiye cause in war is 
commonly he whose interest is concerned ; in prirate war, a prirate 
person ; in public war, a public power, generally a sorereign power. 
Whether war may be made by another, for those who do not them- 
selves stir in it, we shall see elsewhere. In the mean time we hold 
by this maxim ; that by Natural Law, erery one is the yindicator of 
his own right : this is what hands were given for. 

n. I But further: to help another when we can, is not only lawful 
but proper. Those who hare written of Duties, rightly say that nothing 
is so useful to man as other men. But there are various ties of men 
to men, which invite them to mutual ud. Relatives in blood unite 
for mutual help, and neighbours are called upon for ud, and fellow- 
citizens. Hence the Roman cry in sudden distress, Porro (iuirites, 
et quiritari. Up Botnans^/br Romans, Aristotle says that every one 
ought to use arms for himself if he has received an injury, or to help 
relatives, benefeu^rs, allies who are injured. And Solon taught that 
a State was fortunate, in which every one thinks the ii^urics of others 
his own. 

2 If other ties are wanting, the tie of a common hunu&n nature 
is sufficient. Nothing belonging to mankind is indifferent to man. 
So Menander, Democritus, Lactantius. 

m. When we speak of Instruments, we do not here mean 
weapons or the like, but voluntary agents, whose will is moved by 
the will of another. Such an Instrument is a son to a father, a ser- 
vant to a master: So Democritus. So a subject in a State is the 
instrument of the Ruler. 

rv. By Natural Law all subjects may take part in war; but some 
are excluded by special law, as slaves formerly among the Romans, 
and clerical persons now. Which law, like all of that kind, is to be 
understood with an exception of extreme necessity. 

And so much generally of auxiliaries and subjects : special con- 
^derations will be treated in their own place. 

OF THE 

RIGHTS OF WAR AND PEACE 

BOOK 11. 

CHAPTER I. 

Of the Causes of War ; and firsts of Self Defense and 

the Defense of our Property. 

Sect. L The jtutifieaiory Cautes nf 
War 

Are Dtfemet Recovery of our 
owfiy Debt, and Penalty, 
War in Self-d^enee \$ law* 
ful: 

But only against an Aggressor; 
In a present and certain, not 
merely a jprobable danger. 
And in defence of limb ; 
And of chastity, 
VIII. The Right of Defense may be 
waived. 

Defense may be unlawful 
against a very important 
person, 

A blow, an insult, the avoids 
ance of flight, do not justify a 

II. 

IIL 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 
VII. 

IX. 

X. 

Christian in taking life, 

XI. To kill in defense qf one*» 
property is not unlawful by 
Natural Law, 

XII. How far permitted by the 
Law of Moses. 

XIII. Is it permitted by the Law of 

the Gospel? 
XrV. Have we Right, or only Im- 

punity $ 
XV. When is Single Combat law» 

fulf 

XVI. Self-defense by Public War 

XVII. Is not lawful merely to check 
a neighbour's power, 

XVIIL Is not lawful in him who has 
given just cause of war. 

L 1 T ET 118 come to the causes of war ; I mean justificatory causes ; 
I A for there are causes which operate on the ground of uiilityy 
distinct from those which depend on justice ; and these again may be 
distinguished from occasional causes, or the first collision^ as the stag 
in the war of Tumus and ^neas. These are sometimes confounded. 
[See PolybiuSy Livy, Elian, Diodorus.] 

2 These justificatory causes are properly our subject. The neces- 
sity of just causes for war is acknowledged. [See Dionysius, Demos- 
thenes, Dio Cassius, Cicero.] 

3 Just cause is requisite for public no less than for prirate war. 
Seneca complains that the State forbids homicide on a small scale, 
but oommands it on a large one. It is true that wars undertaken 

62 OF THE CAUSES OF WAR ; FIRST, OF SELF- [Book IL 

by public authority have peculiar jural effects, as public sentences 
have ; but they are not therefore blameless, except there bo a reason 
for them. If Alexander made war on the Persians without cause, he 
was rightly called a robber by the Scythians, by Seneca, by Lucan, by 
the Indians ; and treated as an equal by a pirate. Philip his father 
did the like. Augustine says, Without justice what is empire^ but robbery 
on a great scale f So Lactantius. 

4 A just cause of War is injury done us, and nothing else. Au- 
gustine says, The Injustice (that is the injury) o/ the adverse party 
makes a war just. The formula of the Roman Heralds [in declaring 
war] was, / call you to witness that that people is unjust, and does not 
perform its obligations. 

n. 1 There are eyidently as many sources of war as there are 
of Actions at law ; for when the judgments of tribunals cease to be 
of force, war begins. Now Actions are either on account of injury 
done, or not yet done : Actions for injury not yet done, are when 
security is sought that an offence shall not be committed, or that 
reparation shall be made for an incumbent loss, or an injunction that 
no force bo used. Actions for injury done, are either that it be re- 
pwred, or punished ; injury to be repaired regards either what is or 
was ours, as when we reclaim our property, or claim an obligation ; 
or it regards what is owing to us, either by contract, or for wrong 
done us, or by appointment of law. An act regarded as punishable 
gives rise to accusation and public trial. 

2 Most writers state three just causes of war; defense, recoTory 
of property, and punishment of wrong ; which three we find men. 
tioned in the proclamation of Camillus against the Gauls : All that we 
may lawfully defend, recover, revenge, [Compare this with Plato and 
Seneca.] The formula of the Roman Heralds was. What things were 
to be given, done, and discharged, they have not given, done, and discharged, 
[See Sallust; Augustine.] 

3 Such is the natural feeling of Justice among nations. [See 
Diodorus, Liry, Aristotle, Curtius.] 

Therefore the first cause of a just war is an injury not yet done 
which menaces body or goods.' 

lU. If the body be menaced by present force with danger of 
life not otherwise eritable, war is lawful, even to the slaying of the 
aggressor, as we haye before said, in proving some private war to be 
lawful. And this right of defense arises from the natural right of 
self-protection, not from the injustice or fault of another who makes 
the danger. And therefore this right of self-protection is not taken 
away, even if the aggressor be blameless ; if, for instance, he be a 
soldier acting bond fide ; or if he take me for another than I am, or 
if he bo insane or a sleepwalker, such as we read of ; it is sufficient 
that I am not bound to suffer what he attempts to inflict ; just as if 
a wild beast were to attack me. 

17. I Whether innocent persons, who, interposing prevent the 

CHiP. L] DEFENSE AND DEFENSE OF OUR PBOPERTT. 63 

defense or flight without which death cannot be avoided may be cut 
down or trampled down, is a question. There are who think it lawful^ 
even Divines. And certainly if we only look at Natural Law, that cares 
much less for ties of society, than for the defense of the individual. 
But the law of love, especially the Evangelical law, which conunands 
us to regard another as ourselves, plainly does not permit this. 

2 Thomas Aquinas well says, if it be rightly taken, that a man 
killed in self-defense is not killed by intention : not that sometimes, 
if no other way of safety appear, it may not be lawful to do that of 
set purpose, which will cause the death of the aggressor; but that 
such death is not chosen as something primarily intended, as in judi- 
cial punishment it is, but it is chosen as the only thing which is then 
possible ; since he who is attacked, even then, ought to do anything 
by which the assailant may be scared away, or deprived of power, 
rather than by which he may be killed. 

y. 1 Present danger is here required, and imminent in a point 
of time. I confess indeed that if the aggressor be taking up weapons, 
and in such a way that he manifestly does so with the intent to kill, 
the deed may be anticipated ; for in moral things, as in natural, there 
is no point without a certain latitude : but they are in great error who 
allow any fear [however slight] as a right of killing for prevention. 
Jt is well said by Cicero that most injuries proceed from fear, he who 
meditates hurting another, fearing that if he do not do so, ho will 
suffer some evil. So Clearchus in Xenophon, Oato for the Rhodians. 
[See.] Gellius says, a man is not to act like a gladiator, who must 
kill or be killed. So Cicero, quoted by Quintilian : Euripides, Thu- 
cydides, Livy. Quintilian quotes, Who allowed you such fear f And 
so Livia in Dio. [See.] 

2 If any one direct against us violence not present ; as if he make 
a conspiracy, or lay an ambush, or put poison in our way, or assail us 
with a false accusation, false testimony, or iniquitous judgment ; I 
deny that he may be lawfully slain, if either the danger may be 
otherwise avoided, or it be not certain that it cannot be otherwise 
avoided. For delay allows recourse to many remedies and many 
chances ; as we say, between the cup and the lip. Although there 
are not wanting both Jurists and Divines who extend the indulgence 
further. But the other opinion, which is the better and safer, is also 
not without its authorities. 

YI. What shall we say of peril of mutilation of limb ? Since 
the loss of a limb, especially of a principal one, is very grievous, and 
nearly equal to loss of Ufe ; and since, moreover, it can hardly be 
known whether it do not bring in its train loss of life ; if it cannot 
otherwise be avoided, I think the author of such danger may be slain. 

Vn. Whether the same be lawful in defense of chastity, can 
scarcely bo doubted, since not only common estinu&tion, but the 
divine law, makes chastity of the same value as life. [He refers to 
Deut. xziL 25, i/" a man find a betrothed damtel in the field, &c., the 

64 OF THE CAUSES OF WAR ; FIRST, OF SELF- [Book IL 

man $haU cSe ; which J. B. obserreiy hardly justifies his saying that 
chastity is on a par with lifo.] And so Paalns the Jurist decided. 
An example occurs in a Tribune of Marius, killed by a soldier, in 
Cicero and QuintiUan. There are also examples of men in such caset 
killed by women. Such Chariclea in Hierocles justifies. [See.] 

VIU. Though, as we have said, it be lawful to kill him who is 
preparing to kiU, yet he acts more laudably who would rather be 
killed than kill ; this is granted by some, making the exception of a 
person whose life is important to many. But to impose this rule, con* 
trary to forbearance, on all whose llres concern other persons, seems 
Tcry unsafe. It must, I think, be restricted to those whose duty it is 
to protect others from force; such as companies on the road, who 
are under such an engagement, and public Rulers : as Lucan says. 
[See.] 

IX. 1 On the other hand, it may happen that because the life of 
the aggressor is useful to many, he cannot be killed without sin ; and 
that, not only by the dirine law, but by Natural Law. For Natural 
Law not only respects what correctiye justice dictates, but also con- 
tains in itself acts of other Tirtues, as temperance, fortitude, prudence^ 
as in certain circumstances not only good but obligatory. Now bene- 
Tolence binds to act as we hare said. 

2 Yasquius says that a prince, when he insults an innocent man, 
ceases to be a prince : but nothing can be less true or more danger- 
ous. For as ownership, so political authority, is not lost by delin- 
quency, except the law so direct. But there nerer was a law that 
such authority should cease by an offence against a private person ; 
and I believe, norer will be. And what Yasquius lays down as the 
foundation of this and many other inferences, that all authority looks 
to the good of those who obey, not of those who command, eren if 
it were universally true, is nothing to the purpose. For a thing does 
not fail because its utility in some one point fails. What he adds, that 
the safety of the community is desired by each for his own sake, and 
therefore each must prefer his own safety to that of the community, 
does not hang together. For we desire the safety of the community for 
our own sake, but not our own sake only, but that of others also. [J. B. 
doubts whether this be conclusive.] 

3 The opinion of those who think that friendship arises from need 
only, is false, and rejected by the soundest philosophers ; for we hare 
a natural tendency to friendship. And that I should prefer to my sole 
good the good of many, benevolence often counsels, sometimes corn- 
mands. So Seneca and Ambrose. [See.] 

X. 1 If any one be in danger of receiving a buffet, or the like 
evil, some hold that he has a right to protect himself by killing his 
enemy. K merely corrective justice bo regarded, I do not dissent* 
For though a buffet and death are very unequal, yet he who is about 
to do me an injury, thereby gives me a Right, that is a moral claim 
against him, in infinUwn, so far as I cannot otherwise repel the evlL 

CuAP. I.] DEFENSE AND DEFENSE OF OUR PROPERTY. 65 

And evoQ beneyolcnce per se docs not appear to bind us to the advan- 
tage of Lim who does us wrong. But the Gospel law has made every 
such act unlawful : for Christ commands us to take a buffet, rather 
than hurt our adversary ; how much less may we kill him ?* We must 
therefore beware of the doctrine of Oovamivias, that with Natural 
Law in our minds, we cannot conceive anything permitted by natural 
reason which is not permitted by God, since God is Nature itself. For 
God, who is the Author of nature in such a way that he is above Nature, 
has a right to prescribe laws to us concerning the things which by 
nature are free and undetermined ; much more, that that be duty 
which by nature is good, though not duty. 

2 It is wonderful, since the will of God appears so clearly in the 
Gospel, that there should be found Theologians, and Christian Theo- 
logians, who not only think killing may be permitted to avoid a buffet, 
but even when a buffet has been received, if the striker flies, for the reco* 
very of honour, as it is called. This seems to me very far removed from 
reason and piety. For honour is an opinion of one's own excellence ; 
and he who bears such an injury shews himself excellently patient, and 
so increases his honour rather than diminishes. Nor does it make any 
difference if some of corrupt judgment turn this virtue into a disgrace 
by artificial names : for those perverse judgments neither change the 
fact nor its value. And not only the ancient Christians said this, but 
also the philosophers, who said it was the part of a little mind not to 
be able to bear contumely, as wo shall shew elsewhere. 

3 Hence it appears also that that is wrong which is delivered by 
most writers, that defense with slaying is lawful, that is by Divine Law, 
(for I do not dispute that it is by Natural Law,) when flight without 
danger is possible : namely, because flight is ignominious, especially 
in a man of noble family. In truth there is, then, no ignominy, but 
a false opinion of ignominy, to be despised by those who follow virtue 
and wisdom. In this matter I rejoice that I have with me the opinion, 
among the Jurists, of Molinseus. 

What I have said of a buffet and of flight, is to be understood of 
other things, by which our true estimation is not damaged. 

But if any one say something of us, which if believed, would 
detract from our reputation among good men, what then ? There are 
who teach that he also may be slain : very wrongly, and even contrary 
to Natural Law ; for such slaying is not a course fitted to protect our 
reputation. 

XL Let us come to injuries by which our property is attacked. 

If we regard corrective justice, I do not deny that in order to pre- 
serve our goods, the robber, if need be, may be killed ; for the differ- 
ence that there is between things and life, is compensated by the 
preference to be given to the innocent, and the condemnation in* 
curred by the robber, as we have said. Whence it follows that if we 
regard Natural Law alone, the thief flying with his plunder may, if the 
goods cannot otherwise bo recovered, be slain with a missile. So 

F 

66 OF THE CAUSES OF WAR ; FIRST, OF SELF- [Book 11. 

Demosthenes against Aristocrates. [See.] Nor docs bcnoyolonco 
oppose this as a command; setting aside human and dirine hiw; 
except the thing stolen be a trifle which may be contemned ; an excep- 
tion rightly added by some. 

XII. 1 Let us look at the sense of the Hebrew Law, (Exod. 
xxii. 2) with which agrees the law of Solon, and of the Twelve Tables, 
and Plato's Laws, These laws all agree in distinguishing the noctur- 
nal from the diurnal thief*. Some think that this is because by night 
we cannot tell whether he is a thief or a murderer, and therefore may 
kill him as a murderer. Others think it is because by night we hare 
less chance of recovering tho property. I think that neither is the 
true ground ; but this ; that no one ought to be slun directly for the 
sake of mere things, which would be done if I were to kill an unarmed 
flying thief with a missile, and so recover my goods : but if I am 
myself in danger of life, then I may repel tho danger even with danger 
to tho life of another ; nor does this cease to hold, however I have 
come into that danger, whether by trying to retain my property, or 
to recover it, or to capture the thief; for in all these cases I am acting 
lawfully according to my right. 

2 The difierence depends then on this ; that by night there is no 
testimony to be had ; and therefore if the thief be found slain, credit 
is to be given to him who says that he slew him in defending his life : 
that is, if ho be found with any hurtful instrument. Deut. xxii. 2 : If 
a thief he found breaking up^ should be translated, with a weapon for 
hrtahing through. So Jer. ii. 34. 

So tho law of tho Twelve Tables forbids the diurnal thief to be 
killed, except he defended himself with a weapon. On the other hand, 
Ulpian teaches that a man who kills a nocturnal thief does it with 
impunity, if ho could not without peril avoid it. 

3 And therefore, as I have said, the presumption is in favour of 
him who kills the nocturnal thief; but if there be testimony by which 
it appears that the slayer was not in danger of his life, tho presump- 
tion ceases, and he is guilty of homicide. Add to this, that the law of 
the Twelve Tables required him who discovered a thief, cither diurnal 
or nocturnal, to cry out aloud ; namely, that neighbours or magistrates 
might come together for help and testimony. And as such concourse 
is easier by day than by night, therefore more credence is given in the 
case of the nocturnal danger. 

The case is similar with regard to the Hebrew law, Deut. xxii. 23, 
which directs that a maid who has been forced in the field is to be 
believed, but in the city, not, heoavae she cried not being in the city, 

4 To this is to be added, that in what happens by night, we havo 
no means of knowing tho extent of the danger, therefore it is more 
terrible. 

And therefore the Hebrew, like the Roman law, directs that which 
benevolence recommends, that no one should be slain only because 

■ See Elements of Morality, 665. 

CuAP. I.] DEFENSE AND DEFENSE OF OUR PROPERTY. 67 

ho takes a thing, but only if he who defends it comes into dangei^. 
Maimonides says, that the slaying of a man is permitted to a private 
person only to preserve what, lost, cannot be recovered, life and 
chastity. 

Xm. 1 What shall wo say of the Gospel law? That it permits 
what the Mosaic law permitted ; or that in this, as in other cases, the 
€k>8pel is more perfect than the Law, and requires more of us ? I do 
not doubt that it does require more ; for if Christ direct us to give up 
our coat and cloak, and Paul, to suffer unjust loss, rather than have 
recourse to the bloodless contest of law ; they would have directed us 
to give up things of greater value, rather than put to death a man, the 
image of God, and sprung of the same blood with ourselves. Where- 
fore if our property can be preserved without peril of slaying, it is 
well; but if not, it is to be given up: except it be something on which 
our life and that of our family depends, and which cannot be recovered 
at law : as for instance, if the thief be unknown, and we have some 
hope that the matter will end without fatal consequences. 

2 And though almost all, both Jurists and Theologians, hold that 
we may not only kill a man in defense of our property, but beyond 
that limit ; as, if he be running off with what he has taken ; yet we 
have no doubt that the opinion which we have stated was that of the 
early Christians. So Augustine. But this discipline has been relaxed 
by time. 

XrV. It is made a question whether the civil law, when it per- 
mits us to kill a thief with impunity, does not give us a Right to do 
so ; since the civil law has the Right of life and death. But this is not 
so. In the first place, the Civil Law has not the Right of life and 
death in all cases, but only in cases of great crimes. The opinion of 
Scotus is probable, that we have no right to condemn any one to death 
except for the crimes so visited in the Mosaic Law, or those which are 
of the same atrocity. In fact, in so grave a case, wo cannot have a 
knowledge of the divine will which can satisfy our minds, except from 
that law; which certainly does not punish theft with death. And 
moreover, the law neither does nor ought to give the Right of privately 
putting to death those who deserve death, except in very atrocious 
crimes; otherwise tribunals would be useless. Wherefore if the law 
allows us in any case to kill a thief with impunity, it takes away the 
punishment, but does not give the Right. 

XV. It follows, from what has been said, that private persons 
may join in single combat in two cases ; first, if on assailant gives us 
the choice of single combat, being ready to kill us otherwise without 
combat ; and secondly, if the king or magistrate set two condemned 
persons to fight in such a combat ; in which case they may take their 
chance of surviving. But he who gives such command does not seem 
to do his duty well ; for if the death of one was enough, it was better 
that he who should die should be chosen by lot. 

XVI. What has been said of the right of defending ourselves and 

F2 

68 OF TUE CAUSES OF WAR ; &c. [Book II. 

our property, more peculiarly relates to private war, but so that it 
may be adapted to public war, attending to the diversity of conditions. 
For in private war the Right is momentary, and ceases as soon as the 
judge can be referred to. But public war does not arise, except 
wlien the j ledge's authority does not exist, or ends, has a prolonged cha- 
racter, and is constantly sustained by the accession of new losses and 
injuries. Besides in private war, defense alone is considered ; but the 
public powers have the right not only of defending, but also of obtain- 
ing satisfaction. Hence they may prevent force not present, and 
threatening from afar ; not directly (for that, as we have taught, is un- 
just,) but indirectly, by taking satisfaction for a delinquency begun, 
but not consummated * : of which we shall treat elsewhere. 

XYII. There is an intolerable doctrine in some writers, that by 
the Law of Nations we may rightly take arms against a power which 
is increasing, and may increase, so as to be dangerous. Undoubtedly, 
in deliberating of war, this may come into consideration, not as a mat- 
ter of justice, but as a matter of utility; so that if the war be just on 
other accounts, it may, on this account, be prudent ; and this is what 
the arguments of authors come to. But that the possibility of suffering 
force gives us the right of using force, is contrary to all notion of 
equity. Such is human life, that we are never in complete security. 
We must seek protection against uncertain fears from Divine Provi- 
dence, and from blameless caution, not from force. 

XVni. I Nor do we agree that those who have deserved war, 
have a Right to defend themselves ; namely, because few persons are 
content with taking satisfaction to the mere extent of the injury. For 
that fear of an uncertainty cannot give a Right to force : and so, a 
person accused of a crime has not a right of forcibly resisting the 
ministers of justice, for fear of being over-punished. 

2 He who has injured another ought first to offer him satisfaction 
at the arbitration of a good man ; and if this fail, his warfare will be 
righteous. So Hezekiah acted, 2 Kings xviii. 7, 14, and xix. 1. So 
Pontius the Samnite urged that this was all that could be required. 
[See Livy.] So when the Thebans had done this, Aristides says that 
justice had passed over to their side. 

" The broad differences marked in this article between public war and private 
•elf-defense shew how improperly the latter is called war. W. W. 

k 

CHAPTER 11. 

Of the Common Rights of Men. 

Iect. I 

!. Division of what is our 
own. 

XII. 

II. 

The Origin of Property, 

XIIL 

III. 

Is the sea Property $ 

IV. 

No property from occupation 
by individuals only. 

XIV. 

V. 

Wild animals property by oc- 

XV. 

cupation, excepting law. 

XVI. 

VI. 

A General,Right of Necessity 

XVII. 

against Property, 

XVIII. 

VII. 

Obtains tf inevitable; 

XIX. 

VIII. 

Excepting an equal Necessity 

XX. 

in the owner: 

XXI. 

IX. 

And with an obligation of 

XXII. 

restitution. 

XXIII. 

X. 

Example in war. 

XI. 

Right of harmless use of prom 
perty. 

XXIV. 

Hence Right over running 

water. 

Right of passage by land and 

by rivers. 

Right of traruit'taxes on 

merchandize. 

Right of tarrying. 

Right of exiles to settle. 

Right to wastes. 

Right to necessary acts. 

Right of buying. 

Right of selling. 

Right of marrying. 

Rights of strangers. 

Rights ex jure and ex bene- 

ficio. 

Right of exclusive dealing. 

L TT7S treat now of the Causes of War ; and first, of Injary done us 
T Y with respect to what is ours. Some things are ours by the 
Common Right of mankind ; others by our own Special Right. We 
will begin with the Common Right of mankind. This Right either 
directly regards corporal things, or certain acts. Corporal things are 
either unappropriated, or the property of some one. Unappropriated 
things are either such as cannot be appropriated, or such as can. 
Hence we must consider the origin of Property, or Ownership, which 
the jurists call Dominium, 

II. 1 Qod gave the human race generally a right to the things of 
a lower nature, at the Creation, and again, after the Deluge. Erery 
thing was conmion and undivided, as if all had one patrimony. Hence 
each man might take for his use what he would, and consume what he 
could. Such a Universal Use was then a Right, as Property is now. 
What each one had taken, another could not take from him by force 
without wrong. Cicero compares this state of things to the theatre, which 
though it be common, yet when a man has taken any place, it is his. 

And this state might have continued, if men had remained in great 
simplicity, or had lived in great mutual good will. One of these two 
conditions, a community of goods arising from extreme simplicity, we 
may see in some of the peoples of America, who have lived for many 
generations in that state without inconvenience. The other, a commu* 
nity of goods from mutual charity, was exhibited formerly among the 

70 OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. [Book 1L 

Essenes, and then among the first Christians at Jerusalem, and now in 
many places among Ascetics. The simplicity of the first races of men 
was proved by their nakedness. They were rather ignorant of yices 
than acquainted with virtue : as Trogus says of the Scythians. So 
Tacitus, Macrobius, the Book of Wisdom, St Paul. Their business 
was the worship of God, of which the Tree of Life was a symbol, (see 
Revelation xxii. 2). They lived easily on what the earth, without labour, 
spontaneously produced. 

2 But men did not continue in this simple and innocent life, but 
applied their minds to various arts, of which the symbol was the Tree 
of the Knowledge of good and evil ; that is, of those things which may 
be used ill or well. So Philo, Solomon, Dio Prusseensis. [See.] The 
oldest arts, agriculture and pasture, appeared in the first brothers 
(Cain and Abel) ; not without a division of possessions already shew- 
ing itself, and even not without bloodshed. And at length when the 
good were corrupted by intercourse with the bad, came the life of the 
Giants, that is, times of violence. And when the world was cleared by 
the Deluge, instead of that ferine life, followed the pursuit of plea- 
sure, with wine and lawless love. 

3 But the concord was especially broken by a more generous 
vice, ambition : of which the Tower of Babel was the sign ; and then 
different men divided the earth among them and possessed it. Yet 
still there remained among neighbours a community, not of their flocks 
and herds, but of their pastures ; for there was enough for all for a 
time: until, cattle increasing, the land was divided, not according to 
nations as before, but according to families. And some made and 
occupied their own wells, things most necessary in a thirsty region, 
and not sufficing for many. This is the account of the sacred history, 
sufficiently agreeing with the account given by philosophers and 
poets. 

4 There we learn what was the cause why men departed from the 
community of things, first of moveables, then of immoveables : namely, 
because when they wore not content to feed on spontaneous produce, 
to dwell in caves, to go naked, or clothed in bark or in skins, but had 
sought a more exquisite kind of living, there was need of industry, 
which particular persons might employ on particular things. And as 
to the common use of the fruits of the earth, it was prevented by the 
dispersion of men into different localities, and by the want of justice 
and kindness which interfered with a fair division of labour and sus- 
tenance. 

6 And thus we learn how things became Property ; not by an act 
of the mind alone : for one party could not know what another party 
wished to have for its own, so as to abstain from that ; and several 
parties might wish for the same thing ; but by a certain pact, either 
express, as by division, or tacit, as by occupation : for as soon as com- 
munity was given up, and while division was not instituted, it must be 
supposed to have been a matter of agreement among all, that what 

Cnxr. II.] OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. 71 

each had occupied he should have as his own. So Cicero» Quiniilian. 
And the ancients when they called Geres the Author ofLaw%^ and her 
festival T^esmop/iorio, Law-hearing^ had this meaning ; that from the 
diyision of land arose a new origin of Rights. 

UL 1 This being laid down, we say that the sea, whether taken 
as a whole, or as to its principal parts, could not become property. 
And as some concede this with regard to prirate persons, but not with 
regard to peoples, we prove it first from a moral reason ; namely, that 
the cause why community was given up, here ceases. For the magni- 
tude of the sea is so great that it is suflSlcient for all peoples for every 
use, either of drawing water, fishing, or navigation. The same 
might be said of the air, if there was any use of it to which the use 
of the earth is not also necessary, as in bird-catching it is; and there- 
fore this employment is governed by the ownership of the land. 

The same is true of sandy bays, where there is nothing which can 
bo cultivated, and the only use, procuring sand, is inexhaustible. 

2 There is also a natural reason which prevents the sea from being 
made property ; namely, because occupation can only be applied to a 
thing which is bounded. [Thucydides, Isocrates.] Now fluids are in 
themselves unbounded, as Aristotle says ; and cannot be occupied ex- 
cept as they are contained in something else ; as lakes and ponds are 
occupied, and rivers as far as their banks go. But the sea is not con. 
tained by the land, being equal to the land or greater, so that the 
ancients say the land is bounded by the sea. [Apollonius, Sulpi- 
cius ApoUinaris, Livy, Seneca, Lucan.] Nor are we to feign a divi» 
sion of the sea : for when the earth was first diyided, the sea was for 
the most part imknown ; and therefore we cannot imagine any way in 
which distant nations could agree as to such division. 

3 Therefore those things which were common to all, and were not 
divided in the first division, now do not become property by division, 
but by occupation, and are divided only after they have become 
property. 

IV. Let us come to those things which may become property, but 
are not yet so. Such are many places hitherto uncultivated, unin- 
habited islands, wild beasts, fishes, birds. But hero two remarks are 
to be made : first, that there are two kinds of occupation, in totality, 
and in particular shares. The former kind is commonly made by the 
people or the Ruler of the people; the other by individuals, but 
rather by assignation than by free occupation. And if anything occu- 
pied in totality is not assigned to special owners, that is not free of 
ownership, but belongs to the ownership of the first occupier, say, the 
people or the king. Such are rivers, lakes, marshes, woods, rocky 
mountains. 

y. Concerning wild beasts, fishes, birds, this also is to be remark- 
ed ; that he who has the ownership of the land and water, may, on 
that ground, prevent any one from taking those creatures, and thus 
acquiring property in them. The reason is, that it is morally neccs* 

72 OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. [Book IL 

sary to the government of a people that they who mingle with the 
people even for a time, which is done by entering the territory, must 
conform to its institutions. Nor is this disproved by what we often 
read in the Roman Law, that jure naturoe or jure gentium men are 
firee to pursue animals of chase. For this is true as long as no 
Civil Law interferes: as the Roman Law left many things in that 
primeval state which other nations settled otherwise. And when the 
Civil Law has settled anything otherwise, the Natural Law itself directs 
that it be obeyed. For though the Civil Law cannot ordain anything 
which the Natural Law prohibits, nor prohibit what that ordains : yet 
it may circumscribe natural liberty, and forbid what Vas lawful by 
Natural Law ; and even interfere to prevent an ownership which 
might be acquired by Natural Law. 

YI. 1 Let us consider whether men have any Common Right to 
those things which are already made private property. Some may 
think that this is a strange question, since property seems to have ab- 
sorbed all the Right which flowed from the common state of things. 
But this is not so. For we must consider what was the intention of 
those who introduced private property: which we must suppose to 
have been, to recede as little as possible from natural equity. For if 
even written laws are to be construed in that sense as far as possible, 
much more is mere utoge, which is not fettered by written words. 

2 Hence it follows, that in extreme necessity, the pristine right of 
using things revives, as if they had remained common : for in all laws, 
and thus in the law of ownership, extreme necessity is excepted. 

3 Hence the rule, that in a voyage, if the provisions run short, 
what each one has must be thrown into the common stock. So to 
preserve my house from a conflagration which is raging, my neigh- 
bour's house may bo pulled down : and ropes or nets may bo cut, of 
which any ship has run foul, if it cannot be extricated otherwise. All 
which rules are not introduced by the Civil Law, but by the interpre- 
tations of it. 

4 For among Theologians also, it is a received opinion, that in such 
a necessity, if any one take what is necessary to his life from any other's 
property, he does not commit theft : of which rule the reason is, not 
that which some allege, that the owner of the property is bound to give 
so much to him that needs it, out of charity : but this, that all things 
must be understood to be assigned to owners with some such benevo- 
lent exception of the Right thus primitively assigned. For if the first 
dividers had been asked what was their intention, they would have 
given such a one as we have stated. [Of necessity, see Seneca, Cicero, 
Curtius.] 

vn. But cautions are to be applied, that this liberty go not too 
far. 

First, that we must first endeavour in every way to avoid this ne- 
cessity in some other manner, as by applying to the magistrate, or by 
trying whether we cannot obtain the use of things from the owner by 

CuAP. II.] OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. 73 

entreaty. Plato allows a man to take water from his neighbour's well 
if in his own he has dug down to the chalk, seeking water ; and Solon, 
if he has dug in his own ground forty cubits. For as Plutarch says, 
he thought that necessity was to be relieved, not idleness encouraged ; 
and Xenophon says to the Sinopians, If we aro not allowed to buy, we 
must take ; not from contempt of Rights, but from necessity. 

VIII. Secondly, such liberty is not granted, if the possessor be 
in like necessity ; for casteris paribus, the case of the possessor is the 
better. Lactantius says, that he does not do amiss who abstains to 
thrust a drowning man from a plank, or a wounded man from his 
horse, eren for the sake of his own preserTation. So Cicero : and 
Curtius. 

IX. Thirdly, that when it is possible, restitution be made. There 
are some who think otherwise on this point, and consider that, as the 
man used his own Right, he is not bound to restitution. But it is 
more true that this Right was not plenary, but limited by the burthen 
of restoring what was taken, when the necessity was over : for such a 
Right suffices to preserve the natural equity of the case against the 
rigour of ownership. 

X. Hence we may collect how he who carries on a righteous 
war may lawfully seize a place situate in a land which is not at war ; 
namely, if there be a danger, not imaginary, but certain, that the 
enemy will seize that place, and thence do irreparable damage : and 
next, on condition that nothing bo taken which is not necessary for 
this purpose of caution, for example, the mere custody of the place, 
leaving to the true owner the jurisdiction and the revenues : finally, if 
it be done with the intention of restoring the custody to the true owner 
as soon as the necessity is over: Livy says, Enna retained by a step 
necessary y or unjustifiable; because in such a case every thing is unjusti- 
fiable which is not necessary. So the Qrecks who were with Xeno- 
phon, in their need took the ships which they found passing, spared 
the lading for its owners, fed and paid the sailors. This then is the 
first Right which, when ownership has been established, remains out of 
the old community of goods ; namely, the Right of Necessity. 

XI. Another Right is the Right of Harmless Use. Why^ says 
Cicero, when a man can without any loss to himself, should he not itn^ 
part what is useful to the receiver, and not inconvenient to the giver f So 
Seneca denies that wo have a Right to refuse a man permission to 
light his fire at ours. So in Plutarch, we are not to destroy meat 
when we have more than we need, nor to conceal or to muddy a 
spring of water, when we have used it, nor to pull down guide-posts 
or sea-marks which have done their service to us : they are to be left 
to be of use to others. 

Xn. So a river, as it is a river, is the property of the people 
within whose boundary it flows, or of him under whoso authority tho 
people is. He may run a pier into the river ; and what is produced 

74 OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. [Book H. 

in the riyer is bis. But the same rirer, as it is flomng water, remains 
common, for drawing or drinking: so Ovid. Water is in this way 
public property. So Virgil. 

XIII. 1 And so land, and rirers, and any part of the sea which 
is become the property of any people, ought not to be shut against 
those who have need of transit for just cause ; say, because being es^ 
polled from their own country they seek a place to settle ; or because 
they seek traffic with a remote nation ; or because they seek their own 
in a just war. The reason is the same as above ; that ownership 
might be introduced with the reservation of such a use, which is of 
great advantage to the one party and of no disadvantage to the other; 
and the authors of ownership are to be supposed to have intended 
this*. 

2 We have a valuable example of this in the history of Moses, 
who applied first to the Edomites, and then to the Amorites (Numb. 
XX. and xxi.), for leave to pass through the land on coudition of going 
by the king's high way, and paying for what they took. And when 
these conditions were rejected, he on that account made war on the 
Amorites ; justly, as Augustine says. 

3 The Greeks, of the ten thousand under Glearchus, claimed the 
same Right ; so Agesilaus, Lysander, the Batavi, Cimon. The middle 
opinion is the true one ; that a transit is first to be requested ; but if 
denied, may be asserted by force. So Agesilaus, when the king of 
Macedon, thus applied to, said he would consult, replied, IaX hvnk eonr 
nUty meantime we shall p(u$ through, 

4 Nor can any one properly object that he is afraid of the multi- 
tude of those who make the transit. For my Right is not taken 
away by your fear ; and this the less, because there are ways of pro- 
viding against danger; as by sending the body of persons in small 
parties, and without arms, as the Gologneso proposed to the Germans ; 
by placing guards at the expense of the transit-seekers ; by taking 
hostages. So too fear of war from him against whom the transit- 
seeker makes a righteous war, does not justify him in refusing. Nor 
is it enough to say that he may pass another way: for every one 
might say the same, and thus the Right of Transit be destroyed. It 
is enough if he pass bond fide by the shortest and most convenient 
way. If indeed he who seeks transit makes an unjust war, or brings 
my enemies with him, I may deny the transit ; for in such a case I 
might meet him on his own ground and stop his way. 

6 Transit is to be granted not only to persons, but to merchan- 
dize ; for no one has a right to impede one nation in cultivating trade 
with another remote nation ; for it is of advantage to the human race 
that such intercourse should be permitted : nor is that a damage to 
any one; for if any one misses some gain which he had reckoned 

* GronoTius in a long note gires very strong reasons why this Bight of Transit 
cannot be held, and cases in which it has been negatived. 

Chap. H.] OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OP MEN. 75 

upon but nerer had, that is not to be reckoned loss'*'. So Philo, Plu- 
tarch, Libanius, Euripides, Floras. 

XIY. 1 It is made a question whether, when merchandize thus 
passes through a country, the Rulers of that country may impose a 
transit-duty. And certainly whatever taxes hare no respect to the 
articles of merchandize, cannot equitably be imposed on them. So 
neither a capitation tax, nor taxes for the general purposes of the 
State, can be required of foreigners passing through. 

2 But iff either to proride security for the merchandize, or for 
this along with other objects, a burthen fidl on the country, a tax may 
be imposed on the merchandize, if it do not go beyond the measure 
of the cause. That is the measure of the equity, as of other taxes, 
so of dudes on merchandize. Thus Solomon (1 Kings x. 28) had a 
tax upon horses and linen yam which passed the isthmus of Suez. 
So transit duty was demanded by the Gebanites, Massilians, Corin- 
thians, Romans. And the jurists have much to say of the passage of 
riyers. 

5 But this limit is often transgressed ; as by the Arabian chieft. 

XV. 1 It ought also be permitted to those that travel through 
the land, to tarry there for a short time for the sake of health or 
other just cause; for this also is a harmless use. So Ilioneus in 
Virgil; and when the Megareans complained that the Athenians ex- 
cluded them from their ports contrary to the known rules of jtutiee, 
their complaint was approved by the Greeks. 

2 It is consequent upon this, that the transit-maker may erect a 
momentary hut, on the shore for instance, though the shore be occupied 
already. For the rule that it requires the order of a judge to build 
on the shore or in the sea, refers to permanent structures. 

XVI. Further, a place of settlement is not to be denied to 
foreigners who are expelled from their own country ; provided that 
they submit to the constituted government, and such other regulations 
as are requisite to avoid confusion. So Virgil, Dionysius of Halicar- 
nassus, Eratosthenes, the Eolians, Rhodians, Carians, Lacednmonians, 
Cunupans. But when the Minyans coming thus, asked the Lacedse- 
monians to share their power widi them, they wore injurious aggressors, 
as Herodotus speaks ; and Valerius says diat they turned a benefit 
into an injury. 

XVIL And if there be any portion of the soil of a territory 
desert and barren, that also is to be given up to immigrants who ask 
for it; or even may be rightly occupied by them; because that which 
is not cultivated, is not to be conceived as occupied, except as to the 
ownership, which continues to be in the old people. So the Latin 
Aborigines granted land to the Romans ; so Dio Prusa)ensis says ; so the 
Ansibarii in Tacitus held : though their general doctrine was wrongly 

* Gronorins notM that thii is mnch too lax and liberal, and contrary to the 
praotioe of nations, as he shews by examples. 

76 OF THE COMMON EIGHTS OF MEN. [Book II. 

applied in that case ; for the lands were occupied : so the Romans 
rightly resisted the Senones on the same ground. 

XVIU. After the Common Right to things follows the Common 
Right to acts; and this is given either simply or hypothetically. 
There is given simply a Right to those acts without which life cannot 
conveniently be sustained, and others which may be compared with 
these. The same necessity is not required here, as in taking what 
belongs to another*; for here we do not speak of what may be done, 
the owner being unwilling ; but of the mode of acquiring things with 
the owner's consent; asserting only, that he may not prevent the 
acquisition either by law or by conspiracy. For such impediment in 
such matters is contrary to the nature of human society. This is, 
as Ambrose says, to separate ourselves from the intercourse of our 
common parent ; to deny what is given for all ; to tear up the root 
of our common life. For we do not now speak of superfluities, the 
mere instruments of pleasure; but of the necessaries of life, food, 
clothing, medicaments. 

XIX. We say then that these things, all men have a Right to 
purchase at a fair price ; excepting when they from whom they are 
asked, themselves need them : as in a great scarcity of com, it is for- 
bidden to be sold. And yet even in such a necessity, foreigners once 
admitted cannot be expelled, but the common evil is to be borne in 
common, as Ambrose says. 

XX. We have not the same Right to sell what we have; for 
every one is free to decide what he will acquire, and what not. Thus 
formerly the Belgians would not admit wine and other foreign mer- 
chandize : and the Arabians admitted some articles and not others. 

XXI. 1 In the Right of which we speak is included, we con- 
ceive, the Right of seeking and making marriages with neighbouring 
nations : if for instance, a population entirely male expelled from 
some other place come thither. For to live without marriage, though 
not entirely repugnant to human nature, is repugnant to the nature 
of most men. Celibacy suits only superior minds: therefore men 
ought not to be deprived of the means of getting wives. So Romulus 
in Livy : so Canuleius. So Augustine. 

2 The Laws of some nations, which deny marriage to strangers, 
either depend on this ground, that at the time when they were made 
there was no people which had not a sufficient supply of women ; or 
they do not treat of marriage in general, but of that marriage which is 
legitimate in a peculiar sense, that is, which produces some special 
kind of legal effects. 

XXII. The Right hypothetical to acts, refers to acts which any 
nation has permitted to strangers generally : in this case, if one people 
be excluded from such acts, it is wronged. Thus if it be permitted to 
strangers to catch beasts, fish, birds, in certain places, or to get pearls; 
to take legacies, to sell goods, to contract marriages, even without tho 

Chap. H.] OF THE COMMON RIGHTS OF MEN. 77 

plea of want of women, that cannot be denied to one particular people, 
except on account of a delinquency ; on which account the rest of 
the Hebrews took away from the Benjamites the right of intermar- 
riage with them. 

XXm. But what 18 said of such permissions, is to be understood 
of such things as are permitted in yirtue of natural liberty not taken 
away by law ; not of those things which are permitted by indulgence, 
as a relaxation of law : for there is no wrong in denying an indulgence. 
And thus Francis Victoria and Molina may be reconciled. 

XXIV. I recollect a question raised, Whether it be lawful for one 
people to make an agreement with another, that they will sell to them 
alone fruits of a certain kind, which grew nowhere else. I conceive it 
to be lawful, if the buying people be ready to sell them to others at an 
equitable price: for it makes no difference to other nations, from 
whom they buy what gratifies their natural desires. And one party 
may anticipate another in a gainful trade ; especially if the people 
making this bargain have taken the other people under its protection, 
and hare incurred expense on that account. Such forestalling and 
monopoly, made ^th the intention which I hare described, is not con- 
trary to Natural Law; although sometimes it is prohibited by Civil 
Law, on account of public utility. 

^ CHAPTER III. 

Of the oriffiiMl acquieitum of Things. The Sea, Mivera. 

8kct. I 

:. Original aequisiiion is by 
Division or Oooupation, 

XI. 

II. 

Other modes, as Concessions, 
rejected. 

xu. 

III. 

And Fabrication, 

XIII. 

IV. 

Occupation is either Autho' 

rity or Ownership, 

XIV. 

V. 

Occupation of movables may 
be barred by Law. 

XV. 

VI. 

Ownership <^ Infants and 
Insane, 

XVL 

VII. 

Rivers may be occupied: 

XVII. 

VIII. 

May the Seaf 

IX. 

This was not allowed in the 

XVIII. 

Roman Empire. 

XIX. 

X. 

Not unlawful in some eases. 

Such occupation how made, 

and for how long. 

Does not give a Right ofpr9' 

venting harmless transit. 

Authority over parts of the 

Sea, 

Taxes on navigators. 

Conventions not to navigette 

beyond Hmits. 

Result of a River changing 

its course. 

Of a complete change of 

channel. 

Accession qfa whole River, 

Things derelict. 

I. A THING may become our property by acqubition, original or 
XjL deriratiye. Original acquisition formerly, when the human 
race could meet together and agree, might be made by dlTjfiion; at 
present it is only made by occupation. 

II. It may be said perhaps that property may be originally 
acquired by being giren on conditions, as a farm ; or deposited as a 
pledge : but on consideration, it will appear that such ownership is not 
new, except in its form ; by its own virtue, it resided in the ownership 
of the former owner. 

III. Paulus the Jurist adds, to the enumeration of the causes of 
acquisition, this, if we have made anything, so as to cause it to exist 
fiut since, in tlie course of nature, nothing can be made except out of 
pro-existing matter, if that matter was ours, the ownership oontinues 
when it assumes a new form ; if the matter was no one's property, this 
acquisition comes under occupation ; if the matter belonged to another, 
the thing made is not ours alone, as will appear below. 

IV. I Therefore wo hare to consider occupation ; which, after that 
primitive time, is the only natural and original mode of acquisition. In 
things which are properly no one's, two things are occupable ; the lord- 
ship, and the ownership, so far as it is distinguished from the lordship. 
Kings have power over all things (the lordship); individuals have 
property (ownership.) The city is the king's; but nevertheless in tho 
city each has his own. Lordship has two kinds of matter subject to 
it ; primary, persons, which matter alone sometimes suffices ; as in the 
case of a body of peoplo (men, women, and children,) seeking a new 
lottlomont; and secondary, a place, which is called a territory. 

Chap. III.] OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF THINGS. 79 

2 Therefore, though lordship and ownership are commonly acquired 
by one act, they are really distinct. The ownership may pass not only 
to citizens, but to strangers ; while the lordship remains in the same 
hands as before. 80 Siculus De Condiiionibus Agrorum. Demosthe* 
nes uses different words for landed property in our own territory and 
in another. 

y. In a place in which the lordship is already occupied, the right 
of occupying moTcable things (as wild beasts, birds, &c.) may be barred 
by the Oiril Law, as we have said (B. n. 0. ii. § y.)< For Uie right to 
take such things is from a permission of Natural Law ; not from a com- 
mand, directing that there shall always be such liberty. Nor does 
human society require that it should be so. If any one should say 
that it appears to be a part of jua gentium that such a liberty should 
exist ; I reply, that although in any part of the earth this be or should 
be so received, yet it has not the force of a general compact among 
nations : but is the Civil Law of several nations distributively, which 
may be taken away by nations singly. There are several such points 
which the jurists say are juris gentiutnf in what relates to the division 
and acquisition of property. 

VI. It is to be observed also, if we regard Natural Law alone, that 
there is no ownership except in a creature endowed with reason. But 
the juB gentium has introduced an assumption, on the ground of com- 
mon utility, that infants and insane persons can receive and retain 
ownership, the human race, as it were, performing their parts for them. 
And in fact many things besides nature may constitute Rights, though 
nothing can constitute Rights against nature. Therefore this owner- 
ship which is thus introduced in favour of infants and the like by the 
custom of civilized nations, stops at the primtu actus, the potential &ct 
of having; and does not go on to the <ietus secundus, the operative 
fBMt of using. For alienation and similar processes in their very nature 
include the use of reason, which cannot exist in such agents. To which 
we may refer. Gal. iv. 1, ths heir, so long as he is a child, $c. 

YIL We have above begun to speak of the sea; we must now 
finish what we have to say on the subject. 

Rivers may be held as by occupation, though neither their upper 
nor lower extremity be included in the territory; but cohere with 
superior or inferior water, or with the sea. It is sufficient that the 
greater part, that is, the sides, are inclosed with banks, and that a river 
is something small in comparison with the land. 

VIII. By this it appears that a portion of the sea also may be 
occupied by him who possesses the land on each side : although it be 
open at one end, as a bay, or at both, as a strait ; provided it be not 
such a portion of the sea as is too large to appear part of the land. 
And what is lawful to one people or king, seems also to be lawful to 
two or three, if they, in like manner, wish to occupy the sea which lies 
among their dominions. And thus two rivers which flow between two 
peoples are occupied by both, and thus are divided. 

80 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF THINGS. [Book II. 

IX. 1 It must be confessed, however, that in the parts of the 
earth known to the Roman empire from the earliest times down to 
Justinian, it was a part of the Law of Nations that the sea could not 
be occupied by any people, even for purposes of fishery. Nor are they 
to be attended to who say, that since, in the Roman Law, the sea is 
called commune omnium^ common to all, it is to be understood as 
common to Roman citizens. For, in the first place, the expressions are 
too general; as in Theophilus, Ulpian, Gelsus. [See.] And next, the 
jurists distinguish these pubiica popuIU public property of one people, 
from things common to alL So in the Institutions and Theophilus. 
[See.] 

2 As to shores of the sea, Neratius said that they are not public 
as belonging to any one people, but as still in a state of nature, never 
having come to belong to any, not even any people. This seems to be 
contradicted by what Gelsus says, that the shore within the bounds of 
the Roman authority belongs to the Roman people; but that the sea 
is common. The two may be reconciled, if we suppose that Neratius 
meant the use of the shore as far as it is used by navigators or travel- 
lers ; but Gelsus, so far as it is taken up for some permanent use, as for 
a building. For this, as Pomponius teaches us, was obtained only by 
application to the judge, as also the right of building in the sea. 

X. I Though this is so, yet that the sea, in the sense which we 
have spoken of, is not occupied, nor can lawfully be occupied, is a 
result of institution, not of natural reason. For a river is public pro- 
perty, as we know; and yet the right of fishing in a certain bend of the 
river may belong to a private person by occupation : and Paulus pro- 
nounced, that if any one could have property in the sea, he might ob- 
tain a sentence of the court in the usual form, uti possidetis, since the 
case would be a private, not a public one ; but in this he speaks, doubt- 
less, of a small part of the sea, such as can be taken into private 
grounds, as was done by LucuUus and others. G. Sergius Grata made 
seas of his own hy shutting up estuaries^ as Valerius says. And this 
authority was used by Leo the Emperor, for appropriating the entrance 
of the Bosphorus by shutting it with piers. 

2 Since a portion of the sea may become part of a private estate, 
namely, if it be included in the estate, and so small as to seem part of 
it, and if Natural Law does not prohibit this ; why should not a por- 
tion of the sea included within the territory of a people or of several 
peoples be the property of those whose the shores are ? provided that 
the size of that portion of the sea compared with the territory be not 
larger than the creek of the sea compared with the estate. And it is 
not a reason against this, that the sea is not included on all sides, as 
we may understand by the example of a river, and of the sea admitted 
into the heart of a city. 

3 But many things which are permitted by nature, the Law of 
Nations, by a bond of common consent, has prohibited. Wherefore in 
those places in which such a Law of Nations is in force, and is not 

Chap. IU.] THE SEA, RIVERS. 81 

suspended by common consent, any portion of the sea, eren though 
small and mostly included by shores, is not the property of any 
people. 

XI. It is further to be noted, that since, in those places in which 
that Law of Nations concerning the sea is not receired, or is abolished, 
it is not to be inferred from the mere occupation of the land, that the 
sea is occupied : so also, that a mere mental act does not suffice for the 
occupation of the sea ; but that there is need of some external act [as 
the presence of ships] by which the occupation may be understood to 
take place. And again, that if the possession which arose from occu- 
pation be given up by desertion, the sea forthwith returns to a state of 
nature ; that is, to community of use ; which was declared by Papi- 
nian to be the law respecting a shore not built on, and a fishery in a 
rirer. 

Xn. This is certain, that eyen he who holds the sea by occupa- 
tion cannot prevent an unarmed and harmless navigation upon it ; since 
even a transit of this character over land cannot be prohibited, which 
nevertheless is both less necessary, and more noxious*. 

XIII. 1 The empire of the sea, claimed over a portion of it 
without any other property [on which it depends] might easily proceed 
from such claims as we have spoken of, nor do I conceive that the Law 
of Nations, of which we have spoken, would stand in the way. It has 
often been asserted and conceded ; thus the Argives expostulated with 
the Athenians for allowing the Spartans to pass over the sea, whereas 
the treaty was that neither party should allow the enemies of the other 
to pass through their domain. 

And in the truce, in the Peloponnesian war, the Megareans are 
permitted to navigate the sea contiguous to their and their allies' 
shores. So the sea is spoken of as part of the Roman empire, by Dio 
Gassius, ThemistiuB, Appian, Dio Prusseensis, Virgil, Qellius, So the 
Massillans and the Sinopians. 

2 The empire of a portion of the sea is, it would seem, acquired 
in the same way as other lordship ; that is, as above stated, as belongs 
ing to a person, or as belonging to a territory : belonging to a person, 
when he has a fleet which commands that part of the sea ; belonging 
to a territory, in so i&t as those who sail in that part of the sea can be 
compelled from the shore as if they were on land. 

XrV. Hence he does nothing contrary to the Law of Nature 
and Nations, who, undertaking the care of assisting navigation by pro- 
viding lighthouses and buoying sand-banks, imposes an equitable tax 
upon navigators ; like the Roman Erythrssan tax to meet the expense 
of the expedition against the pirates ; and the passage dues which wore 
levied by the Byzantines in their sea ; and those which the Athenians 
levied in the same sea when they occupied Ohrysopolis : [See Polybius.] 

* The right of transit by land, which is here described as "more noxicas," 
and used as an argament, was proved by assuming it to be absolutely innoxious. 
See B. II. c. ii. § xiiL W. W. 

G 

82 OF TIIR ORIOlNAJj ACQUISITION OF THINGS. [Book n. 

Mid what tlio Athonions formorly had loTiod in the Ilellespont, as 
Domotthonot shows; and tho Uoman emperors, as Procopius mentions, 
in Ills time. 

XV. 1 There are examples of treaties by which one people 
bound itself to another not to narigate beyond certain boundaries. 
Thus the kings of tho region on the Red Sea, and the Egyptians, had 
a Gonrention that the Egyptians should not come upon that sea with 
any ship of war, nor with more than one merchant-TOSsel. So the 
Athenians and Persians at the time of Gimon agreed that no armed 
Median ship should sail within the Oyanean and Chelidonian islands ; 
and after the battle of Salamis, within the Cyaneans and Phaselis. In 
tho truoe of the Peloponnesian war, it was agreed that the Lacedse- 
monians should not send to sea ships of war, but only merchant-ships 
of not above 500 talents burthen. In tho First Treaty of the Romans 
with tho Cartliaginians, it was agreed that the Romans and their 
alUos should not navigate beyond Cape Fair (Pulohnan Pramonr 
iorium), except compelled by tempest or hostile force ; and that those 
who had come under such compulsion should only take necessaries, 
and should depart within fire days : and in the Second Treaty it was 
agreed tliat tho Romans should not plunder nor traffic beyond Cape 
Fair, Maitia, and Tarseium. In the peace with the Illyrians it was 
agrootl that they sliould not nayigate beyond Lissus with more than 
two Imrks, and those unarmed : in the peace with Antiochus, that he 
should not navigate beyond the promontories of Calycadnus and Sar- 
podon (in Cilicia), except with the ships which carried his subsidy, 
amlmssadorm or hostages. 

2 Rut tlioso examples do not prove possession of the sea, or of the 
right of navigating, by occupation. For peoples as well as individuals 
way. by compact, concede to another not only the Rights whidi are 
theirs 8|>eoially, but also those which they have in common with all 
men : and when tliis is done, we may say, what Ulpian said when an 
estate was sold on condition that the purcbaser should not carry on a 
thunny lUhery to the prejudice of the seller r-— namely, that there 
could not be a servitmlo over tho sea, but that the b<ma/de$ of the 
contract r«Hiuirod that the rule of the sale should be observed ; and 
therefore that tho possessors and their successors were under a per- 
sonal obligation to obsi^rve the condition. 

XVL 1 When a river changes its course^ a question often arises 
betw\>en neighbouring peoples whether the boondary of the territory 
abo ohang^^ and whether the additions which the river makes to one 
side belong to the land to which they are added : whidi controversies 
are to be solved by regarding the nature and mode of the aoq[at» 
sitton. 

Thv>«e who write concerning land, tell us that there are three 
kiinU the a*Mi(t«^»» which is limited bv an artificial boundarr ; the 
«MP^mi4lH* fMT iviii«vrMMMM« which is determined by its mcstfnred 
^uantitT^ and tlie «ifv^ijiMM» whkli is defined by natwrad bo«adaries» 

Chap. IEL] THE SEA, RIVERS. 83 

AB iiTen or moantainB.'*' In the two fonner kinds, if the iiTer changes 
its coune, the territory is not changed, and if any alluTial addition is 
made to it, it is an accession to the property of the occupier of the 
hind. 

2 In land defined hy a riyer, its natural boundary, if the riyer 
changes its course gradually, it changes also the boundary of the terri- 
tory ; and whaterer the river adds to one side belongs to him to whose 
land it is added ; because each people must be supposed to have settled 
their claims on the understanding that the river, as a natural terminus, 
should divide them by a line drawn along its middle. So Tadtus 
speaks of the Rhine as a boundary, so Diodorus of another river ; and 
Xenophon calls such a river simply the Horizont, the boundary. 

3 The ancients relate that the Achelous, perpetually changing its 
course^ was the constant cause of war between the Etolians and Acar- 
nanians ; and that Hercules confined it within banks, and thus put an 
end to the quarreL 

XVn. 1 But this is only true if the river has not at onee changed 
its channel. For a river, as bounding territories, is not considered 
simply as water, but as water flowing in a certain channel and bounded 
by certain banks. And therefore any addition or subtraction of par- 
ticles which leaves to the whole the same general aspect, allows the 
thing to be taken for the same. But if the aspect of the whole be 
changed at once, it becomes another thing. If a river is dammed up 
in the upper part, and turned into a new cut made by hand, it ceases 
to be that river; and in like manner if the river leave its old bed and 
break its way by a new channel, it is not the same river as before, but 
a new river, the old one being extinguished. And since, if the river 
had dried up, the boundary of the territory would remain the middle 
of the channel as it was just before ; so, because the intention of the 
peoples must be supposed to have been that their lands were to be 
naturally dirided by the river, but that if the river ceased to be, then 
each should hold what he had held ; therefore when the channel is 
thus changed the same rule must be observed. 

2 In doubtful cases, the territories which border on the river are 
to be supposed to have that for their boundary : because nothing is 
more suitable for separating the lands of different nations than a river 
which is not easily crossed. 

That national territories are defined by the rules of ager limitatusf 
or o^er mentura comprehensus more rarely happens; and then, not 
from primeval occupation, but from concession, [or by treaty.] 

XVUI. But though in doubtful cases, as we have said, national 
territory extends to the middle of the river, it may happen, and some- 

• GronoTins lajs that these distinctioiis are wrongly given by Grotiug, and 
wrongly applied; bat Barbeyrac defends him. 

-f- In modern times, national territories hare fireqnently been defined by boun- 
daries entirely artificial, as parallels of latitude, and meridians; of which the map 
erf America affords many examples. W. W. 

o2 

81 OP THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF THINGS. [Book II. 

times does, that the whole of the rircr belongs to one party; as when 
the second bank has been taken possession of at a later period, after the 
first bank and the river had been already occupied; or because the 
matter was so settled by compact. 

XIX. 1 This also is worth obserring ; that there may be an ori- 
ginal acquisition of those things which have had an owner, but have 
ceased to haye one; as being derelict, or because the owners have 
been removed; for then things return into the state of nature in 
which they were at first. 

2 This also is to be noted ; that sometimes the first acquisitions 
of property are made by a people or its head in such a manner that 
not only the lordship, including that jus emtnens of which we have 
spoken, (B. i. c. iii. $ vi ;) but that also the private ownership, was ac- 
quired at first generally for the people or its head; and then the property 
was distributed particularly in special lots to private persons, in such 
a manner that their ownership depended on that former ownership ; if 
not in the same way as the ownership of a Vassal from that of Seignior, 
or the ownership of the tenant-farmer from that of the landlord, yet 
in some slighter way ; as in fact there are many species of ownership : 
among which is the ownership of a trustee. So Seneca and Dio Pru- 
Bflsensis, Strabo, Tacitus, speak of various ways in which a thing may 
be mine. [See.] 

3 And since private properties thus depend on the general proprie- 
torship, if any portion of property ceases to have a special owner, it 
does not then become the property of the occupier, but reverts to the 
community, or to the superior lord. And a rule similar to this of Na- 
tural Law, might be introduced by Civil Law, without the reason we 
have given. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Of presumed Dereliction of Property, and the Occupation 
which Jbllows ; and funu it differs from Usucaption and 
Prescription. 

Sect. I 

. Doet Usucaption or Pre 

scription hold between states 9 

II. 

Long Possession is alleged. 

IIL 

For Human Will is shewn not 

onlg by words; 

IV. 

But by Acts done; 

V. 

And by Acts omitted. 

VL 

Effect of Time in Derelict. 

VII. 

A Time beyond memory qf 

man. 

VIII. 

Do men throw away their 

property 9 

IX. 

Immemorial Possession. 

X. Rights of Unborn Persons, 

XI. Sovereignty by long Posses^- 
sion. 

XII. Are sovereigns subject to Pre' 
scription 9 

XIII. Separable Rights of sovB' 
reigns are subject to Pre" 
scription, 

XIV. May subjects always seize 
their Freedom, 

XV. Facultative RighU not lost by 
Disuse, 

I. TTERE arises a great difficulty concomidg the right of usucaption, 
XI [hy which a thing long used becomes the property of the pos- 
sessor.] This Right is introduced by the Civil Law,[not by Natural Law,] 
for time, of its own nature, has no effective power ; for nothing is done 
by time, though everything is done in time. Hence this right, as Yas- 
quius thinks, cannot have place between two free peoples, or kings, or 
a people and a king ; nor even between a king and a private person who 
is not his subject, nor between the subjects of two different kings or 
peoples : which appears to be true, except so far as things and acts 
are governed by the laws of the territory : [for a person in one terri- 
tory, knowing the laws of another territory as to usucaption, may 
act accordingly, in questions of right between him and another 
person in the stranger territory.] Yet if we admit this, there seems 
to follow this very inconvenient conclusion, that controversies con- 
coming kingdoms and their boundaries are not extinguished by any 
lapse of time ; which not only tends to disturb the minds of many 
and to perpetuate wars, but is also repugnant to the common sense of 
mankind. 

II. For [the authority of time and usage has been generally acknow- 
ledged in disputes on such subjects]. So in Judges xi. 13, 26, when tho 
^ng of the Ammonites claimed the land from Amon to Jabbok and 
«rordan, Joshua said that Israel had dwelt there 300 years ; why there- 
^ore did ye not recover tJiem in that time f And the Lacodasmonians in 
^Bocrates lay it down as a rule most certain, and acknowledged by all 
nations, that public possessions, as well as private, are so confirmed by 
length of time that they cannot be taken away ; on this ground they 

86 OP PRESUMED DERELICTION [Book II. 

repel those who demand Messena. [See.] So Philip the Second of 
Macedon told Quintius that he would give up the cities which he had 
himself taken, but not those which had legitimately descended to him 
from his ancestors. Sulpitius in Liyy, disputing agiunst Antioohus, 
shews it to be unjust that because the Qreeks in Asia had at one time 
been in subjection, he should make that the ground of an asserted right 
of reducing them to subjection again after several ages. The histo- 
xians speak of the claim of ancient possessions as idle talk, mythical 
stories. See also Oicero. 

III. In truth, the effects, as to Rights, which depend on man*8 will, 
still do not follow the mere internal act of the mind, except that act be 
indicated by some external signs. For to assign a jural efficiency to 
mere acts of the nund, would not be congruous to human nature, which 
cannot know the acts of the mind, except from outward signs. Tet 
signs denoting the acts of the mind have never a mathematical, but 
only a probable certainty; for men may express in words something 
different from what they feel and will, and may simulate in their acts. 
But the nature of human society does not suffer that the acts of the 
mind, sufficiently indicated, should hare no efficacy: therefore what is 
sufficiently indicated in words, is to be held true^ as against him who 
BO indicates it. 

This doctrine of the force of words is to be applied to derelicts. 

lY. 1 A derelict may also be indicated by the fact ; thus, that ia 
a derelict which is thrown away ; unless the circumstances of the case 
be such that it may be supposed to be put away for a time and with 
the intention of taking it again. Thus a debt is supposed to be remit- 
ted by ginng up the note of hand which acknowledges it. An inherit*' 
ance, as Paulus says, may be refused, not only by words, but by deed, 
and by any indication of will. 80 if he who is the owner of anything, 
knowingly contracts with another person in whose possession it is, as 
with the owner, he must be held to lose his right : and there is no rea- 
son why this should not hold also between kings and peoples. 

2 In like manner a superior, making a concession to an inferior, 
or giving him a command which he cannot lawfully perfbrm, except 
he be relieved j&om the tie of the law, is supposed to have loosed that 
tie. This rule flows, not only frcMn the Civil Law, but from Natural 
Law, according to which any one may abdicate what is his ; and from 
the natural presumption by which every one is supposed to intend 
what he has sufficiently indicated. And in this sense may be accepted 
what Ulpian said, that the acknowledgment in court of the payment 
of a debt'*', is apart of jus gentium; (it being really a part of ^ 
eivUe), 

y. 1 Among ^' facts*' we must also understand what is left un* 

* Heinec Elem, Jut, Civ, § 1022. Est ergo accepHlaHo actus legitimns qao 
interrogatione debitoris et congnia creditoris respondone obligatio per stipnla- 
tlonem contracta diasolTitur. Formiilaerat Quod ego tUn promiri, htUfetne acd^ 
turn f Hahto aeuptum. 

Chap. IV.] OF PEOPERTY, &c. 87 

done, ooDBidered with due drcumstftnoes. If any one, present and 
knowing, is silent, he may be assumed to assent; as also the Hebrew 
Law recognises, Num. xxz. 4, 6, 11, 12: 1/ a woman vow a vow, $c.; 
except circumstances shew that he was prevented from speaking by 
fear or other cause. Thus that is supposed to be lost, with regard to 
which the hope of recoToring it is giren up ; as Ulpian says, that pigs 
carried off by woWes, and goods lost in shipwreck, cease to be ours, not 
at once, but when they cannot be recoTcred ; that is, when there is no 
reason to belieye that they keep any hold on the mind of the owner ; 
when there is no indication of a purpose of recovering. For if persons 
hare been sent to seek what is lost, or if a reward for finding it is of- 
fered, we must judge differently. If any one knows a thing which is 
his to be held by another, and in the course of a long time says nothing 
against it, he, except some other reason manifestly appear, must be 
supposed to have acted with the purpose of no longer having that 
thing as his. And so Ulpian says, that a house may, by long silence, 
be understood to be derelict by the owner. And Pius, the Emperor, 
in a rescript says, Tou have no right to ask for the interest of your 
money for the past period, for the length of time shews that you had 
given it up. Tou did not require this payment from your debtor, in 
order to gain favour with him. 

2 Similar to this is the case of Custom. For Custom, without 
referring to the Civil Law, which fixes a certain time and numner for 
introducing it, may be introduced by a subject people, in virtue of its 
being tolerated by the Ruler. But the time in which such Custom re- 
ceives the effect of Law, is not defined, but arbitrary ; namely, as much 
as is necessary to signify the consent of the party. 

3 But in order that silence may be valid for the presumption of 
derelict, two things are required; that it be the silence of a party 
knowing, and freely willing ; for the inaction of a party which is in 
ignorance, has no effect; and when there is another cause known 
which influences the will, conjecture as to what it is ceases. 

VL To establish the assumption of these two conditions, other 
conjectures are of force : but for the most part, the effect of time, in 
both points, is great. For in the first place, it can hardly happen 
that in a long time, a thing pertaining to any one should not come to 
his knowledge, since time supplies many occasions. And a shorter time 
is sufficient for this purpose in a case between persons present, than 
absent, even without referring to the Civil Law. So fear once im- 
pressed is understood to last for a certain time, but not for ever, since 
a long time affords many occasions of taking counsel against the 
<langer, either by one's own means or by means of others; as by 
going out of the bounds of the authority of him who inspires the fear; 
or at least, it affords the means of renewing our right by protest, or, 
what is better, of referring to judges or arbitrators. 

YII. Since time beyond the memory of man is morally, as it 
were, infinite, a silence for such a time will always suffice to esta- 

88 OP PRESUMED DERELICTION [Book II. 

blish derelict, except there are rery strong reasooB on the other side. 
It is well remarked by the more prudent jurists, that time beyond the 
memory of man is not the same thing as a century, though the two 
periods are often not very different ; because the common term of 
human life is a hundred years ; which period commonly includes three 
generations of men ; as the Romans objected to Antiochus, when they 
pointed out that he asked for cities which neither he, nor his father 
nor his grandfather, had ever had. 

Vm. 1 It may be objected that men are fond of their property, 
and that negative acts, even in a great length of time, ought not to be 
taken as proving that they throw it away. But, on the other hand, 
we ought to think well of men, and not to suppose that they would 
allow another man to be perpetually in the wrong, for the sake of a 
perishable thing. 

2 And as to political authority, though highly valued, it has also 
heayy burthens, and such as bring diyine wrath on those who ad* 
minister them ill: and as it would be cruel for different asserted 
guardians to litigate, at the expense of the ward, which has a right to 
manage his afiairs ; or, to use Plato's comparison, for the crew of a 
Teasel to contend, with much danger to the yessel, who should steer ; 
80 are they not always to be praised who with great loss, and much 
effusion of the innocent people's blood, are ready to fight who shall 
gorem the people. The ancients praise Antiochus for expressing 
his thanks to the Romans who had reduced his kingdom within 
manageable limits. So Lucan implies that a rivalry for empire is 
absurd. 

3 Then again, it is for the good of human society that gorem- 
ments should at some time be placed beyond the risk and doubt of 
controversy ; and the modes of settling the matter which have this 
tendency are to b<9 preferred. If Aratus thought it hard that private 
possession of 50 years should be disturbed, we must still more hold 
by the saying of Augustus, that a good citizen does not wish the pre- 
sent state of the republic to be changed. So Alcibiades in Thucydides, 
Isocrates, Cicero, Livy. 

4 And even if these arguments were wanting, the presumption that 
each man wishes to keep what he has, may be met by another pre- 
sumption, that no man will stay a very long time without giving some 
indication what his wishes are. 

IX. And perhaps we may say that this is not merely a matter of 
presumption, but that this law was introduced by an instituted law of 
nations, that a possession going beyond memory uninterrupted, and 
not accompanied with any appeal to justice, absolutely transfers 
ownership. It is credible that nations have agreed upon this, since 
such a rule tends greatly to peace. But it is essential to require unin- 
terrupted possession, as stated in Livy. For a desultory possession is 
of no efficacy, as the Kumidians urge against the Oarthaginians, also 
in Livy. [See.] 

Chap. IV.] OP PROPERTY, &c. 89 

X. 1 But another and an important question arises here : whether 
those not yet bom may tacitly lose their rights by such dereliction. If 
we say they cannot, the definition just given is of no ayail for the tran- 
quillity of authority and ownership, since most kinds of these are such 
that they belong to posterity. If we say that they can, it will appear 
strange how silence can prejudice those who cannot speak because 
they do not exist; and how the act of others can be allowed to harm 
them. 

2 For the solution of this difficulty, it is to observed, that he who is 
not yet bom has no rights, as a thing not existing has no attributes. 
Wherefore if the people, from whose will the right of reigning pro- 
ceeds, changes its will, it does no injury to those who are not yet bom, 
and who have not yet acquired any right. And as the people may 
change its will expressly, it may also tacitly bo presumed to have 
changed it. If then the will of the people be changed, and since the 
right of the expected progeny does not yet exist, and the parents from 
whom they are to be bom relinquish their right, nothing prerents its 
being occupied by another as a derelict. 

3 In this we speak of Natural Law : for by the Civil Law, as other 
fictions may be introduced, so this also, that the law may represent 
the part of the persons who do not yet exist, and may thus prevent 
adverse occupation being a prejudice to them : which purpose of the 
law, however, is not lightly to be assumed, because that private advan- 
tage is much at variance with public utility. Whence those fiefs which 
[by law] are conveyed, not by the right of the last possessor, but 
by a primitive investiture in each vacancy, may, by a sufficiently long 
usage, be acquired [as territory], as the best jurists hold. Govamivias 
has asserted this with strong reasons, respecting rights of primogeni- 
ture and entailed estates. 

4 For nothing prevents the Civil Law from introducing such a 
Right as cannot be alienated by one act, but yet, in order to avoid 
the uncertainty of ownership, may be lost by neglect after a certain 
time : but in such a way that future claimants shall retain a right of 
personal action against those who have committed the neglect, or 
their heirs. 

XI. From what we have said, it appears that both a king as 
against a king, and a free people as against a free people, may acquire 
a right, not only by express consent, but by dereliction and posses- 
sion following this, or taking a new force from it. For as to what is 
said, that what is not legally valid at first cannot become valid by the 
subsequent fiEtct, it is to be taken with this exception, except a new cause 
intervene, fit of itself to produce such validity. And thus [by the 
course of usage] the king of any people may lose his authority and 
become subject to the people ; and he who was not king, but only 
governor, may become king with absolute authority; and the sovereign 
authority, wluch at first was in the king or in the people wholly, may 
be shared between them. 

90 OP PRESUMED DERELICTION [Book II. 

Xn. 1 This also is a question worth examiniog*: Whether the 
law of UBUcaption or prescription, made by the sorereign, may affect 
the right of soTereign authority, and its necessary parts, which we 
have elsewhere explained (B. i. c. ill. $ ?!.)• Not a few of the Jurists 
seem to think that it may, treating this question of the soTereignty as 
a matter of CiTil Law. We think otherwise. For in order that any 
one may be bound by a law, there is required both power and will, at 
least presumed, in the author of the law. But no one can bind him- 
self in the manner of a law, that is, in the character of a superior: 
and hence it is that the authors of laws hare the right of changing 
their laws. Howeyer, a person may be bound by his own law, not 
dirocUy, but by reflexion ; namely as being a part of the community, 
in virtue of natural equity, which requires the component parts to 
follow the analogy of the whole. So Saul put himself and his son 
Jonathan on the same footing as the rest of the people, 1 Sam. xir. 40. 
But this does not apply in the case which we are now treating ; for 
we consider the author of the law, not as a part of the community, but 
as him in whom the whole legislatire rirtue resides ; for we speak of 
the BOToreignty as such. [Therefore the sorereign has not the power 
of binding himself by such laws.] But neither can he be presumed 
to have the will; for the authors of laws are not supposed to in- 
clude themselves, except both the matter and the reascm of the law 
are universal ; as in settling prices by law. But the sovereignty has 
not parity of reason with otiier things; on the contrary, it is a matter 
of a higher order than other things. 

Nor have I ever seen a civil law treating of prescription, which 
comprehended in its sphere the sovereign power, or could be probably 
supposed to have comprehended it. 

2 Whence it follows that the time defined by law is not sufficient 
to acquire the sovereignty or any necessary part of it, if there are 
wanting those natural conjectures of which we have before spoken; 
and that if those conjectures exist to a satisfactory extent, so great a 
space of time is not required ; and that the Civil Law, which prohibits 
a possession being acquired in a certain time [by prescription], does not 
apply to the Sovereignty. 

* Gronoyias treats this as the question -whether any rights belonging to the 
sovereignty can be matter of prescription ; and says that Grotios's opinion, that 
they cannot, is both servile, and dangerous to princes ; for the power of princes has 
in many cases been increased by prescription ; and where the power of the people 
rests upon prescription, if Idngs reftise to allow it, they are involred in seditioiis 
and troubles, like Charles I. in England. 

But Barbeyrac remarks that Grotius is speaking of Usucaption and Prsscrip- 
tion as defined according to the rules of Civil Law ; and that he allows in Art. 2 
of this section, that parts of the sovereignty may be established by usage, even in 
shorter times than the Civil Law requires for prescription. To which we may 
add, that GronoTius in another note ('*), asserts that the people cannot be sup- 
posed to give up its "most just, certain and eternal possession,** namely its sove- 
reign rights; thus going much beyond Grotius on one ^de of the question. W. W. 

Chap. IV.] OP PROPERTY, &c. 91 

It would howeyer be possible that the people, in conferring the 
BOTereignty, should express its will in what way and in what time the 
supreme authority might be lost by disuse ; which will would undoubt- 
edly be to be followed, and could not be infringed, eren by a king 
possessed of the sovereign power; because it pertains, not to the 
soYoreignty itself, but to the mode of holding it; of which difference 
we hare elsewhere spoken. 

Xni. But [though the sorereignty is thus exempt from the Rules 
of the Ciyil Law] those things which are not of the nature of the 
soTereignty, and do not belong to it as natural properties, but can 
either be naturally separated from it, or communicated to others, are 
altogether subject to the rules of Civil Law concerning Usucaption and 
Prescription. So we see that there are subjects who have by prescription 
acquired the Right that there is no appeal fi-om them ; but yet so that 
there is always some mode of carrying the matter to a higher tribunal, 
by petition, or in some other way. For that there should not be in 
any way an appeal from a person, is at ?ariance with the notion of a 
subject: it belongs to a sovereignty or a part of it; and cannot be 
acquired otherwise than according to Natural Law, which regulates 
the BOYereignty. 

XIV. 1 Hence it appears how far we are to receive the doctrine 
which some put forth, that it is always lawful for subjects, if they can, 
to obtain their liberty, that is, Civil liberty; because the authority which 
was gained by force may be taken away by force ; and in regard to that 
which was given voluntarily, they may repent and change their mind. 
[But this goes too far.] For authority gained at first by force may by 
tacit consent receive firm right : and the will exercised, either in the ori- 
ginal institution of a government, or at an after period, may be such 
as to give a right which afterwards does not depend upon the will. 
King Agrippa said to the Zealots who were clamorous for liberty, It 
is now out of season to demand liberty. Tou should have fought 
formerly, not to lose it For submission is a hard lot, and it is honour- 
able to fight in order to avoid it. But when a person has once been 
overcome in such a struggle, if he shake off the yoke, he is no longer 
a lover of liberty, but an insurgent slave. And so Josephus himself 
said; and Cyrus to the king of Armenia. [See.] 

2 But that a long forbearance of the king, such as we have before 
described, may be a sufficient ground of the people obtaining its 
liberty from a presumed relinquishment of imperial authority, is not 
to be doubted. 

XV. But rights which do not involve daily exercise, but are exer- 
cised, once for all, at a convenient time, as the loosing of a pledge; also 
freely used rights*, to which the act exercised is not directly contrary, 

* In the table of contents at the head of the chapter, the subject of this section 
is thus given : RighU which are mertt faculiiUu, cure not lost in any course of 
time; Jura merafaeuUatis are Bights which a man possesses but is not bound to 
exercise. 

92 PRESUMED DERELICTION OF PROPERTY, &c. [Book IT. 

but IB contained in it as a part in the whole ; — as if any one should for 
a hundred years have alliance with one only of his neighbours, when 
he might hare it with others also ; — are not lost, except for the time 
when prohibition or coaction intervenes, and obedience is rendered to 
it with a sufficient signification of consent ; and since this agrees, not 
only with Civil Law, but with natural reason, it will properly have place 
also among the most exalted persons. [Such persons will not attempt 
to control the exercise of those rights.] 

CHAPTER V. 

Of tlie original acquisition of Rights over Persons ; wherein 
of the Rights of Parents; of Marriage; of Corpora^ 
tions ; of Rights over Subjects^ and over Slaves, 

ECT. I. 

, Rights of Parents over chil' 

XVII. 

Rights of a Majority. 

dren. 

XVIII. 

Equality of votes. 

II. 

Rights of Infants. 

XIX. 

Combination of opinions. 

III. 

Youth in the Family. 

XX. 

Rights of the Absent ? 

IV. 

Right of coercing Children, 

XXI. 

Precedence among Equals, 

V. 

Right of selling Children, 

XXII. 

Societies founded on PrO' 

VI. 

Children when out of the 

perty. 

Family. 

XXIII. 

Right of the State over sub- 

VII. 

Parental Power natural 

jects. 

and civil. 

XXIV. 

Right of renouncing one^s 

VIII. 

Right of Husband over 

nation 9 

Wife. 

XXV. 

Right over Exiles 9 

IX. 

Monogamy and Divorce. 

XXVI. 

Right over Adopted Son. 

X. 

Consent of Parents required 

XXVII. 

Right over Slaves. 

by Natural Law 9 

XXVIII 

. Right of life and death over 

XI. 

Marriage with one married. 

them 9 

XII. 

Parents with Children in- 

XXIX. 

Right over the Offspring of 

cestuous. 

slaves. 

XIII. 

Brothers with Sisters, ^c. 

XXX. 

Kinds of Slavery. 

XIV. 

Ulterior Degrees. 

XXXI. 

Right over Voluntary Sub- 

XV. 

Lawful concubinage. 

jects. 

XVI. 

Marriages unlawful but 

XXXII. Right over a Delinquent. 

valid. 

I. rilHERE are rights over persons as well as oyer things ; and these 
I may be acquired by generation, consent, or delinquency. 

Parents acquire a right over their children by generation ; both 
parents, the father and the mother; but if there be a contention 
between the authorities, the authority of the father is preferred, as 
superior in sex. 

II. I In Children, three periods of life are to be distinguished; first 
the period preriouB to years of discretion ; next, the period when they 
have come to years of discretion, but remain part of the parents' 
family ; third, the period when they hav^e gone out of the family. [See 
Arbtotle.] 

In the first period, all the actions of the children are under the 
dominion of the parents ; for he who cannnot gorem himself must 
be goremed by another; and the parents are the natural gOTemors. 
[See EschyluB.] 

2 Tet even in this period, a son or daughter is capable of owner- 
ship oyer things jure gerUium ; but the exercise of this right is impeded 

94 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book H. 

by their iraperfection of reason. They ha?e the right to hare, but not 
to use. Therefore that whaterer becomes the property of the child 
becomes the property of the parents, is not Natural Law, but is an 
institution of the laws of certain peoples ; which also in this matter 
distinguish the father from the mother, and sons not yet emancipated 
from paternal control, from those who are emancipated, and natural 
children from legitimate ; which distinctions are unknown to nature ; 
except the superiority of sex, when the authorities interfere, as we hare 
mentioned. 

m. In the second period, when the reason is matured by time, 
those actions only are subject to the authority of the parents which 
haye some important bearing upon the state of the paternal or mater- 
nal family : for it is equitable that a part should follow the uialogy of 
the whole. In other actions, the children haye, at that period, the 
moral right to act; but are bound, even in those, to endeayour to 
please their parents. But since this obligation is not founded in a 
jural right, like the aboye obligations [at the earlier period], but in 
piety, reyerence, and the duty of repaying the benefits they haye 
receiyed, it does not render yoid what is done in transgression of it ; 
as a donation made contrary to the rules of prudence by the owner is 
not yoid. 

lY. In both these periods, the parents' right of goyeming includes 
also the right of coercing, so far as children require to be compelled 
to their duty or amended. What is to be done concerning greater 
punishments, we shall discuss elsewhere. 

Y. But although the paternal authority so far follows the person 
and position of the father, that it cannot be taken from him and 
transferred to another, yet by the Law of Nature, and where the 
Ciyil Law does not impede, the father may put his son in pledge, and 
if necessary, eyen sell him, when there is no other means of proyiding 
for him ; which appears to haye passed to other nations from an old 
law of the Thebans : as the Theban law came from the Phoenicians, 
and higher still, from the Hebrews [Exod. xxi. 7, And if a man sJumU 
sell his dauglUer to be a maidservant, &c. Romulus made the same 
law. Dionys. Halic. 2, 28. Gronovius.] The same held with the 
Phrygians. Nature is conceiyed to giye a right to do eyery thing 
without which that cannot be obtained which nature demands : [as 
the sustenance of children.] 

YI. In the third period, the son is independent and sui juris, 
the duty of piety and reyerence still remuning, as its cause is per- 
petual. Whence it follows that the acts of kings are not yoid because 
they haye parents aliye. 

YU. Whateyer goos beyond this, proceeds from instituted law, 
which is different in different places. Thus the right which Gk>d 
gaye to the Hebrewsy of making yoid the yow of a son or a daughter, 
not popetaalt but lasted as long as they were part of the father's 

had a pairia potestas oyer sons, eyen those 

CsAP. v.] RIGHTS OVER PERSONS, &c. 95 

who were UiemselTes heads of families, so long as ihey were not eman- 
cipated. This power oyer their children the Ronuuis themselTes 
remark that other nations had not. So Sextus Empiricus, Simplidus. 
[See.] Aristotle notes a similar right among the Persians as tyran- 
nicaL Where we are to distingoish accurately Ciyil Law from Natural 
Law. 

YJIL 1 The right oyer persons which arises ex eofuermh from 
ocmsent, flows either from partnership or from subjection. The most 
natural form of partnership appears in marriage ; but on account of the 
difference of sex, the authority is not common to the two ; the husband 
is the head of the wife (Eph. t. 23) ; namely, in matters relating to the 
marriage union and to the family : for the wife is part of the hus- 
band's family. Thus to determine the place of domicile, is the hus- 
band's oflloe. If any further rights are giren to the husband, as by 
the Hebrew law, the right of disallowing the tows of the wife, and in 
some nations, the right of selling the wife's goods, this is not by Natural 
Law, but by institution. 

The subject requires that we consider the nature of the mar- 
riage union. 

2 Marriage, by Natural Law, we conceire to be such a cohabita- 
tion of the male and female, as places the female under the protection 
and custody of the male ; for such a union we see in some cases in 
mute animals. But in man, as being a rational creature, to this is 
added a tow of fidelity by which the woman binds herself to the 
man. 

IX. 1 Nor does nature appear to require any thing more for the 
existence of marriage. Nor does the divine law seem to hare re- 
quired more, before the propagation of the gospel. For holy men, 
before the law, had more than one wife ; and in the law, precepts aro 
giTcn to those who have more than one ; and the king is commanded 
not to haTO many wiTes, or horses ; whence the Hebrew commentators 
note that the king might haTO eighteen wives or concubines ; and God 
says to Darid that he had giTcn him many wItcs. 

2 And in like manner a process is appointed for him who wishes 
to put away his wife ; and no one is prohibited from marrying her 
who is put away, except him who put her away, and a priest. But 
this liberty of going to another husband is to be so restricted, CTen 
by Natural Law, that no confusion of offspring shall arise. Hence 
the question of pontifical law in Tacitus ; whether after the conception 
and before the birth of the child a woman might lawfuUy marry. By 
the Hebrew law three months must be interposed between the mar- 
riages. 

But the law of Christ refers, as other thinp, so this, to a more 
perfect rule ; and by this, pronounces him who had put away a wife, 
except an adulteress, and him who married one thus put away, as 
guilty of adultery ; and Paul, his Apostle and Interpreter, not only giTOs 
the man a right OTer the body of the woman, which also was the 

96 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book H. 

Natural Law, [see Artemidonis] but also gires the woman right oyer 
the body of the man. So Lactantius says that each party may be 
guilty of adultery. 

3 I know that most hold that, in both these places, Christ did not 
establish a new law, but restored that which Gk>d had established in 
the beginning of things ; and to this opinion they are led by the words 
of Christ, where he speaks of what was in the beginning. But to this 
it may be answered, that doubtless, from that first condition, in which 
God gave one woman to only one man, it does sufficiently appear what is 
best and most agreeable to God ; and hence it follows that such a con- 
dition was always excellent and laudable ; but it does not follow that it 
was sinful to do otherwise ; for where there is no law, there is no trans- 
gression ; and at that time, there was no law, on that point, in existence. 
Thus when God said, either through Adam or through Moses, that the 
marriage union was so close that a man must leare the family of his 
parent to make a now family with his wife, it is nearly the same as 
what is said to Pharaoh's daughter, Psal. xlr. Forget aUo thy peopUf 
and thy Jathef^s house. From this institution of so close a union, it 
appears sufficiently that it is most agreeable to God that that conjunc- 
tion should be perpetual ; but it does not thence follow that God had 
then commanded that the tie should not be loosed on any account. 
But Christ forbade that man should put asunder what God had joined 
together; thus taking, from that condition which is best and most 
agreeable to God, matter most worthy of the new law. 

4 It is certain that in ancient times most nations used both the 
liberty of dlrorce and also plurality of wiyes. Tacitus notices that the 
Germans were, in his time, almost the only barbarians who were con- 
tent with single wives : and that appears constantly in the histories of 
the Persians and the Indians. Among the Egyptians, the priests alone 
had only one wife. In Greece, Cecrops was the first who gare one 
wife to one husband. And if any peoples had a more continent prac- 
tice, as the Romans always abstained from two wires, and long from 
divorce, they are to be praised as having made an advance to what was 
best. Hence also the wife of the Flamen Dialis, the priestess of Ju- 
piter, could not have her marriage dissolved but by death. Tet still 
it does not follow that they sinned, who did otherwise before the pro- 
mulgation of the Gospel. 

X. I Lot us now see what marriages are valid by Natural Law: 
in deciding which, we are to recollect that not everything which is 
contrary to the Law of Nature [that is to the moral nature of man] 
is void by Natural Law ; as appears by the example of a prodigal 
donation : [which is contrary to the natural virtue of prudence, and 
yet valid.] Those acts only are invalid, in which there is wanting a 
principle giving validity to the act, or in which the vice continues in 
its effect. The Principle, both here and in other human acts in which 
Right is created, is, that which we have called a moral Faculty or jural 
claim, joined with a sufficient Will. 

Ciup. v.] RiailTS OVER PERSONS, &c. 97 

What sort of will is sufficient to create a Right, will be better 
treated farther on, where we speak of promises in general. With 
regard to the jaral claim, a question arises concerning the consent of 
parents, which some require as naturally requisite to the validity of 
marriage. But in this they are wrong ; for the arguments which they 
adduce only prove how suitable it is to the duty of sons to obtain the 
consent of their parents : which we concede without hesitation, with 
this limitation only, that the will of the parents be not manifestly 
unjust. For if sons owe in all thinp a reverence to parents, they do 
so especially in a matter which has a national bearing, as is the case 
with marriage. But this does not shew that the right which we call 
a jural claim is not possessed by the son. For he who marries a wife 
ought to be of mature age; and he goes out of the family, so that in 
this matter ho is not subjected to the family government. And the 
duty of reverence alone does not make null an act which is contrary 
to it. 

2 The rule established by the Romans and others, that certain 
marriages, because the consent of the father is wanting, shall be 
void, is not a rule of Natural Law, but depends on tho will of the 
lawgiver. For under the same rule, the mother does not make the 
marriage void by her dissent ; though the children by nature owe obedi- 
ence to her; nor does the father, afler his son is emancipated ; and if 
the father be still under tho authority of his father, both the father 
and the grandfather must consent to the nuptials of the son, whilo for 
the daughter, the authority of the grandfather is sufficient ; which dif- 
ferences, unknown to Natural Law, shew sufficiently that these rules 
come from the Civil Law. 

3 In the Scripture we see indeed that pious men, and much more 
women, (whose modesty makes it suitable for them to act on another^s 
will in this matter ; to which view also pertains what is said 1 Ck>r. 
Til. 38, He theUgiveth her in marriage, ^c.) havo, in contracting matri- 
mony, conformed to the authority of their parents. Yet Esau's mar- 
riage [who took his wives of the daughters of Canaan, in spite of his 
father^s disapprobation. Gen. zzviii. 8 ; xxxvi. 2] is not pronounced 
void, or his children illegitimate. So Quintilian, looking at strict 
Natural Law. [See.] 

XI. Marriage with a woman already married to another, is doubt- 
less void by Natural Law, except her former husband havo dismissed 
her ; for so long his authority over her continues. It is void because 
the jural claim is wanting, being taken away by the former marriage, 
and the whole effect [of the second marriage] is vicious. Every act 
connected with it is a trespass on what belongs to another. 

On the other hand, by the law of Christ, marriage with him who is 
tho husband of another woman is void, on account of the right which 
Christ has given a virtuous wife over her husband. 

XIL 1 The question concerning the marriage of those who are 
connected by blood or affinity is sufficiently grave, and not unf^ 

H 

98 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book H. 

qaently stirrod with great yehemence. For if any ono tries to assign 
certain and natural causes why such unions, in the cases in which they 
are forbidden by law or by usage, are unlawful, ho will find that that 
18 difficult, and indeed impossible. For the reasons giren by Plutarch 
and Augustine [see], that social ties are to be extended more widely 
by diffusing our relationships, is not of such weight that what is done 
against it can be deemed Yoid or unlawful. For that which is the 
less useful of two courses, is not thereby forthwith unlawfuL Add^ 
that it may happen that whateyer the amount of utility on this side be, 
it may be outweighed by a greater utility on the other side ; and that, 
not only in the case of exception mentioned in the Hebrew Law, when 
a man dies without offspring, (which is of the same kind as the rule 
about heiresses in the Hebrew and Attic law,) namely to presenre the 
property of the family in the family ; but also in many other casesy 
which occur or may be imagined. 

2 From this general remark, I except the union of parents of any 
degree with their children; for, if I am not deceiyed, the reason 
why such unions are unlawful is apparent. For the husband, who 
is the superior by the law of matrimony, could not pay to his mother 
(being his wife) the reyerence which nature requires; nor could a 
daughter to a father; for though she is inferior in the marriage union, 
yet the marriage introduces a companionship which excludes filial 
reyerence. Paulus the Jurist says that Natural Law and modesty are 
to be regarded in contracting marriage, and adds, that it is against 
modesty for one to haye his own daughter to wife. Such marriages, 
then, are both unlawful, and also yoid, because the yice has a per- 
petual effect. 

3 Nor need we be moyed by the argument of Diogenes and Ghry. 
sippus, taken from cocks and hens, and other animals ; by which they 
try to proye that such unions are not against Natural Law. For, as 
we haye said in the beginning of this Book, it is enough, if anything 
is contrary to human nature, to proye it unlawfuL And Incest between 
ascending and descending degrees is so. So Paulus, Xenophon, 
ItOchacl Ephcsius, Hippodamus, Lucan, Die Prusseensis. 

4 And here we cannot but wonder at the reasoning of Socrates 
in Xenophon, who finds nothing to blame in such marriages but the 
disparity of years, whence must follow either barrenness, or an ill-formed 
progeny. If this reason alone were the obstacle, certainly such unions 
would be neither unlawful nor yoid ; any more than between other 
persons whose ages are as different as those of parents and their chiU 
dren usually are. 

5 We are rather to consider whether, in men not deprayed by edu* 
cation, there is not, besides the reason giyen by the understanding, a 
certain horror of such union with parents and of&pring, residing in the 
affections thcmsclyes; since eyen some animals haye such a horror. 
So many haye thought: Arnobius; Aristotle of the camel, and the 
Scythian horse ; Oppian ; Seneca in the Hippolytus. 

CflAP. v.] BIGHTS OVER PERSONS, &c. 99 

Xlli. 1 We mu8t next coDsider the question concerning the 
degrees of affinity, and the degrees of consanguinity in a transyerse 
line ; especially those which are ezproBsly mentioned, Leyit. z?iii. For 
though we should grant that these interdicts do not proceed from the 
mere Law of Nature, yet in yirtue of the Diyine precept, these unions 
may pass among foihidden things. And that the precept is one which 
does not bind the Hebrews only, but all men, seems to be collected 
from the words of God, Lev. xviil. 24, 25, 27, Do not ye pollute your- 

2 For if the Canaanites and their neighbours sinned in doing such 
things, it follows that some law of God on that subject must have 
gone before; and as this is not merely a Natural Law, it remains that 
it was from God, either given to those nations peculiarly, (which is 
less probable, nor do the words carry that meaning,) or to the human 
race ; either at the Creation, or at the restoration of things after the 
Deluge. And such laws, which wore given to the whole human race, 
were not, it appears, abrogated by Christ ; but those laws only which 
separated the Jews from other nations. Add to this, that Paul speaks 
of the marriage of a man with his father's wife as something shock- 
ing, though there is no special precept of Christ on that subject ; nor 
does he use any other argument than that such a union is held to be 
hnpuro even by the heathen. And that it is so appears in ancient 
authors. So Charondas ; Lysias ; Cicero ; Plutarch ; Virgil. And if this 
common opinion was not drawn from a dictate of nature, it follows 
that it descends from an old tradition originating in a divine precept. 

3 *The ancient Hebrews, who are not to be thought slightly of as 
commentators on this part of the divine law, and especially Maimonides, 
the greatest of them, says that there are two reasons for these laws, 
given Lev. zviii., concerning marriage : First, a natural modesty which 
does not permit persons to mingle with their own offspring, either in 
themselves, or in persons closely connected by blood or by marriage 
union : Second, lest the daily and confidential intercourse of certain 
persons should give occasion to sexual union, if such union could bo 
confirmed by marriage. Which two causes if we judiciously apply to 
the laws given in Leviticus, it will easily appear that in the first trans- 
verse degree of blood, (brothers and sisters,) on account of the very 
recent image of the parents in the children, the first cause holds, as 
proceeding from that which, if nature does not command, at least she 
points out as more becoming : as there are many such things, which 
make the matter of divine and human laws. 

4 Hence the Hebrews say that in the direct line the degrees not 
named in the law are comprehended, from the manifest parity of 
reason. These degrees they thus reckon : mother's mother ; mother's 
father's mother; father's mother; father's father's mother; father's 
father^s wife ; mother's father^s wife ; son's daughter-in-law ; son's 

* For the reasoDS against marriages of near relations, see Elements of Morality, 
749 and 980. 

H2 

100 OP THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book IL 

son's daughter-in-law; danghtcr's daughteivin-law ; son's daughtei'g 
daaghtor; son's son's daughter; daughter's daughter's daughter; 
daughter's son's daughter; wife's son's daughter's daughter; wife's 
daughter's daughter's daughter; wife's father's mother's mother ; wife's 
mother's father's mother : which the Romans express in a different 
way. And so in infinitum if it could be necessary. 

5 These laws, and the law against the marriage of brother and 
sister, the Hebrews think were giren to Adam at the same time with 
the laws, to worship God, not to shed blood, to worship no false gods» 
not to take what is another's. But they think that the laws con- 
cerning the conjugal union were given so that they should not be in 
force till the human race was to a certain extent multiplied ; which 
could not take place at first without the marriage of brothers and 
idsters. Nor do they think it any objection to this account, that it is 
not giyen in the narration of Moses ; for he held it sufficient to indi- 
cate this tacitly, by condemning other nations on that ground : For 
that there are many things in the Law which are not told in the 
order of time, but as occasion offers ; whence that noted maxim of the 
Hebrews, that in the Law there is no before and after. 

6 On the union of brothers and sisters, see Michael Ephesins^ 
Diodorus Siculus, Dio Prusoeensis, Beneca, Plato. 

7 All which passages shew the ancient opinion of a dirine law 
against such marriages ; whence we see they are called ne/cu. 

XIV. 1 These manifest expressions shew what a difference there 
is between these and remoter degrees. For to marry a father's sister 
is forbidden; but a brother^s daughter, who is in the same degree, 
it is not forbidden to marry; and there are examples of it among 
the Hebrews. So this was done at Rome and at Athens : See Tacitus, 
Isaous, Plutarch. The Hebrews giro a reason, that young men usually 
frequent the houses of their grandfathers and grandmothers, or eren 
lire in them alonc^ with their aunts; but they have not the same 
access to the houses of their brothers, nor so much freedom there. 
If we accept this, as indeed it seems to be reasonable, we must con- 
fess that the law of not marrying relations in the right line, and 
sisters, since the human race was multiplied, is perpetual ; and com- 
mon to all men, as depending on natural decency ; so that whaterer 
is done against this law is roid on account of the abiding vice 
of condition : but that the other laws are not so ; but contain rather 
a caution than a law, which caution may also be applied in other 
ways. 

2 Certainly in the ancient (so called) Apostolical Canons, he 
who married two sisters successiyely, or his niece (the daughter of 
his brother or sister) was only excluded from the clerical office. Nor 
is it difficult to answer what was said concerning the sin imputed to 
the Canaanitos and the neighbouring peoples. For the uniYersal 
terms may be restricted to the principal heads : the pollutions of the 
Canaanites may be those which are mentioned Lev. xyili. 22, 23; 

Chap. V.] RIGHTS OVER PERSONS, &c. 101 

and the other laws, concerning incest, are added as an outwork to 
these. 

That the expressions cannot be understood of every part, we may 
see by the prohibition of having to wife at the same time two sisters, 
which we cannot suppose was a universal rule, since Jacob trans- 
gressed it. So Amram the father of Moses married his aunt, and 
among the Greeks, Diomedes married his mother's sister ; Iphidamas, 
the same ; Alcinus, his brother's daughter. 

3 But the early Christians did well, who spontaneously observed, 
not only those Laws which were given as conmion to all, but also those 
peculiarly given to the Hebrew people ; and even extended their mo- 
desty to other ulterior limits, so as to surpass the Hebrews in this vir- 
tue, as in other things. And it appears from the Canons that this was ' 
done. So Augustine says, that what was not forbidden, as marriage of 
cousins, was avoided, as approaching forbidden ground. And this 
feeling was followed by the laws. Thcodosius forbade the marriage of 
cousins, and Ambrose praised him for doing so. 

4 But it is to be understood that what is forbidden by human law 
is not necessarily void when it is done, except the Law so directs. The 
Canon lx. of Seville says, if any one after the death of his wife shall 
marry her sister, he shall be excluded from the Communion five years; 
thus shewing that the tie of matrimony remains. And as we have said, 
in the Apostolical Canons, he who married two sisters, or a niece, was 
only excluded from the Clergy. 

XV. 1 To proceed to other matters, we may observe that, in 
some cases, concubinage is a true and valid marriage, although it be 
deprived of some of the peculiar efiects of the Civil Law, and even 
lose some of its natural effects by the impediment of the Civil Law. 
For example, the union of a slave with a maid servant is, by the Roman 
Law, cohabitation, not marriage; but yet, in such a union, there is 
nothing wanting to the nature of marriage, which accordingly, in the 
old Canons, is called yafios, marriage. And so the union between a 
free man and a female slave is called concubinage, not marriage; 
and this name was afterwards extended to other persons of unequal 
quality ; as at Athens, to a union between a citizen and a foreigner. 
So in Virgil, Aristophanes, iElian, the child of a foreign mother by 
a citizen is called nothust illegitimate. [See.] 

2 But as in a state of nature, such unions as we have spoken of 
might be true marriage, if the woman was under mai*ital custody, 
and had vowed fidelity to the husband; so also in the state of the 
Christian Law, a union between a slave and a male servant, or between 
a free man and a female slave, will be a true marriage ; much more a 
union between a citizen and a foreigner, or a senator and a freed 
woman ; if the conditions which are necessary by instituted Christian 
Law are present, namely, the indissoluble conjunction of one man and 
one woman ; although some effects of the Civil Law may not follow 
tlus union, or some which would spontaneously follow may be impeded. 

102 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book U. 

In this senso arc to be understood the words of the first Council of 
Toledo : He who, not having a wife, has a caneubirUj is not to be r^eeted 
Jrom the Communion; so only that he be content with the society of one 
woman^ whether wife or concubine. Add to this, the passage in the Cle- 
mentine Constitutions. So Theodosius and Yalentinian call certain 
cases of concubinage unequal marriages, and say that a charge of 
adultery may arise out of them. 

XYI. 1 And eyen if human Law forbid marriages between certain 
persons, it does not follow that the marriage is roid, if it be really 
contracted. For these are two different operations, to prohibit, and to 
annul what is done. For prohibition may exert its force by a penalty 
either express or arbitrary. TJlpian calls this kind of Laws imperfect, 
which forbid a thing to be done, but do not rescind it if done. Such 
was the Cincian Law. 

2 Afterwards there was a law of Theodosius made, that if the law 
had only prohibited a thing, and had not specially said that what was 
done in contradiction of it was Toid, yet that the thing so done was 
null, Toid, and of no effect ; that is, if the matter came into a court 
of justice. But this was not in rirtue of the prohibition alone, but of 
the new Law ; and such a rule other nations are not bound to follow. 
For often the indecency in the act is greater than in the subsequent 
effect ; and often the inconycniences which follow the rescinding of 
the act are greater than the indecency or inconyonience of the act 
itself. 

XVn. Besides marriage, the most natural of partnerships, there are 
others, both priyate and public ; and these latter, either partnerships in 
populum or ex populis. All partnerships hayo this in common, that in 
thoso matters for which the partnership was instituted, the whole 
body, and the majority as representing the whole, bind the special 
members of the partnership. For it must be supposed to haye been 
the intention of those who united to make the society, that there 
should be some way of promoting business ; and it is manifestly unjust 
that the greater part should follow the less ; wherefore by Natural 
Law, not taking into account pacts and laws which prescribe a form 
for conducting business, the majority has a right to act for the whole. 
So Thucydides, Appian, Dionysius Halicamassensis, Aristotle, CurtiuSy 
Prudcntius, Xenophon. [See.] 

XVIII. If the opinions are equally dirided, nothing must be 
done ; for then there is not so much power of moyement as is requisite 
for a change. And for this reason, if the opinions of the judges as 
equally diyided, the aceused^is acquitted; by what the Greeks C9 
Ifinerya's TOte. [See iBseiiyliu and JBrtjj|||||3.....fla too. the pe^ 
in pmrowion keeps the pimiM|gHfe|jMHH|tj^^ 

ZE ^ ^^^^^^^^^Hiiitio be \^. 

Chap. V.] RIGHTS OVER PERSONS, kc. 103 

of which one contains a part of another ; and these latter are to he 
conjoined in the point in which they agree. Thus if one party of the 
judges would fine a man in 20 pounds, and one in 10, they are to be 
joined, as to the 10, against the party which would acquit. But those 
who TOte for the death of the accused, and those who Tote for his exile, 
are not to be conjoined ; for death does not include exile. But also 
those that acquit must not be joined with those who vote for exile; 
because although they agree not to put the accused to death, that is 
not precisely what the vote expresses, but is deduced from it by a 
consequence, for he who exiles does not acquit. Whereupon Pliny^ 
when something of this kind had happened in the senate, said that 
the dirersity of opinions was so great that they must be taken singly; 
and that it made little difference that several rejected the same thing, 
if they could not all accept the same thing. So Polybius notes that 
Postumius the Prsetor took an unfair course with regard to the GreekSy 
when he took the Totes, and put together those who condemned them 
to slarery, and those who thought they should be kept for a limited 
time, against those who absolyed them. So other cases in Gellius and 
in Quintilian. 

XX. This also is to be added, that if any members are absent, or 
otherwise preyented from using their vote, their right deyolyes on 
those who are present. [See Seneca.] 

XXI. The natural order of precedence in a partnership is the 
order in which the members haye come into it. So the eldest brother 
always retains his superior priyileges. See Aristotle. So Theodosius 
and Valens, of precedence between the Consuls. So in the general 
association of Christian kings and nations, formerly those had prece- 
dence in the councils who had first professed Christianity. 

XXn. It is to be added howeyer, that when a partnership has its 
foundation in property which all do not equally share in ; as if, in an 
inheritance or other estate, one person has a half, one a third, one a 
fourth ; then, not only is the order of precedence to follow the order 
of shares, but also the weight of the yotcs must be proportional to 
the shares. And as this is the rule of natural equity, so is it also 
the rule of the Roman Law. So Strabo mentions a league between 
Cibyra and those neighbouring cities, in which Cibyra had two yotcs, 
(as contributing more,) the others, one each. And again, in Lycia, 
he says there were 23 cities of which some had 3 votes, some, 2, some, 
one only, and bore the burthens in the same proportion. But, as 
Aristotle says, this is right, if the partnership be formed for the sake 
of possession. 

XXIII. An association in which many fathers of families coalesce 
into one people and state, gives the greatest right to the body over its 
parts ; for this is the most perfect society ; nor is there any external 
act of man which either does not regard this society "of itself, or may 
not regard it from circumstances. It may, as Aristotle says, make 
laws on all subjects. 

104 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION OF [Book IL 

XXIV. 1 It is often oskod, whether citizens may quit the State 
without leave obtained. We know that there are peoples where this 
is not permitted, as the Muscovites ; nor do we deny that civil society 
may be formed on such a pact, and that usage may take the force of a 
pact. By the Roman Laws, at least in their later forms, a person was 
allowed to remove his domicile ; but he who had done so, was still 
bound by the obligations of the town to which he belonged. Those who 
were under such rule remained within the limits of the Roman em- 
pire, and the rule referred specially to the interests of the tributary 
collection. 

2 But the question for us is. What ought to be the rule by 
Natural Law, if no agreement has been made; and this, as relates, not 
to any part only, but the whole of the state or the whole body of a 
sovereign empire. And that the subjects may not depart in lai^ 
bodies, is evident enough from the necessity of the end, which gives a 
right in moral matters ; for if that were permitted, Ciril Society could 
no longer subsist. With regard to the emigration of individuals, the case 
is different ; as it is one thing to take water out of a river in a vessel, 
another thing to turn off a part of the river by a side cut. Some hold 
that each ought to be at liberty to choose his own city: soTryphoninus; 
Cicero. But here the rule of natural equity is to be observed, which 
the Romans followed in winding up the affairs of private societies ; 
that it should not be done, if the interests of the society forbade : That 
is to be done, said Proculus, not which is the interest of one member, 
but of the whole society. And it is for the interest of the society 
that a citizen should not leave the country, if the country be greatly 
in debt, except the citizen is prepared to pay his part ; and again, if 
the country have undertaken war, relying upon its population, espe- 
cially if a siege be likely; except that citizen be wilHng to find a 
substitute to take his place in defending the country. 

3 Except in these cases, it is to be supposed that a people agree 
to the free departure of citizens ; for they derive advantages from it 
in other ways. 

XXV. The State has no authority oTer exiles. So say the Hera* 
clidss in Euripides ; so the son of Alcibiades in Isocrates. 

The association of several peoples, either by themselves or by their 
heads, is a League : and we shall hereafter treat of such, when we come 
to obligations by compact. 

XXVI. [Next of Subjection by Consent, as a kind of Association.] 
Subjection by consent is either private or public. Private subjec- 
tion by consent may be manifold, as there are many kinds of [private] 
government. The noblest species of this is Arrogatiot by which a per- 
son who is his own master, gives himself into the family of another, to 
be subject to him, in the same manner that a son of mature age is sub- 
ject to a father. But a father cannot give his son to another, in such 
a manner that the paternal power passes fully to him, and that he 
should discharge the office of father ; for this, nature docs not suffer- 

C^AP. v.] RIGHTS OVER PERSONS, Sic. 105 

But he may commend his son to another, and give him to the other 
to be brought up as an adopted son. 

XXYU. 1 The most ignoble species of subjection is that in which 
a person giyes himself into perfect slavery ; as those among the Ger« 
mans who played the last throw of the dice for their own liberty, as 
Tacitus says. So Dio Prusseensis. 

2 That is perfect slavery, when a man gives his whole labour for 
ever for the sustenance and other necessaries of life. If the matter is 
thus taken in natural terms, there is nothing shocking in this ; for the 
perpetual obligation to labour is compensated by the perpetual cer- 
tainty of food ; which often those have not who work for daily wages. 
SeeEubulus; Posidonius. 

XXVni. Masters have not over slaves the power of life and 
death, (I speak of plenary and internal jurisdiction,) nor can any one 
lawfully put a man to death, except he have committed a capital 
offense. But by the laws of some peoples, the master, if for any cause 
he has killed his slave, meets with impunity, as absolute kings do. 
Seneca before us had used this comparison. And yet undoubtedly 
a slave may receive a Wrong from his master, as Seneca also affirms ; 
but impunity is not properly called a Right. The like right Solon gave 
parents over children, as did the old Law of Rome. See Sextus Empi- 
ricus and Dio. 

XXIX. 1 The question concerning those who are bom slaves, is 
more difficult. By the Roman Law, and by the Law of Nations 
respecting captives, as we shall explain elsewhere, as in beasts, so in 
men of servile condition, the offspring follows the mother; which 
however is not sufficiently congruous to Natural Law, when the father 
may be known by sufficient evidence. For since in dumb animals the 
father, no less than the mother, shares the care of the offspring, we 
have, in this, an evidence that the progeny belongs to both. And thus, 
if the Civil Law had been silent on this point, the progeny would 
follow the father no less than the mother. Let us suppose then, to 
make the difficulty less, that both the parents are in slavery ; and let 
us see whether the offspring would be of servile condition by Natural 
Law. Certainly if there were no other means of bringing up the 
offspring, the parents might give their future progeny along with them- 
selves into slavery : since on such grounds, parents may even sell their 
children. 

2 But since this Right by Natural Law flows from necessity only, 
it is not the right of the parents, in any other case, to give their chil- 
dren into slavery. And therefore the right of the owners over the 
progeny of slaves arises, in this case, from their supplying sustenance 
and the other necessaries of life. And thus, when the children bom of 
slaves are to be supported for a long time, and the subsequent labour 
corresponds to the aliment afterwards supplied, it is not lawful for 
those thus bom to escape slavery. 

But if the craelty of the owner be extreme, it is a probable opinion 

106 OF THE ORIGINAL ACQUISITION, &c. [Book II. 

that even those who hare giren themselres into slayery may seek 
refuge in flight For what the Apostles and the ancient Canons prescribe 
to slaves, that they are not to withdraw themselyes from their masters, 
is a general rule only, and deliyered in opposition to the error of those 
who rejected all subjection both priyate and public, as contrary to 
Christian liberty. 

XXX. Besides complete slavery, of which we have now spoken, 
there are imperfect kinds of slavery ; as those which are for a time ; 
or under a condition ; or to perform certain work. Such is the state 
of libertij freedmen ; stcUu liberarum*, manumitted by testament under 
a pendent condition ; nexi, slaves for debt ; cuidictij slaves by sentence 
of a judge ; cucripti gUbce, sorfe conveyed with the land ; and the slavery 
among the Hebrews for seven years, and that which lasted till the 
Jubilee. So the Peneske of Thessaly; so what are called morttuB 
manuSf villein tenants; and finally, mercenaries; which differences 
depend on law or on compacts. Also by the Natural Law the condition 
of those, one of whose parents is of free and the other of servile con« 
dition, seems to be an imperfect slavery, for the reasons given above. 

XXXI. That is public subjection, in which a people gives itself 
into subjection to one man, or to many, or to another people. We 
have above given the formula of such a subjection, in the case of Capua. 
(B. I. c. iii. § viii.) So the formula used in the case of the Collatine 
people : See Livy : to which Plautus alludes. The Persians call this 
presenting earth and water. There are other modes of public subjection 
less perfect, either as to the mode of possessing such subjects, or as to 
the plenitude of authority ; the degrees of which may be sought in 
what we have said above (B. i. c. iii.). 

XXXn. Subjection from delict or delinquency, may arise without 
preceding consent, when he who has deserved to lose his liberty is 
reduced by force into the power of him who has a right to purush 
him. Who has the right to punish, we shall hereafter see. (B. n. 
c. XX. § iii.) And in this way, not only may individuals be reduced 
into private subjection; (as at Rome those who did not appear to 
answer to a charge of delict, and those who had made a false return 
of their property ; and afterwards, women who had married the slave 
of another master.) but also peoples might be reduced into public 
subjection for a public delict. There is this difference, that the slavery 
of a people is of itself perpetual, because the succession of parts does 
not prevent its continuing to be one people. But the slavery of indi- 
viduals does not go beyond the person; because the consequences 
of the crime follow the criminaL But both kinds of slavery, public 
and private, may be penal, whether it be perfect or imperfect, accord- 
ing to the nature of the crime and the punishment. 

Of the slavery both private and public which arises from the insti- 
tuted LsiW of Nations, we shall have an opportunity of speaking hero* 
after, when we come to the effects of war. (B. ni. c. vii.) 

* I have taken Gronoriiu*! erpUnations of these various Idndt of imperfect 
darery. W.W. 

CHAPTER VL 

Of acquisition derivative, hy the act of man; and herein of 
the alienation of the Sovereignty y and of its accompani- 
ments. 

Sect. L Requisites for alienation in 
the Giver. 
IT. In the Receiver. 
III. Political authority may be 

alienated, 
lY . Not against the will of a part. 
V. Nor except in great necessity. 
VI. The case of necessity. 
y II. Local authority alienable. 
yill. May parts of the empire be 
■alienated 9 

IX. Enfeoffment and Pledge. 

X. Alienation of minor Juris- 
diction. 

XI. People^ s Patrimony not alien- 
able, 

XII. But the Income ofthePatri^ 
mony? 

XIII. May parts of the Patrimony 
be pledged $ 

XIV. Testaments are by Natural 
Law. 

L 1 rpHINGS become ours by deriyatire acquisition, by the act of 
I man, or by the act of the law. That those who are the owners 
of things may transfer the ownership, either the whole or in part, is a 
part of NatundLaw, when ownership has been introduced: for this is 
a part of the nature of plenary ownership. So Aristotle. 

But two things are to be noticed; one, in the giver, one, in the 
receirer. In the giver an internal act of the will does not suffice ; but 
there are required besides, either words or external acts; because a 
mere internal act, as we have said elsewhere, is not congruous to the 
nature of human society. 

2 That traction (delivery) also is required, is a matter of Civil 
Law; which, because it is received by many nations, is improperly 
called a part of Jua Oentium. So in other places we find the usage to 
be, that a declaration before the people or the magistrate, or a regis- 
try of the gift, is required ; which it is quite certain are matters of the 
Civil Law. 

An act of the will expressed by a sign must be understood to mean, 
of a rational will. 

U. On* the other side, in him to whom the thing is given, there ia 
required, setting aside the Civil Law, by Natural Law, the will of 
accepting, with its sign : which will ordinarily follow the giving ; but 
may precede it; as for instance if the receiver had asked that the 
thing be given, or granted : for such a will is supposed to continue to 
exist, except some change appear. 

The other things which are required for the conveyance of a right 
and for acceptance of it, and how each may be done, we shall treat of 
below, in the Chapter on Promises : for the right of alienating and 
of promising are the same, at least by Natural Law. 

•See E.M. 699. 

108 OP ACQUISITION DERIVATIVE, &c. [Book II. 

IIL As other things may be alicnatod, so may Sovereign autho- 
rity, by him who is really the owner, that is, as we hare said abore 
(i. iii. § xii.), by the king, if the authority is patrimonial : otherwise, by 
the people, but with the consent of the king ; because ho too has his 
right, as tenant for life, which is not to be taken away against his will. 
And so much of the whole soYoreign authority. 

IV. In the alienation of a part of the sovereignty, it is also re- 
quired that the part which is to be alienated consent to the act. For 
those who unite to form a State, contract a certain perpetual and 
immortal society, in virtue of their being integrant parts of the 
same ; whence it follows that these parts are not under the body in 
such a way as the parts of a natural body, which cannot live without 
the life of the body, and therefore may rightly be cut away for the 
utility of the body. The body of which we speak is of another kind, 
namely a voluntary combination. And thus its right over its parts is 
to be measured by its primeval will; and this must not be supposed 
to have been such that the body should have the right of cutting 
off parts from itself, and giving them into the authority of another. 

V. And in like manner on the other hand, a part has not a right 
to withdraw from the body, except evidently it cannot otherwise pre- 
serve itself : for, as we have said, in every thing of human institution 
the case of extreme necessity is to be excepted, which reduces the matter 
to mere Natural Law. So Augustine. So in the oath of the Oroeks, 
in which those who had submitted to the Persians were devoted to 
severe punishment, with the reservation. Except they had been plainly 
compelled, 

VI. And hence it may bo sufficiently understood, why, in this 
matter, the part has a greater right to protect itself than the body has 
over a part*; because the part uses a right which it had before the 
society was formed, and the body does not. Nor must any one say 
to me that the sovereignty resides in the body as an attribute iu its 
subject, and therefore may be alienated by it as ownership may. For it 
resides in the body as in an adequate subject, not divisible into seve- 
ral bodies, as the soul or life resides in perfect bodies. But the 
necessity which reduces the thing to Natural Law cannot have place 
with regard to the body : for in Natural Law, some things are com- 
prehended, as consuming a thing by eating, and retaining possession 
of a thing, which are natural operations ; but not alienation, which is 
introduced by the act of man, and takes its measure from that. 

VII. But sovereignty over a locality, that is, a part of the terri- 
tory, say an uninhabited or deserted parfc, may, so far as I see, be alien- 
ated by a free people, or by the king with the consent of the people. 
For a part of the people, because it has free will, has also the right of 

* Gronovius, in his Notes, is very impatient of this discussion of Grotius, and 
nayi that it tends to make the claims to kini^doms eternal : as when the French 
-ienj that Francis the First, as a captive, coald cede to Charles the Fifth the king- 
dom of Naples, the dukedom of SaTOj, and the Belgian provinces. 

Chap. VI.] OP ACQUISITION DERIVATIVE, &c. 109 

refusing consent ; but the territory, both the whole and its parts, are 
common to the people, pro indivisOf as a whole, and therefore subject 
to its will. But if a people cannot alienate the sovereignty of a part 
of the people, as we have said, much less can a king, though haying 
full SOT ereignty, but not in a full manner, according to the distinction 
explained above. 

Vin. Wherefore we cannot agree with jurists who, to the rule of 
not alienating the parts of the empire, add two exceptions, public 
utility, and necessity ; except in this sense, that when the common 
utility of the body and of the part is the same, the consent both of 
the people and of the part may seem, eyen by a silence of no long time, 
to be given ; and more easily still, if necessity appear. But when the 
will, either of the body or of a part, is manifestly on the contrary side, 
nothing ought to be miderstood as done, except, as we have said, when 
a part is compelled to secede from the body. 

IX. Under alienation is rightly comprehended also infeudatiofh 
giving the kingdom as a fiof to a superior, with the power of taking 
possession of it if the holder commit felony, or if his family fail*. 
And hence we see that by most peoples, infeudations, as well as 
alienations, are held void when made by the kings without consulting 
the people. The consent of the people is understood to be given, 
whether it meet as a whole, which was formerly the usage among the 
Germans and Gauls, or by certain representatives of the integrant 
parts, invested with sufficient powers. For what we do by others we 
do ourselves. Nor can a part of the empire be oppignerated or put in 
pawn, except with similar consent ; not only because oppigneration is 
commonly followed by alienation, but also, because the king is bound 
to the people to exercise the sovereign authority himself, and the 
people is bound to its parts to preserve this exercise in its integrity ; 
for which purpose the members of the civil society came together. 

X. To concede subordinate civil functions to persons, even with 
the right of hereditary succession, is what a people may do ; since such 
concessions do not trench upon the integrity of the body politic and 
the sovereignty. But the king cannot do this without consulting the 
people, if we confine ourselves within the limits of Natural Law : for 
a temporary right, such as that of an elective or hereditary king, can 
only have temporary effects. But this right may be given to kings, 
not only by express consent, but by tacit assent introduced by usage, 
such as we now see commonly prevail. And so we perpetually read 
in history of the Bdedian and Persian kings giving towns or provinces 
as possessions to be held for ever. 

XI. The patrimony of a people, the produce of which is destined 
to support the burthens of the republic or of the royal dignity, may not 
be alienated by kings, neither in the whole nor in part. For in this 
too they have only a life interest. Nor do I admit the exception, If it 

* As king John of England executed an infeudation of his kingdom to the 
Pope. Oronov, 

110 OP ACQUISITION DERIVATIVE, &c. [Book U. 

be a thing of small amount ; for of what is not mine, I may not alien- 
ate even a small part. But in things of small amount, the consent of 
the people may be presumed from its knowledge and silence, rather 
than in great matters. In which sense we may also apply what wo 
have said above on the subject of alienating the parts of the sove- 
reignty, to the case of the public patrimony ; and the more, inasmuch 
as a matter of smaller amount is here inrolved : for the patrimony is 
constituted [not on its own account but] for the sake of the State. 

XII. But many persons run into error by confounding the annual 
income of the patrimony with the patrimony itself. Thus the right 
to alluvial accession generally belongs to the patrimony ; the things 
alluvially added are part of income ; the right of receiving the taxes 
is in the patrimony ; the annual produce of the taxes is income ; the 
right of confiscation is in the patrimony ; the property confiscated is 
income. 

XTII. But the parts of the patrimony may be oppignerated, for 
cause arising, by kings who have plenary sovereignty; that is who 
have the right, for cause arising, of imposing new taxes. As the people 
is bound to pay taxes imposed for good cause, so is it to loose a thing 
pawned for good cause : for such loosing of a thing pawned Is a sort of 
tax. And the patrimony of the people is [in this case] pledged to the 
king for the debts of the people. And I may oppignerate things 
pledged to me. 

What we have hitherto said holds, except there be a law, besides 
the general condition of sovereignty, either enlai^ng or contracting 
the authority of the people or of the king. 

XIV. 1 Also we must observe that when we speak of alienation, 
we include, in that class of processes, testamentary dispositions. For 
though a testament, like other acts, may assume a certain form by the 
Civil Law ; yet its substance has a close affinity with ownership, and 
thus, is under Natural Law. For I may alienate my possession, not 
only simply, but also under condition ; not only irrevocably, but revo- 
cably, and even retaining in the mean time possession and the fullest 
power of enjoying it. But alienation under condition, namely the con- 
dition of my death, and revocable before that event, while I retain 
possession and enjoyment in the mean time, is a Testament. So Plu- 
tarch, speaking of Solon's granting the Athenians permission to make 
a will, adds, in order that every one might have full ownership over 
his own property. So Quintilian. So Abraham if he had died with- 
out children, would have left his property to Eliczer. Oen. xv. 2. 

2 The law that in some places strangers are not allowed to mako 
Wills, is not a part of Jus gentium^ but of the peculiar law of such 
States; and if I am not mistaken, proceeding from that period when 
strangers were looked upon as enemies ; and therefore it has deserv- 
edly fallen into disuse among the most civiUzed nations. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Of the derivative acquisition which takes place by Law ; 
and herein of succession to intestate property. 

Sect. I. 

Right to Wreck, 

XXI. 

IL 

To things taken for Debt, 

XXII. 

III. 

Intestates, 

XXIII. 

IV. 

Inheritance* 

XXIV. 

V. 

Succession. 

XXV. 

VI. 

Vicarial Succession, 

XXVI. 

VIL 

Abdication and exhereda^ 
Hon, 

xxvu. 

VIIL 

Natural children. 

XXVIII. 

IX. 

Re-ascent of inherited pro- 
perty. 

XXIX. 

X. 

Newly acquired property. 

XXX. 

XI. 

Differences of lava of suc^ 

cessions. 

XXXL 

XIL 

Succession in patrimonial 

kingdoms. 

XXXIl. 

XIII. 

Preference to eldest son. 

XXXIII. 

XIV. 

Hereditary kingdoms, 

XXXIV. 

XV. 

Go only to first kingU pos^ 
lerUy. 

XVI. 

Not to natural children 
only. 

XXXV. 

XVIL 

Males preferred. 

XXXVL 

XVllI. 

Eldest preferred. 

XIX. 

Is tlus an Inheritance 9 

XXXVIl. 

XX. 

Common Law to be fol- 
lowed: Allodial; 

Or Feudal. 
Cognatic Succession, 
Agnatic Succession, 
Proximate Succession. 
Exheredation to a kingdom. 
Abdication of a kingdom. 
Who to judge cf succeS' 
sion$ 

Son bom before accession. 
Except the Law be other- 
wise. 

Elder son *s son^and younger 
son. 

Elder brother^s son, and 
younger brother, 
Brother*s son, and uncle. 
Son's son, and daughter. 
Younger grandson by son, 
and elder grandson by 
daughter. 

Granddaughter by elder 
son, and younger son. 
Sen of sister, and daughter 
of brother, 

, Daughter of elder brother, 
and younger brother. 

I. rpHE derivatlTe acquisition or alienation which takes place by Law, 
_L takes place either by the Law of Nature, or by the instituted 
Law of Nations, or by the Civil Law. Of the Civil Law we do not treat, 
for to do so would be an infinite task ; and the principal controversies 
concerning war are not defined by the Civil Law. Only this we 
may note, that some civil laws are manifestly unjust : as those which 
confiscate goods thrown on shore by shipwreck. For without any 
probable preceding cause, to take away from any one his right to his 
own property is mere wrong. So Euripides, Constantino, Dio Pnu 
sseensis. [See.] 

n. 1 By the Law of Nature, which follows from the nature and 
force of ownership, alienation is made in two ways, by legal compen- 
sation and by succession. 

Alienation takes place by legal compensation, as often as, in the 
place of a thing which Is mine or is owing to me, when I cannot ob- 

112 OP THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION [Book II. 

fain the thing itself, I receire another thing of the same value from 
him who detains or owes what is mine. For expletory justice, when 
she cannot restore the same thing, has recourse to a thing of the 
same value, which is in moral estimation the same. That the owner- 
ship is transferred in such cases, is proved by the end of the pro- 
cedure, which in moral cases is the best proof. For I cannot 
obtain compensation for my right, except I become the owner. My 
detention of the thing is of no use, if I cannot use it as I choose. So 
in Diodorus, Hesioneus took the horses of Ldon, as compensation for 
what he promised his daughter and did not give. 

2 By the Civil Law indeed, it is, as we know, forbidden to 
execute justice for one's self; so that it is called violence, if any 
one take by act what is owing to him ; and in many places he loses 
the right of a creditor who does so. And indeed if the Civil Law 
did not directly prohibit this, it would follow from the institution of 
judicial tribunals that it is unlawful. Therefore the rule that we 
have laid down holds, when the course of regular justice is con- 
tinuously interrupted, as we have explained above, {i. iii. 2). When 
the interruption is momentary, the taking of the thing will be 
lawful, in case you cannot otherwise recover what is yours; for 
example, if your debtor be running away. But the establishment of 
ownership must be waited for till the judge assigns it, as is usual in 
repriMls: of which we shall hereafter treat. But if the right be 
certain, and at the same time it be morally certain that compensa- 
tion cannot be obtained from the judge ; for example, for want of 
proof; the truer opinion is, that under the circumstances, the law 
concerning the tribunals ceases, and the matter reverts to the pris- 
tine rule. 

IIL Succession to intestate property, setting aside the Civil 
Law, has its natural origin in the coi^ecture of the will of the last 
possessor. For inasmuch as the force of ownership was such that 
the property might, by the will of the owner, be transferred to 
another, even on account of approaching death, and with possession 
retained, as we have said before ; if any one has made no manifesta- 
tion of his will, and yet it be not credible that he was so minded that 
his property should after his death come into the hands of any 
one who should take possession of it; it followed that the pro- 
perty should belong to him to whom it was most probable that 
the defunct person wished it to belong. As Pliny says. It is a rule 
of law to understand the will of persons defunct. And in a doubt- 
ful case, every one is supposed to have willed that which is most 
equitable and proper. And in this case, the first claim is that which 
is strictly due; the next that which, though not strictly due, is con- 
formable to duty. 

IV. I Jurists dispute whether children have a right to aliment 
from their parents. For some are of opinion that it is Indeed 
agreeable to natural reason that children should be supported by 

Chap. VU.] WHICH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &c. 113 

iheir parents, but that it is not a dobt or due. We make a dis- 
tinction as to the word dtbt or due ; which strictly taken, is sometimes 
taken for the obligation introduced by explotory jus ; but sometimes, 
more laxly, that which cannot bo decently omitted, though that de- 
cency proceeds not from eiplctory justice, but from some other 
source. Now what we hero speak of is (except there be in addi- 
tion some human law) a debt or due in the laxer sense. So Va- 
lerius Maximus, Plutarch. [See.] That he who gires the form giyes 
what is requisite to the form, is a dictum of Aristotle. Therefore 
he who is the cause of a man's existence, ought, as far as he can 
and as far as is necessary, to proTido him with the things necessary 
to human life, that is, natural and social life. 

2 So other animals by natural instinct provide for their offspring. 
Hence Apollonius Tyanseus so amends Euripides, and gives many 
arguments, which see in Philostratus ; and so Appian : and Euripi- 
des in the Dictys, 

Hence the old jurists refer the bringing up of children to Natural 
Law; that is, to that class of things which Instinct recommends to 
animals, and Reason to man. So Justinian, Diodorus Siculus, Quin- 
tilian. Sallust calls a testament in which the son is excluded, impious. 
And since this is a natural due, the mother ought to support her 
children of which the father is uncertain. 

3 And though the Roman Laws directed that those bom of a co- 
babitation condemned by the laws should have no legal inheritance, 
as the law of Solon provided that it was not necessary to leave anything 
to natural children ; the rules of Christian piety corrected this rigour, 
and teach that all children may rightly have that loft them by their 
parents, and if need be, should have that left them, which is sufficient 
to support them. And thus is to be taken what is usually said ; that 
the lawful share' of the inheritance (legitima) cannot be taken away 
by human laws : that is, so far as this lawful share implies necessary 
aliment. For what is more than this may be taken away without 
transgressing Natural Law. 

4 Not only descendants in the first degree, but in the second, if 
necessary, and in ulterior degrees, ought to be supported. So Jus- 
tinian. And this extends to those who are descendants through females, 
if they have no other source of support. 

v. I Also aliment to parents is due from their children : which 
is not only a matter of law, but expressed by a proverbial term refer- 
ring to the supposed filial piety of the stork. And Solon is praised for 
marking with infamy those who do not discharge this due. But this 
is not so ordinarily applicable as the rule concemiug children ; for 
children, when they are bom, bring with them nothing on which to live: 
add to which, that they have to live longer than the parents have. 
Therefore as honour and obedience are due to parents, not to children, 
so support is due to children more than to parents. So Lucian and 
Aristotle. 

I 

114 OF THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION [BooKn. 

2 Hence, oren without the aid of the Civil Law, the first rule of sue* 
cession is, that the goods go to the children ; because the parents are 
believed to have intended to provide for them, as for parts of their 
own bodies, not only necessaries, but all things which pertain to an 
agreeable and decent life, and especially after they cease to bo able to 
enjoy their property. So the Jurists Paulus, Papinian. So Valerius 
Maximus says of Hortensius, when he made his son his heir, though 
disapproving his character, that Ht rendered the du>e Jtanour to the tie of 
blood. So St Paul, 2 Cor. xii. 14. 

VI.* It is ordinarily the case, that the father and mother provide 
for their children, and therefore, so long as they are alive, the grand- 
father and grandmother are not bound to furnish them aliment ; bat 
when the parents, or one of them, fails, it is equitable that the grand- 
ftither and grandmother should undertake the care of the grandchil- 
dren for their defunct son and daughter: and this goes on In like 
manner to parents still further removed. And hence is the origin of 
that right by which the grandson succeeds in the place of the son, as 
Ulpian speaks. See Modcstinus, Justinian, Isseus, Philo Judaeus, De- 
mosthenes. This vicarious succession by family branches, the more 
recent Jurists call Bepresentation. This prevailed among the Hebrews 
also, as the division of the promised land among the sons of Jacob, 
plainly shews. [Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, having 
a lot ; but in fact they had each a lot, being adopted. J. B,] 

VII. What we have said of the conjectured will, holds only if 
there be no evidence to the contrary. Amongst such evidence, the 
first place belongs to abdication of a son, which was practised by the 
Greeks, as exheredation [disinheriting] was by the Romans : but this 
rejection or disinheriting of a son, if he had not merited death by his 
crimes, was to be so limited that he was to be provided with aliment» 
as we have stated above. 

VIII. 1 To the rule of a man providing for a son, this exception 
also is to be added ; if it be not sufficiently certain that he is really hia 
son. Things which are done in the sight of men have a certain degree 
of certainty from testimony ; and as persons are usually present at the 
birth of a child, the mother is known, but the father cannot be known 
with the same certainty. So Homer, Menander. 

Hence it was necessary to find some other way in which it might bo 
known who was the father of a child : and the way is, marriage in its 
natural state, that is cohabitation, the woman being in the custody of 
the man. But if it be known in any other way who is the fother, or 
the father have ascertained the fact, such ofiipring, as well as any 
other, does by Natural Law succeed. Why not? Since a stranger^ 
adopted as a son, also succeeds from the conjectured will. 

2 Natural children, even after the law has made a difference be* 
tween them and legitimate children, [see Euripides,] may be adopted 
[by the father], except the law interpose. This was formerly permitted 
by the Roman Law of Anastasius : but afterwards, in order to favour 

Chap. VH.] WHICH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &c. 115 

legitimate marriage, a more difficult way of putting thorn on a footing 
of equality with legitimate children was introduced, per curice ablatio- 
fi^m, by offering them to bo Curialea [a burthensome condition], or 
by subsequent marriage [of the parents]. An example of the old 
adoption of natural children we haye in the sons of Jacob, who were by 
their father made equal to the sons of freo women, and received equal 
parts in the inheritance. 

3 On the other hand, it may happen, not only by law but by com- 
pact, that children bom in marriage may receive aliment alone, or at 
least may be excluded from the principal inheritance. A marriage con- 
tracted on such a compact, even with a free woman, the Hebrews called 
concubinage ; such was the marriage of Abraham with Keturah, whose 
children, like Ishmael the son of Hagar, received certain gifts or lega- 
cies, but did not succeed to the inheritance of their father. Such is 
the marriage which is called morgengabe: and not very different from 
this is the law of second marriages among the Brabanters: for the 
landed property which existed when the former marriage was dissolved 
passes to the children of the first marriage. 

IX. 1 Where there are no children to whom the succession may 
naturally fall, the case is less clear ; nor is there any point in which 
Laws are more various. The whole variety however may be referred 
mMnly to two sources ; one of which respects the proximity of degree, 
the other directs the property to return to the quarter from which it 
came; as the phrase is, the father's goods to the father's house, the 
mother's to the mother's. We find it necessary to make a distinction be- 
tween the property of the father and grandfather, (as it was expressed 
in the formula'*' in which the prodigal was interdicted from the con- 
trol of property,) that is, the old inheritance, and new acquisitions. 
The former are to be regulated by Plato's rule ; who directs the /mx- 
trimonial lot to be kept Inviolate for the family to which it belongs. 
Which we are not so to accept as if it were not lawful to dispose by 
testament of property received from father or grandfather, (for that 
is often not only laudable but necessary,) but that it may appear what 
is to be supposed the will of an intestate person in a doubtful case. 
For we grant that the person of whom we speak has in him plenary 
ownership f. 

2 But since he cannot retain his ownership after death, and it 
must be held for certain that he would not lose the means of doing a 
favour to some one ; let us consider what is the most natural order 
of such favours {. Aristotle says that we are to repay obligations before 

* The fommla was this : Qnando tua bona paterna aritaqae neqnitia tua dis- 
pendis, liberosqne tnos ad egestatem perdocis, ob earn rem tibi ea re commercioque 
interdico. Panliu 3. Sent. tit. 4. $ 7. Oronovius. 

f It is plain that Plato*8 law withholds plenary ownership. W. 

i The making the owner so completely the master of his property even after 
his death, that it is to be disposed of by conjecture as to what he would have 
wished, rather than by any other rule, is an extreme view of ownership. W. 

12 

116 OF THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION [Book II. 

we confer favours; and so Cicero, Ambrose. But obligations may bo 
repaid to the living or to the dead : to the dead, in their children who 
are a part of them ; and whom if they were alit e they would wish to 
have benefited. See Lysios. 

3 And this equity has been recognized by the careful framers of 
Justinian's code, in Hie question between full brothers, and brothers 
by the father^s side, and by the mother's ; and in some other cases. 
See Aristotle : Valerius Maximus. In Justin it is called gentium com- 
munejus for brother to succeed to brother. 

4 When he is not to be found from whom the property came, nor 
his children, it remains that the obligation be repaid to those to whom 
it is due in the next degree, though less due ; that is, to a parent of 
superior degree and his children ; especially since by that means it 
remains among the nearest relatives, both of the deceased owner, and 
of the person from whom the property came. So Aristotle. 

X. I In newly acquired property, (the surplus beyond the patri- 
monial lot, of Plato) when the rule of repaying obligations fails, it 
remains that the succession fall to him who is believed to have been 
most dear to the deceased : and this is he who comes nearest to the 
deceased in the degree of relationship. So Isseus, Aristotle, Cicero, 
Tacitus, Ambrose. [This however is a moral claim, not a jural claim.] 

2 The succession to intestate property, of which we here speak, is 
nothing but a tacit testament made out by conjecture of the late 
owner's will. So Quintilian. And what we have said of property 
newly acquired, will hold also of inherited property, if neither the per- 
sons from whom it came nor their children are extant. 

XI. I The rules which we have given, though most consentaneous 
to natural conjecture, are, however, not necessary by Natural Law ; and 
therefore by different causes, moving the human will, they vary by 
compacts, laws, customs. These in some cases allow one person to 
succeed in the place of another ; in other cases, do not permit it ; in 
others, make a distinction as to whom the property came from ; in 
others, disregard this. In some cases the first-bom take more than 
those bom later, as among the Hebrews; in others, the shares are 
equal. In some cases the father's relatives only are reckoned ; in 
others, the mother's relatives share equally with the father's. Some- 
times the sex has its effect, sometimes it has not; sometimes account 
is had of cognation within the nearer degrees, in other cases it is ex- 
tended further. It would be tedious and foreign to our purpose to 
follow these differences. 

2 This rule we must hold by : that when there are no more ex- 
press indications of will, it must be supposed that every one intended, 
with respect to his own succession, that which the law or custom of 
the people directs : and this, not only from the force of the authority 
of the State, but from conjecture of what the person's will was. And 
this is to be held good also of the persons who have the sovereign 
authority. For they are probably believed to' have judged in their own 

Chap. Vn.] WHICH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &c. 117 

case that which b most equitable, which is what they have established 
as law or sanctioned as custom. 

Xll. In the Succession to kingdoms, we must distinguish the king* 
doms which are held by plenary possession and which are patrimonial, 
from those which are held m some way inyolying the consent of the 
people. Of which difference we have spoken above. 

Eangdoms of the former kind may be held by males or females : as 
formerly in Egypt and in Britain. See Lucan and Tacitus. And 
adopted as well as real children succeed in such cases, from presump- 
tion of the will. So Hyllus the adopted son of Hercules succeeded 
^palius; Molossus succeeded Pyrrhus; Atheas [Ateas, Gronav,'] 
would haTO taken Philip for his successor; Jugurtha succeeded to 
the kingdom of Numidia; and so in the kingdoms of the Goths and 
Lombards adoption prevailed. Even the kingdom shall pass to those 
relatives of the last possessor who have no connexion by blood with 
the first king (the source of the royal stock), if such succession be 
received in the country in question. Thus Mithridates, in Justin, 
says that his father received Paphlagonia by inheritance, the line of 
domestic kings being extinguished. 

XnL If it be directed that the kingdom is to pass undivided, but 
not to whom it is to go, the eldest child, male or female, will take it 
See the Talmud on kings, Herodotus, Livy, Trogus Pompeius. This is 
called ju$ gmtium, the order of age and of nature. But he or she 
who succeeds in such a kingdom is bound to provide a satisfaction for 
the coheirs, instead of their share of the power, if, as and as far as, it 
can be done. 

XrV. Those kingdoms which have become hereditary by the 
free consent of the people, are transferred according to the presumed 
will of the people. The people are presumed to will what is most 
expedient. Hence it follows, in the first place, that the kingdom passes 
undivided, because that arrangement is of great use to preserve the 
state and the concord of the citizens. So Justin : except law or cus- 
tom ordain otherwise, as at Thebes, the kingdom was divided between 
the males; and ancient Attica among the sons of Pandion; and 
Rhodes; and Argos. [See.] 

Xv. Another rule is, that the succession remains among those who 
are descended from the first king : for that family is conceived to be 
elected for its nobility, and when it fails, the kingdom to return to 
the people. So Curtius. [See.] 

XVI. In the third place, that none succeed except those who are 
bom according to the laws of the country : not natural children, who 
are open to contempt, since their father did not deem their mother 
worthy of a legitimate marriage, and besides, as being less certain. For 
in kingdoms it is expedient for the people that there should be the 
greatest possible certainty, to avoid controversies. So Demetrius in 
Macedon was taken, rather than Perseus. So says Ovid. Also not 

118 OP THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION [Book II. 

adoptive children, because the nobility of the race makes kings more 
rcrerenced, and turns more hope to them. So Horace. [See.] 

XVn. In the fourth place, that among those who are admitted 
alike into the inheritance, whether as being of the same degree^ or as 
succeeding in the place of their parents, males are preferred to 
females; because males are more fitted both for war and for other 
parts of government. 

XVIIL 1 Fifthly, that among males, and among females when the 
males fail, the elder is preferred, because he is either more mature in 
judgment, or will sooner be so. So Cyrus in Xenophon. But because 
this superiority of age is only temporary, while that of sex is perpetual^ 
the prerogative of sex is stronger than that of age. So Herodotus, 
Diodorus, Trogus, Xenophon, Virgil. So at Lacedsemon, Sparte the 
daughter of Eurotas succeeded, and her children ; and the children 
of Helen, to Tyndareus, because there were no male children. And 
Eurystheus was succeeded by his uncle Atreus. By the same right the 
kingdom of Athens passed to Crensa, that of Thebes to Antigone, 
because the males failed : and the kingdom of Argos went to Argus 
the grandson of Phoroneus through his daughter. 

2 Whence it is to be understood that although children in some 
degrees fill the place of parents who have died, that is to be under- 
stood, so as that they are capable of ruling compared with others, and 
saving the prerogative, first of sex, and then of age. For the quality 
of sex and of age, so far as in this matter they are considered by 
the people, adheres to the person, so that it cannot be separated 
from it. 

XIX. It is made a question whether a kingdom, when thus trans- 
ferred, is a part of the inheritance. And the more true opinion is that 
it is a certain kind of inheritance, but distinct from the inheritance of 
other property ; such an inheritance as is seen in some fiefs, in leases, 
in the right of patronage, in priority of legacy. Whence it follows 
that the kingdom pertains to him who may take the property as heir 
if ho choose to do so ; but in such a way that it may be tkken without 
the property and its burthens. The reason is, because the people is 
supposed to wish that the kingdom should be transferred by the best 
right possible ; nor is it their concern, whether the king accept the 
inheritance of the property or not ; since they chose the hereditary 
order of succession, not that the heir of the ordinary property should 
have it, but that the order might be certain, and might carry with it 
the reverence given to the blood ; and also that from the habits of 
the race and their education, there might be the hope of good moral 
qualities : and that the possessor of the kingdom might bestow more 
care on the kingdom, and defend it with more energy, since he was to 
leave it to those whom he most wished to benefit for benefits received, 
or from natural afibction. 

XX. But when the rule of succession is diffcEent in allodial and 

Chap. VH.] WHICH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &c. 119 

mjeudal property, if the kingdom be not a fief, or certainly was not 
go at first, eyen though homage have been done for it ; the successioii 
is by the law which regulated allodial property when the kingdom 
was instituted. 

XXL But in those kingdoms which were given as fiefs by a per- 
son who had plenary ownership, the law of feudal succession is to be 
followed : not however always the Lombardic law which we have in 
the law-books, but that which was received in each nation at the time 
of the first investiture. For the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, Bur« 
gundians. Angles, Saxons, all the Germanic nations which occupied the 
best parts of the Roman empire, had each their own laws or customs 
concerning fiefs, as well as the Lombards. 

XXII. 1 But there is another succession frequent in kingdoms, 
called LinecU; in this, the rule observed is, not that of the represcnta« 
tion of the heir by his progeny, but the heir transmits the future suc- 
cession, [even if he die before he succeed himself] the law founding a 
true right upon an expectancy which of itself produces no effect ; [see 
the illustration from the Civil Law ;] so that this right passes to his pos- 
terity who are descended from the first king : but according to a certain 
order ; so that there are first called in the children of the last posses- 
sor of the first degree, both those who are alive and those who are 
dead : and among those alive and dead account is had, first of sex, 
then of age : and if the right of the dead be superior, it passes to 
those who descend from them, with the like prerogative, first of sex, 
and then of age ; and preserving at every step the right of transmis* 
sion from the dead to the living, and from the living to the dead. If 
the children of any branch fail, the succession passes to the next who 
are nearest of kin, or would be if they were alive, by a similar trans- 
mission, and observing in those of the same branch the same distinc* 
tion of sex and age ; so that transition is never made, on account of 
sex or age, from one line to another. It follows from this, that a son's 
daughter is preferred to a daughter's son, and a brother's son to a 
sister's son, and an elder brother's son to a younger brother, and so in 
other cases. This is the succession of the kingdom of Castile : and the 
same rule holds with regard to majorats in that kingdom. 

2 An argument for this lineal succession, if law and example be 
wanting, may be taken from the order of public assemblies ; [such 
as a House of Peers.] For if in such cases also account is had of 
lines of descent, that will be a sign that expectancy [is by the law 
vivified into a Right, so that the succession passes from the dead to the 
survivors. 

This is a CogncUic lineal succession, in which women and the sons 
of women are not excluded, but are postponed in their own line ; but 
yet so that there is a regress to them, if there be a failure of claimants 
nearer, or equal in other things, who are males, or from males. 

The foundation of this succession, so far as it differs from the here* 
ditary, is the hope entertained by the people as to the good education 

120 OP THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION [Book U. 

of those who haye tho legitimate hope of the kingdom : and such are 
they whose parents, if they had lived, would have succeeded. 

XXUI. There is also an AgncUic lineal succession, of males to 
males only; which, ohtaining in a certain nohle kingdom, is called 
Frank Law [or Salic Law.] This, so far as it differs from the cog- 
natic, was introduced mainly with this yiew, that the empire might not 
pass to foreign blood by the marriages of the female branches. 

In both these lineal successions, those are admitted who are dis- 
tant even in the most remote degree from tho last possessor, proyided 
they descend from the first king. 

There are some cases when, failing the agnatic succession, the 
cognatic is substituted. 

XXrV. Other modes of succession also may be introduced accord- 
ing to the will of the people, or by the will of the patrimonial sove- 
reign. For instance, he may settle that those who on each occasion are 
nearest to himself, [see Grotius's note] should succeed to the king- 
dom : as amongst the Numidians formerly, I suppose by some such 
rule, the brothers of the last possessor were preferred. So in Arabia 
Felix, the Tauric Chersonese, and the Africans of Morocco and Fez. 
And this rule is, in doubtful cases, followed in choosing trustees for 
family property, as is the sounder opinion, agreeing also with the 
Boman laws, though the commentators wrest them another way. 

These rules being well known, it will be easy to answer the contro- 
Tersies concerning the right of succession, which are thought very diffi- 
cult in consequence of the different opinions of jurists. 

XXV. It is made a question, whether a son can be disinherited 
by his father so as to be prevented from succeeding to the kingdom. 
Here we must distinguish alienable, that is, patrimonial kingdoms, from 
those which are inalienable. In alienable cases, there is no doubt 
that disinheritance takes its effect, since the kingdom cannot differ 
from other property ; and therefore the rules which by law or custom 
obtain as to ea^ieredation will have place here. And if there are no 
laws or customs, by Natural Law exherodation is lawful, except as to 
aliment ; anid even without that exception, if the son have committed 
a crime worthy of death, or otherwise greatly offended. Thus Reuben 
was deprived of his right as first-bom by Jacob for his offense, and 
Adonijah, of the kingdom, by David. And ho is held for tacitly dis- 
inherited who has committed a grave crime against his father, if there 
are no tokens of condonation or pardon*. 

But in inalienable kingdoms, though hereditary, the same does not 
hold : because the people chose indeed tho hereditary way ; but the 
hereditary way with the usual succession to intestates. 

Still less will exherodation hold good in a lineal succession, when 
the kingdom comes to each person by the gift of the people, without 
attempting to imitate the hereditary rule. 

XXVL Similar is the question whether the kingdom, or the right 

* This if rejected by Barbeyrao as too severe. 

Chap. VH.] WHICH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &o. 121 

of sncceeding to it, can be abdicated. And that each person for him- 
self may abdicate, there is no doubt : whether he can do so for his 
children also, is more controverted, but is to be solved by the same 
distinction. For in hereditary kingdoms, he who abdicates for himself 
can transfer nothing to his children. But in a lineal succession, the act 
of the father cannot be allowed to prejudice sons already bom ; be- 
cause as soon as they began to exist, they acquired a right by law; nor 
sons not yet bom, because it cannot prevent that the right should de- 
scend to them also by the gift of the people. Nor docs the difficulty 
of transmitting the right make any obstacle : for the transmission is 
necessary, not voluntary, so far as the parents are concerned. There 
is this difference between children bora, and to be bom; that those not 
yet bom have not yet acquired any right, and therefore their rights 
may be cut off by the will of the people, if the parents whose interest 
it is that the right should pass to the sons have given up that right : 
and to this pertains what we have said above of dereliction. 

XXVII. 1 This also is made a question. Whether the reigning 
king, or the people, or judges appointed by them, can judge concerning 
the succession. And we must deny that they can pronounce a judg- 
ment as if they had jurisdiction in such a case. For jurisdiction be- 
longs only to a superior, not merely taking account of the person, but 
of the cause also, which is to bo regarded with its circumstances. But 
the cause of the succession is not subject to the reigning king : which 
appears from this, that the reigning king cannot bind his successor. 
For the succession to the sovereignty is not under the authority of the 
sovereign, and therefore remains in the natural state in which there 
was no jurisdiction'*'. 

2 If however the right of succession be controverted, they who 
claim the right, will do rightly and piously if they agree to appoint 
arbitrators. The people has transferred all the jurisdiction from itself 
to the king and the royal family ; and so long as that lasts, it has no 
rclicks of it. I speak of a true kingdom, not merely of a government. 
But if a question arise concerning the primeval will of the people, it 
will be much to the purpose to ask the people now existing, which is 
conceived to be the same with the former people, to express its opinion 
upon that matter, which is to be followed, except it appear certainly 
that the will of the people formerly was different, and that a right was 
thence acquired. Thus Euphaes, as king, permitted the Messenians to 
determine who of the royal family of the Egyptidsa should reign ; and 
in the controversy of Xerxes and Artabazanes the people decided. 

XXYin. To come to other questions; that a son who was bom 
before his father's accession to the kingdom is, in an indivisible king- 
dom, to be preferred to one bom during the enjoyment of power, is 
true in every form of succession. In a divisible kingdom he will 
doubtless have his share ; as is the case with other property, in which 

* GroDoriiu argnes against this doctrine, but rather in the manner of a rhe« 
toridaa than a jurist. W. 

122 OF THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION OBookU. 

no difference is erer made as to the time when it was acquired. Now 
he who would take a share in a diyisible inheritance, will, in a matter 
indivisible, be preferred on the ground of age ; and thus the fief follows 
the son who was bom before investiture. But in a case of lineal suc- 
cession also, as soon as the kingdom is acquired, there is some expect- 
ancy given to the children bom previously ; for suppose that none were 
bom afterwards, nobody will say that the former children were to be 
excluded. But in this kind of succession, an expectancy once given to 
any one gives him a right, and does not cease by any subsequent event ; 
except that in a cognatic succession it is suspended by the privilege 
of sex. The opinion which we are stating obtained in Persia between 
Cyrus and Arsica ; in Judea between Antipater, the son of Herod the 
Great, and his brothers ; in Hungary, when Geissa took the kingdom ; 
and in Germany, though not without recourse to war, between Otho I. 
and Henry. 

XXIX. The fact that a different rule was followed at Sparta, pro- 
ceeded from a peculiar law of that people, which on account of their 
education, preferred those that were bom in the reign. The same may 
take place by a peculiar Law of the primitive investiture, if the govem- 
ment be given as a fief to a vassal and his offspring: on which argument 
Ludovico seems to have relied against Galeazzo his brother, in the con- 
troversy respecting the dukedom of Milan. For in Persia, Xerxes who 
obtained the kingdom against his brother Artabazanes owed his success 
to the power of his mother Atossa, rather than to his right, as Herodotus 
notes. And in the same kingdom of Persia, when afterwards the same 
controversy arose between Artaxerxes Mnemon and Cyrus, Artaxerxes 
as the eldest, though bom in a private station, was made king. 

XXX. 1 It has also been a matter of contest, discussed by means 
of wars and single combats, whether the grandson of the former son be 
to take precedence of the later son. This, in a lineal succession, can 
have no difficulty ; for there the dead are held as living, in this respect, 
that they transmit their right to their children : wherefore in such a 
succession the son of the first-bom is preferred without any regard to 
age ; and in cognatic kingdoms, the daughter also : for neither age nor 
sex lead them to desert the line. In divisible hereditary kingdoms, the 
claimants share the inheritance according to the shares of the sons ; 
except in those countries in which the substitution of the son for the 
parent is observed, as among most peoples in Germany. For it was 
only at a later period that grandsons were admitted along with sons 
to the inheritance. But in a doubtful case, we are rather to suppose 
that that vicarious succession has place, because nature f&vours it. 

2 If the substitution of the son in the place of his deceased 
parent be plainly introduced by the Civil Law, it will have place, 
although, in any law, proximus, ** the nearest relation," be mentioned 
as the successor. The reasons which are drawn from the Roman 
Laws to this effect, are insecure ; as will appear to any one who exa- 
mines these laws themselves. But this is the best reason ; that in a 

Chap. VH.] WmCH TAKES PLACE BY LAW, &c. 123 

£iTOiirable matter, the signification of words is to be extended to erery 
property, not common only, but artificial also ; bo that under the name 
of sons are to be comprehended adoptive sons ; and under the name 
of death, ciril death, because the laws hare been accustomed so to 
speak. Therefore he may justly come in the name of proximtu whom 
the law has put in the nearest place to the succession. But in here- 
ditary indiyisible kingdoms, in which substitution of one person into 
the place of another is not excluded, we cannot say that either the 
grandson always, or the second son always, is preferred ; but as being 
equal in claim, by the effect of law in equalizing their degrees of rela- 
tionship, he is preferable who is the elder ; for in hereditary kingdoms, 
as we hare said, the privilege of age is not transferred by succession. 
At Corinth the eldest of the descendants of the deceased king suc- 
ceeded. So amoDg the Vandals it was provided that the heir should 
be be who was nearest and oldest ; and the second son, being older, 
was preferred to the son of the first son. So in Sicily, Robert was 
preferred to the son of his elder brother Charles Martel, not exactly 
for the reason which Bartolus devised, because Sicily was a fief; but 
because the kingdom was hereditary. 

8 We have a similar succession exemplified in the Frank kingdom, 
in Guntram ; but that happened rather by the election of the people, 
which at that time had not quite fallen into disuse. But since the 
agnatic lineal succession without any election is introduced, the matter 
is clear of controversy: as formerly at Sparta, where, when the kingdom 
passed to the Heraclidse, there was a similar agnatic lineal succession. 
And thus Areus was preferred to his uncle Cleonymus. But in the cog- 
natic lineal succession also the grandson is preferred ; as in England, 
Richard* the grandson of Edward III. by his first-born [the Black 
Prince] was preferred to Edmund and Thomas [and others], sons of the 
same Edward IIL : which also is the rule in the kingdom of Castile. 

XXXL By a like distinction we reply to the question between 
the surviving brother of the last king, and the son of his elder brother: 
except that we must know that in many places succession into tho 
place of a person deceased is received, as among the children, when 
it is not received in the transverse line. When the law is not mani- 
fest, we are rather to incline to that rule which puts children in the 
place of their parents, because natural equity points that way, that is, 
in things which have descended from tho grandfather. Nor is it any 
objection that Justinian calls the right existing in the sons of brothers 
& privilege: for that he does, not with reference to Natural Law, but 
to the old Roman Law. 

Let uB run over some other questions which Emanuel Costa pro- 
poses. 

XXXn. He says, that tho son of the brother of the deceased, or 
even his daughter, is to be preferred to their uncle ; rightly, not only 
in a lineal succession, but also in a hereditary one, in kingdoms where 

* Barbeyrac has corrected Orotliu*8 mistakes in the English royal genealogy. 

124 OF THE DERIVATIVE ACQUISITION, &c. [Book H, 

substitution in the place of the deceased is obserred : but not in king- 
doms which in precise words respect the natural degree; for there he 
will be preferred who is superior in sex or age. 

XXXm. He adds, lliat a grandson through a son is preferred 
to a daughter; rightly; namolj, on account of sex: with this excep- 
tion, unless the question bo in a country which, eren among children, 
regards only the degree [the order, not the sex]. 

XXXrV. He adds, that a younger grandson by a son, is pre- 
ferred to an older grandson by a daughter; which is true in a cognatic 
lineal succession, but not in a hereditary, except a special law be 
produced. Nor is the alleged reason sufficient, that the father of the 
first would haye excluded the mother of the second ; for that would 
hare happened on account of a mere personal preference, which is 
not transferred. 

XXXV. What he adds as probable in his opinion, that the grand- 
daughter by the first-born excludes a younger son, cannot be receired in 
hereditary kingdoms, even if we admit substitution in the place of the 
deceased : for that does indeed make the granddaughter capable of 
the succession ; but among those capable, the privilege of sex must 
have its weight. 

XXXVI. And therefore in the kingdom of Arragon, the son of a 
sister is preferred to the daughter of a brother. 

XXX Vn. In the same manner, in hereditary kingdoms, the 
younger brother of the king is preferred to the daughter of his elder 
brother. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

()f Acquisitions commonly said to be Jure Gentium. 

8bct. L Things improperly Juris gen- 
Hum, 
Animals inclosed. 
Animals escaped. 
Possession by instruments. 
Game may be the king*s. 
Things without owner. 
Treasure found, 
YIII. Alluvium and Islands, 
IX. Naturally the People's, 
Inund^Uions. 
Doubtful Alluvium ; 
Conceded to the Boundary- 
owner, 
XIII. So deserted Channels, 

U, 
III. 
IV. 

V. 
VI. 
VII. 

X. 

XL 
XII. 

XIV. Alluvium or Island $ 
XV. Alluvium when to Vassals, 
XVL Against Roman Law, 

XVII. Road bars Alluvium, 

XVIII. Offspring follows the mother 9 

XIX. Right by Fabrication ; 

XX. Even from another^ mate- 

rial, 

XXI. Mixed properties, 

XXII. Right by plantation, S^c, 

XXIII. Bona fide possessor, 

XXIV. Mala fide possessor, 

XXV. Delivery not required, 

XXVI. The use of what has been 

said. 

I. I rriHE order of our subject has led us to that acquisition which 
I takes place jure gentium, as distinct from jus ncUurale, Na- 
tural Law; which we have above called Instituted Jtu Oentium. 
Such are the things done by the Laws of War ; but we shall treat of 
these hereafter. 

The Roman Jurists, when they speak of acquiring the ownership of 
things, reckon many ways of such acquisition, which they say are juris 
gentium ; but if we duly attend, we shall see that they all, if we except 
the Laws of War, do not pertain to that jus gentium of which we now 
speak; but are either to be referred to Natural Law (not mere Natural 
Law, but that which follows the introduction of ownership, and precedes 
all Civil Law,) or to the Civil Law, not of the Roman People alone, 
but of many other nations : I suppose, because the origin of such Law 
or custom came from the Greeks, whose Institutions, as DionysiuB 
Halicamassensis and others note, the peoples of Italy and the neigh- 
bourhood followed. 

2 But this is not the jus gentium properly : for that does not per^ 
tain to the mutual society of nations amongst themselves, but to the 
tranquillity of each people: whence it might be changed by one 
people without consulting others ; and also it might happen that in 
various places and times, very different usages, and thus, different jus 
gentiwm improperly so termed, might be introduced : which, we see, 
happened, in fact, from the time that the Germanic nations invaded 
almost the whole of Europe. For as the laws of Greece formerly, so 
now Germanic InstitutionB are everywhere received, and are still in 
authority. 

126 ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. [Book U. 

The first mode of acquiring ownership which is called by the Ro- 
mans juris gentiimif is the occupation of things which belong to no 
one (res nuUius) : which mode is, doubtless, natural in the sense which 
I have mentioned ; ownership being supposed to be introduced, and as 
long as the law has made no other appointment For ownership may 
also take place by the Ciyil Law. 

n. To this head is referred, first, the capture of wild beasts, birds, 
fishes. But how long these are res ntdlius, belong to no one, is not 
without question. Nerra says, that fishes in a pond are ours, fishes 
in a lake are not ; beasts which are in a park are ours, not those which 
range in the woods, though surrounded by a fence. But fishes are in- 
eluded in a lake, which is private property, as much as in a pond ; and 
a well-fenced wood shuts in beasts, no less than a park : these things 
differ only in that one is a narrower, the other a wider custody. And 
accordingly, in our time, the contrary opinion more rightly prerails : 
and beasts in private woods, and fishes in private lakes, as they can be 
possessed, so can they be owned. 

in. The Roman jurists say, that when beasts recover their natu- 
ral liberty they cease to be ours : but in all other things the owner^ 
ship which begins with possession is not lost when we lose the posses- 
sion ; but, on the contrary, gives a right to recover possession. And 
it cannot make much difference whether it be a fugitive slave that 
takes them away, or that they take themselves away. Therefore the 
sounder opinion is, that the ownership is not lost because the beasts 
escape from our custody, but that it is lost from the probable conjec- 
ture, that we may be supposed to let them go as derelicts, on account 
of the difficulty of pursuing them; especially as it is impossible to 
know our beasts from others. But this conjecture may be refuted by 
other evidence : as if the beast be marked, or have a bell hung to it ; 
as we know that deer and hawks have sometimes had, and thereby 
have been restored to the owners. 

Some corporeal possession, is required to make the ownership com- 
plete ; and therefore it is not enough to have wounded them, as is 
rightly held, in opposition to Trebatius. Hence the proverb. You 
started the hare /or him to catch. And so Ovid. 

rv. But a possession which gives ownership may be acquired, not 
by the hands alone, but by instruments, as traps, snares, nets; on two 
<M>nditions ; first, that the instruments be in our power ; next, that the 
creature be so caught that he cannot escape. And by this rule is to 
be decided the question of the boar which fell into the snare. 

y. This is the rule, if no Civil Law intervene : for jurists are 
much mistaken who think that it is so decidedly Natural Law that it 
cannot be changed. It is Natural Law, not simply, but in a certain 
state of things, that is, if it be not otherwise provided. But the 
peoples of Germany, when they wished to assign to their princes and 
kings some rights to sustain their dignity, wisely thought that they 
might best begin with those things which can be given without damage 

Chap. VHI.] ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. 127 

to any one ; of which kind are the things which hare not yet hecome 
the property of any ; [and thence they gare them a right to the game]. 
And this too was what the Egyptians did. For there the king's proc- 
tor claimed things of that kind. The law might transfer the owner- 
ship of these things eyen before occupation, since the law alone is suf- 
ficient to produce ownership. 

VI. Other MavoTOf ownerless things, are acquired in the same 
way as game. For these too, if we follow nature alone, belong to him 
who finds them and takes possession. Thus Acanthos was adjudged 
to the Chalcideans who entered it first, not to the Andrians who first 
cast a jayelin into it : for the beginning of possession is the contact of 
body with body, which, with regard to moveables, is mostly performed 
with our hands, with regard to the soil, with our feet. 

VII. Among ownerless things is trectaure trove^ that is, money of 
which the owner is unknown ; for what does not appear is, so far, as if 
it did not exist. Hence by Natural Law such treasure belongs to the 
finder, that is, him who took hold of it or took it up. Nor is it an 
objection, that by laws and customs other rules may be established. 
Plato directs that the fact shall be reported to the magistrates, and the 
oracle consulted; and ApoUonius adjudged it, as a boon of the gods, 
to him whom he thought the best man. That among the Hebrews 
the receired rule was that the treasure should go to the owner of the 
soil, appears to follow from the parable, Matth. xiii. The same was 
the case in Syria. See Philostratus. The Laws of the Roman Em- 
perors yaried much on this point; as appears partly by the constitu- 
tions, and partly by the histories of Lampridius, Zonaras and Cedrenus. 
The peoples of Germany gaye treasure troye, like other ownerless 
things^to the prince ; and that is now the common law, as a sort of ^ 
gentium. For it is observed in (Germany, France, England, Spain, and 
Denmark. And that there is in this no wrong done, we baye suffi- 
ciently explained. 

VIII. Let us now come to the additions made to land by riyers ; 
on which subject there are yery many rescripts [opinions on cases] of 
the old jurists, and of the modems, whole books. But the rules de- 
liyered on this subject by them are, for the most part, instituted rules 
of certain nations, not Natural Law ; although they often giye their 
rules as Natural Laws. For many of their determinations rest on this 
foundation, that the banks belong to the nearest landowners, and also 
the bed of the riyer when deserted by the stream : from which it follows 
that the islands which make their appearance in the riyer belong to 
the same persons. Thus in the inundation of a riyer thoy make a 
distinction that a small Inundation does not take away ownership, a 
large one does ; but so that if the riyer retires by a single impulse, tho 
ground which was flooded returns to the owner by postliminium^ [a 
resumption of the previous condition of property :] if the river recedes 
gradually, it is not so ; but, on the contrary, passes to the nearest land- 
owners. That all this might be established by law, and defended by 

128 ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUAL [Book IL 

the consideration of its being a useful rule for the preservation of the 
banksy I do not deny : that it is Natural Law, which they seem to 
think, I by no means concede. 

IX. 1 For if we look at the general case, peoples occupied tho 
land, not only as lords, but as owners, before it was assigned to privato 
proprietors*. Seneca, Cicero, Dio PrusfiDensis, Tacitus, speak of tho 
occupation of land by peoples. [See.] What was thus occupied by 
peoples, and was not afterwards distributed, is to be considered as 
belonging to the people ; and as in a rirer which is private property, 
an island which makes its appearance, or a deserted rirer-bed, is the 
property of the priyate person; so in a public river, both of these 
belong to the people, or to him to whom the people has given them. 

2 What we have said of tho bed of the river, is true also of the 
bank, which is only the extreme portion of the bed, that is, where the 
river naturally stops. And we find that this is now the general usage. 
In Holland, and the neighbouring countries, where of old these con- 
troversies were more frequent on account of the lowness of the land, 
the magnitude of the rivers, and the neighbourhood of the sea, which 
receives the mud carried down, and brings it back by the reflux of 
the tide, it was always settled that islands which were true islands 
were the public property ; and in like manner, the deserted beds of 
the Rhine and the Mouse ; which has often been adjudged, and rests 
on the soundest reasons. 

3 For even the Roman jurists allow that an island which floats in 
a river, for instance, one resting on roots and branches, is public pro- 
perty ; because the party who has a right to the river has a right also 
to an island produced in the river. But the same reason holds for the 
bed as for the river : not only in the way in which the Roman jurists 
take it, because the bed is covered by the river, but for another, which 
we have mentioned above ; that the bed and the river were occupied 
at the same time by the people, and have not since passed into pri- 
yate ownership. And therefore we do not accept as Natural Law 
what they say, that if the lands are marked by boundaries, the island 
belongs to him who takes possession of it. That would be so, only if 
the river and the bed of the river were not already occupied by the 
people ; as an island which rises in the sea belongs to him who takes 
possession of it. 

X. 1 Nor can we admit that doctrine above stated concerning 
a very grave inundation, if we only follow natural reason. For 
mostly, though the surface part of the ground is dissolved into sand, 
the lower solid part of the soil remains ; and though it may in some 
measure change the quality, it does not change the substance, any 
more than a part of the land from which a lako is drained, the right 
to which is not changed by such a process, as the Romans rightly de- 
cide. Nor is that Natural Law which they say, that the rivers, like 
the collectors of a land-tax [who have to seize and sell the property 

* Ai Barbeyrto says, the contrary ii more nearly tme. W« 

Chap. VHI.] ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. 12& 

of defaulters, OronJ] increase prirate property by public, and public 
by prirate. The Egyptians judged better, who made a measurement 
and diyision of the land, which was independent of the inundations. 

2 There is nothing contrary to this opinion in what the Roman 
writers have delirered, that what is ours does not cease to be ours 
except by our own act ; add, or by law. But among our acts are 
included also the things which we do not do, so far as they supply a 
conjecture of the will. Wherefore we grant this, that if the inundation 
be yery graye, and if there are no other signs which imply an intention 
of retaining the ownership, the land may easily be presumed to be a 
derelict; and this estimation, as it is naturally indefinite from the 
yaiiety of circumstances, and one of those things which must be left 
to the judgment of a fair man, so is it often defined by the Ciyil Law. 
Thus in Holland land is held to be derelict, if it has been under water 
for ten years, and there are no signs of continuation of possession : 
and in this case we reasonably accept a rule which the Romans reject ; 
that if you can do nothing else, you may be supposed to retain pos- 
session by fishing oyer it. So princes were accustomed to appoint a 
time within which the ancient possessors wore bound to free their lands 
from water : and if they did not do this, warning was giyen, first to 
those who had mortgages upon the land, next to those who had juris- 
diction, either ciyil only, or criminal also ; and if all these parties were 
behindhand in doing what the law required, the whole right of the 
property passed to the prince : and he either drained the lands him- 
self, and added them to his patrimony, or gaye them to others to be 
drained, retaining a part of the profit. 

XI. Concerning alluyium, that is, the addition of particles which 
cannot be claimed by any one, because it is unknown whence they 
come, (for otherwise the part would not, by Natural Law, change its 
owner,) it should bo considered as certain that this also belongs to the 
people, if the people haye assumed possession of the riyer as owner, 
which in a case of doubt is to be supposed ; otherwise, the property 
of him who takes possession of it. 

Xn. I But as the people may concede this right to others, so 
imdoubtedly it may concede it to the possessors of the adjacent lands; 
and .it is supposed to haye done so, if those lands haye no other 
boundary on that side than the natural boundary, that is, the riyer. 
Wherefore we are not to despise the laborious discussion of this sub- 
ject by the Romans ; in which they haye distinguished limitaium, land 
bounded by artificial limits, from other lands ; proyided we recollect 
that land mensurd comprehensum^ determined by its measured quan-* 
tity, (see ii. iii. xyi.) is goyemed by the same rule as limitaie land. 
For what we said before of ownership, when we spoke of occupation^ 
obtains also with regard to priyate lands : adding this difference, that 
lordships (imperia) are, in a doubtful case, to be supposed to be arci^ 
finiali bounded by natural limits, because that best agrees with the 
nature of the territory : but private lands are rather supposed not to be 

K 

130 ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUAL [Book 11. 

naturally bounded, but either limitate, or determined by measure; 
for this is more congruous to the nature of private possession. 

2 We do not deny that it may be that a people assigns land to a 
priyate person by the same rule by which it had itself occupied it, 
that is, up to the riyer ; and if that is the case, the possessor has a 
right to the alluyium : which, in Holland, was some generations ago 
adjudged to be the case with the lands between the Mouse and the 
Tssel, because these, both in the leases and in the records of the land- 
tax, are always said to reach to the riyer. And if such lands be soldy 
although, in the articles of sale, some measure be mentioned, yet since 
they are sold, not by measure but bodily, they retain their nature and 
right of alluyium: which is also declared in the Roman Law, and 
ererywhere acted on as usage. 

Xin. What we haye said of idluyium, is also to be considered to 
apply to a deserted riyer-bank and a part of the bed dried up ; namely 
that, in places not occupied, they belong to him who takes possession ; 
in occupied riyers, to the people ; and to priyate persons ooly if they 
haye receiyed from the people, or from one who dcriyes right from the 
people, land running on to the riyer, as such. 

XIV. But since we haye said that the rule respecting an island 
is different from the rule for alluyium, a controyersy often arises 
which of the two a piece of ground is, when there is an eleyated pro- 
montory connected with the nearest land by a plain which is under 
water : which perpetually happens with us on account of the inequa- 
lity of the ground. Here usages yary. In Gueldres it becomes part 
of the land, provided it bo occupied and can bo yisited with a loaded 
cart : in the land of Putten, as far as a man on foot with a sword in 
his hand can reach. The most natural rule is, that an island should 
be considered as separate from the land when there is a strait through 
which a ship can commonly pass. 

XV. 1 No less frequent is the question between the soyereign 
prince, and his yassals who haye subordinate authority. That the 
mere concession of soyeroignty does not carry with it the increase 
made by riyers, is plain enough. But it b to be noted that some 
▼assals haye receiyed, with their definite authority, the right to tho 
whole land, saying what belongs to private persons ; it may be, be- 
cause the land formerly belonged to the prince or to the people, or 
was drained by the people. la this case it is not doubtful that the 
Yassals have the same rights which the prince or the people bad. And 
thus we see in Zealand, yassals who have only civil jurisdiction, [not 
criminal,] still pay tho land-taxes for the whole of the land ; of which 
they in return claim a part from priyate possessors according to their 
holdings. And in such cases there is no question about the right of 
alluyium. 

In some cases, the river is given to a person, and then of course ho 
rightly claims the islands that are produced, whether arising from 
accumulated mud, or parts of the bed which the river leaves. 

i 

Chap. Vni.] ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. 131 

2 There are other persons whose grant does not comprehend either 
the one or the other of these things : and these have no case against 
the puhlic ; except either the custom of that country fayours them, 
or a long possession, with due circumstances, hare generated a right. 

But if it he not the authority or lordship, hut the land wbidb ig 
granted as a fief, we must see what is the nature of the land, as abore 
stated. If it is areifinialf the alluyium is to be considered as compre* 
bended in the grant, not by the peculiar right of the prince, but by 
the nature of the land : for a tenant for a term would in such case 
also enjoy the profits of alluyium. 

XVI. The Romans, in order to proye their own Law to be Natu- 
ral Law, are wont to adduce that trite maxim : It is according to 
nature that he should haye the adyantages of anything who has the 
disadyantages : wherefore, as the riyer may often carry away a part 
of my land, it is reasonable that I should take what it giyes. But that 
rule docs not hold, except when the adyantages come from a thing 
which is ours ; but here they come from the riyer, which belongs to 
another party. But that what is destroyed is lost to the owner, is 
Natural Law. And that what they allege is not unlyersally applicable, 
appears by the exception, admitted by themselyes, of limitate land. 
The riyer enriches some, impoyorishes others, as Lucan says. 

XVn. What they further say, that eyen a public road [passing 
along the riyer-bank] does not bar the right of alluyium, is a doctrine 
for which there is no natural reason ; except the private land be bound 
to keep up the road. 

XVIII. There is another mode of acquisition, amongst those 
which are reckoned juris gmtiwnf by the generation of animals : in 
which that which has been ruled by the Romans and some other 
nations, that the offspring follows the mother (as to property) is not 
Natural Law, as we haye said aboye, (n. y. xxix.) except so far that the 
father is unknown in most cases. But if there were any probable cer« 
tainty concerning him, no reason could be assigned why the offspring 
should not belong partly to him. For that what is bom is part of 
the father is certain. Whether it deriye more from the fiither or 
the mother is disputed among physiologists. So Plutarch. [See.] 
And this yiew was followed in the old laws of the Franks and Lom-* 
bards. 

XIX. 1 [There is a question concerning property in which mate- 
rials and labour are mixed.] 

If I make a new article of materials belonging to another, the 
Babinians* determined it to be the property of him to whom the 
materials belonged ; Proculus, the property of me who gaye it the new 
form, by which the article began to be what it is. But at last the 
medium opinion was accepted : that if the matter could return to its 
former shape, the owner of the material should haye it ; if it could 
not, then the person who was the author of the new form. But 
* The followers of IfaBmrim Sabinns. Gronov. 

K2 

132 ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. [Book H. 

Connanos condemns this, and is for haying this point alone con- 
sidered; whether there be a greater amount of value in the workman- 
ship or in the material ; and for directing that that which is the more 
Taluable should prevail, and draw to it that which is of less value ; 
arguing by reference to the doctrines of the Roman jurists concern- 
ing value added to a thing. 

2 But if we look at Natural Law merely, as the Roman jurists 
decided that when materials of two kinds belonging to two persons 
are indistinguishably mixed, there is a common property produced, in 
proportion to each person's share, because otherwise there could be 
BO natural termination of the question : so when things consist of 
matter and form as their parts, if the matter belong to one, the form 
to another, it follows by Natural Law that the article is common pro-' 
perty, according to the share of value which belongs to each. For the 
form is part of the substance, but not the whole substance: which 
Ulpian saw, when he said that by the change of form the substance 
was almost destroyed. 

XX. But that they who with fraudulent intent meddle with 
matter that belongs to another, lose their right to the form which 
they have given it, is indeed a rule not otherwise than equitable ; but 
it is a penal Law, and therefore not a Natural Law ; for Nature does 
not determine punishment, nor does she take away ownership for a 
delinquency per se; though by Natural Law delinquents are worthy of 
some punishment. 

XXI. But that the minor thing becomes an appendage to the 
major thing, which is the ground on which Connanus rests, is a natu- 
ral rule in fact, but not in law. He who is part-owner of an estate, for 
a twentieth part only, is as much part-owner as he who has the nine- 
teen parts. Wherefore all that is settled in the Roman Law, or may 
further be settled, about one part becoming an appendage to the 
other on account of the prevalence of value, is not Natural Law, but 
Civil Law, introduced for the convenience of business ; nature not re- 
pugning, because the law has the right of giving ownership. But there 
is scarce any part of law in which the opinions and errors of jurists 
are so various. For who will allow that if copper and gold are mixed 
together they cannot be separated, as Ulpian writes ; or that in weld- 
ing, [/erruminoHo] there is an indistinguishable mixture, as Paulus ; 
er that the rule is different for a written paper and a picture ; the 
canvas being an appendage to the picture, but the writing to the 
paper ? 

XXII. That plantations and crops are appendages to the soil is 
similarly an established rule of law ; of which the reason is, that they 
are nourished by the soil. On this account a distinction is made in a 
tree, according to whether it has shot out roots. But aliment makes 
only a part of a thing already existing : and therefore, as the owner of 
the soil acquires some right from the aliment supplied, so the owner 
of the seed, plant, or tree planted, does not thereby lose his right 

Chap. Vin.] ACQUISITION JURE GENTIUM. 133 

according to Natural Law. Therefore this too will be a case of com- 
mon property : and in the same way in a house, of which the parts 
are the ground and the superstructure ; for if the building be moye- 
able, the owner of the soil has no right in it, as Scserola also decided. 
XXni. That a bona fide possessor, [one who believes that he has 
a right,] acquires a property in all the fruit or income which he draws 
from the property, is not Natural Law : but only so far as this ; that 
he has a right to charge the expenses which he has bestowed upon the 
property, and his useful labour, and of deducting them from the 
income received : and even of retaining the rising crop if repayment 
is not otherwise made. 

XXIV. The same may be said of a possessor male fide, [who 
knows that he has not a right,] when the penal law does not interfere. 
It is more considerate, says Paulus the jurist, that even in a man who 
has robbed us we should take account of his expenses ; for the complain- 
ant ought not to derive gain from another's loss. 

XXV. The last mode of acquisition which is called juris gentium 
is by tradition or deliyery. But we have said above that delivery is 
hot required by Natural Law for the transfer of ownership ; as indeed 
the Jurists themselves in some cases acknowledge: as in a thing 
which b given to another, while the present enjoyment of it is retained 
by the donor, or which is made over to a person who already holds it, 
or has it as a loan, or in things thrown among a crowd for them to 
catch. And in some cases, even now, a man may transfer the owner- 
ship before he is owner himself; as [by a certain Roman law,] in 
inheritances, legacies, things given to churches or pious places, or to 
communities, or for the sake of aliment, or in cases when a joint pro- 
perty in the goods is established. 

XXVL We have noted these things, in order that when any one 
finds the term juris gentium in the Roman jurists, he may not, as a 
matter of course, understand that jus which is immutable : but may 
carefully distinguish precepts of Natural Law from those which, in a' 
certain state, are natural; and rights which are common to many 
peoples independently, from those which contain the bond of human 
society, [and therefore are truly juris gentium]. 

But this is to be noted, that if by this jus gentium improperly so 
called, or by the law of one people, a mode of acquiring property be 
introduced without any distinction of citizen and stranger, this, of 
course, gives a right to foreigners also : and if the person be prevented 
from taking possession of the right, there may arise a wrong which 
gires a just occasion of war. 

CHAPTER IX. 

When Lordship and Oumerahip cecue. 

Sect. L 

They cease when there is no 

VII. 

Successor, 

VIII. 

II. 

As when a Family is ex- 

IX. 

Hnct, 

X. 

III. 

Or a People ceases to be a 
people : 

XI. 

IV. 

Losing its necessary parts^ 

XII. 

V. 

Or the whole body, 

XIII. 

VL 

Or the form. 

yot by emigration. 
Or change of Government. 
How \f Peoples are united f 
How if they are divided $ 
To whom does the Roman 
Empire belong $ 
Rights qf Heirs. 
Rights qfa Conqueror. 

L X7[7^ ^^^<^ sufficiently explained bow both private ownenbip and 
V Y public authority is acquired, and how it is transferred ; let us 
now consider how it ceases. 

That it ceases by derelict, is above shewn in passing ; because the 
will ceasing, the ownership does not remain. There is also another 
mode of its ending : the subject or person in whom the lordship or 
ownership resides being removed, that is, before alienation either ex- 
press at least, or tacit, such as there is in successions to intestates. 
Wherefore if any person die without giving any indication of his will, 
and without leaving any relative, every right which he had perishes, 
and therefore his slaves (except some human law prevent it) will be 
free ; the peoples who had been under his authority will be their own 
masters, because these things (slaves and governments) are not things 
which can be taken possession of by the first comer ; but his other 
property may be so occupied, 

II. The same which we have said of a person may bo said of a 
Family which fails, and which had any rights. 

III. I The same, if a People fails. Isocratos, and after him the 
Emperor Julian said, that states are immortal; that is, that they may 
be so ; because a People is that kind of body which consists of separate 
elements, but is subject to one name, and has one habit, as Plutarch 
says, one spirit, as Paulus. This spirit or habit in a people is the full 
and perfect common participation of civil life ; the first production of 
which is the sovereignty, the bond by which the State is held together, 
the vital breath drawn by so many thousands, as Seneca speaks. And 
these artificial bodies have plainly an analogy with natural bodies. A 
natural body does not cease to be the same, though the particles are 
gradually changed, the Form remaining the same, as Alphenus, after the 
philosophers, discourses. 

2 And thus we can explain what Seneca says, that no one of us is 

Chap. IX.] WHEN LORDSHIP AND OWNERSHIP CEASE. 136 

the same in ago which ho was in youth, this being understood of the 
matter of which we consist ; as Heraclitus said, according to the quota- 
tion of Plato in the Cratylus, and Seneca in the abore cited place, that 
we cannot bathe twice in the same rirer : which Seneca rightly corrects, 
by saying the name of the rirer remains, the water passes. So Aris- 
totle, comparing a riyer to a people, says, that rirers are caHed the 
same, though new water is constantly coming in, old water going out. 
Nor is it the empty name which remains; but that habit, which Conon 
defines as a JtabU holding the body together, and Philo, as a spirittKd 
bond, and which the Latins also call the spirit of the thing. Thus a 
People, as Alphenus and Plutarch say, is reckoned the same now as it 
was a hundred years ago, though none of those who lived then is alire 
now, Ae long as thcU communion which makes a people and binds it to* 
gether with mvtttcU bonds preserves its unity, as Plutarch expresses it. 
And hence arises the mode of speaking, that when we address a people 
now existing, we attribute to it what happened to the same People several 
generations ago ; as we may see both in the historians, and in the Scrip, 
tures. [See the passages.] So in Tacitus, Antonius Primus reminds 
the veterans of the Third Legion, that, Under M. Antonius, they had 
repelled the Parthians, under CorbuLo, the Armenians. 

3 It is therefore through spite, and not as speaking truly, that in 
the same Tacitus, Piso denies that the Athenians of his time are the 
Athenians, those being extinct by a succession of calamities ; and says, 
that they are a mixture of the dregs of nations. For that accession 
of strangers had perhaps detracted something from the dignity of the 
people, but had not made it another people. Nor was he ignorant of 
this, since on those very Athenians of his time he charged the old 
&ults which they had committed, their failures against the Macedo- 
nians, their violence against their own citizens. 

But while the change of component parts docs not make a people 
cease to be what it was, even for above a thousand years ; it cannot 
be denied that a people may cease to be : and this may happen in 
two ways ; by the destruction of the body, or by the departure of the 
/orm or spirit of which I have spoken. 

IV. The body is destroyed, either by the simultaneous removal of 
the parts, without which the body cannot subsist, or by taking away 
their connexion as a body. To the former mode, you must refer peo- 
ples swept away by the sea, as the peoples of the island of Atlantis, of 
whom Plato speaks, and others whom Tertulliaii mentions. Also such 
as have been swallowed up by an earthquake or a chasm opened in 
the ground, of which there are examples in Seneca and Ammianus 
Marcellinus, and elsewhere: and those who voluntarily destroyed 
themselves, as the Sidonians and the Saguntines. Pliny says diat 
fifty-three Peoples of ancient Latium perished, leaving no trace. 

If, of such a people, so few survive that they cannot make a Peo- 
ple, what are we to say? In that case, the ownership which the peo- 
ple had in the way of private persons may subsist; but not anything 

136 WHEN LORDSfflP AND [BookIL 

which belongs to a peoplo as a people : and the same may be said of 
a College or Corporation. 

V. The connexion of the parts of the body is taken away, if the 
' citizens either break up their society spontaneously on account of pes- 
tilence or sedition ; or be so distracted by force that they cannot come 
together; which happens sometimes in war. 

VI. The form of a People is taken away, when the participation 
in common rights no longer subsists, either at all, or at least, perfectly: 
whether indiyiduals are reduced into a state of personal slavery, as 
the Myceneans sold by the Argiyes, the Olynthians by Philip, the 
Thebans by Alexander, the Bruttians sentenced to slavery at public 
works by the Romans ; or retiuning their liberty* are deprived of their 
political power. Thus Livy relates of Capua, that the Romans deter* 
mined that it should be inhabited as a hamlet merely, with no muni- 
cipal body, no senate, no assembly of the people, no magistrates ; a 
collection of individuals without authority, among whom a judge sent 
from Rome should administer justice ; and accordingly Cicero says, 
that there was no image of a State left at Capua. The same is to be 
said of peoples reduced into the form of a province, and of those who 
are brought under the authority of another people. Thus Byzantium 
was put under Perinthus by Severus, and Antiochia under Laodicea 
by Theodosius. 

VU. If the People migrate from its place, either of its own will, 
on account of famine, or other calamity ; or under compulsion, as the 
Carthaginian people in the third Punic war, if the form of which I hav9 
spoken remain, the people does not cease to be ; still less, if the walls 
of the city only are thrown down. Therefore when the Lacedsemonians 
would have excluded the Messenians from being admitted among those 
who were to swear to the peace of Greece, because their city-walla 
were destroyed, the matter was decided against them by the common 
council of the allies. 

VIII. 1 Nor does it make any difference how the peoplo is go- 
verned, whether by the authority of a king, or that of a number, or 
that of the multitude. The Roman people was the same under kings, . 
consuls, emperors. Even if the king govern with the most absolute 
power, the people will be the same which it was before, when it was its 
own master ; provided the king is set over it as the head of that people, 
not as the head of another people. For the authority which is in the 
king as the head, is in the people as the whole body, of which the head 
is a part : and therefore when the king, if he be elective, or the king's- 
family, is extinct, the supreme authority reverts to the people, as we 
have shewn above. 

Nor is the objection from Aristotle valid ; when he says that the 

form of the State being changed, the State is no longer the same ; asr 

says he, the harmony is not the same when we modulate out of the 

Dorian mood into the Phrygian [though the notes may be the same].. 

• Ea retmUa is plainly to be understood m libertate reUnta, W. 

Chap. IX.] OWNERSHIP CEASE. 137 

2 For it is to be understood that an artificial thing may hayo seve- 
ral ybrnu; thus, one ybrm of a legion (or regiment) is its government by 
legatif trt^unt, emturiones ; (colonels, captains, Serjeants, &c.) : another 
form of the same body is its order of march or of battle. Thus one 
form of a State is the common participation of right and authority ; 
and another is the relation of the parts governing and governed. The 
politician looks at the latter form, the jurist at the former: and Aris- 
totle was aware of this, when he subjoins, Whether the name (of the 
State) i$to be changed when the form of government is changed, is another 
inquiry: that is, it belongs to another science [Jus], which Aristotle 
does not confound with Political Science (Politica), that he may not 
conmiit the fault which he blames in others, of passing to another 
genus. 

3 When a People has a king placed over it, it does not cease to 
owe the moneys which it owed being free : for it is the same people, 
and retains the ownership of the things which had belonged to the 
people; and also authority over itself, though this authority is not 
now to be exercised by the body, but by the head. And hence we see 
what answer is to be made to a controversy which sometimes arises 
from circumstances ; In what place in a convention ought he to sit who 
has acquired the sovereignty over a people free before: as in the 
Amphictyonic council, Philip of Macedon had the place which the 
Phoceans had had. And so on the other hand, the place which had 
belonged to the king, shall be filled by the people, made free. 

IX. If at any time two Peoples are united, their rights will not be 
lost, but imparted by each to the other ; as the rights, first of the 
Sabines, and afterwards of the Albans, were imparted to the Romans, 
and they were made one republic, as Livy speaks. The same is to be 
conceived of kingdoms which are united, not by league, nor only 
because they have a common king, but joined by a real union. 

X. It may happen, on the contrary, that what had been one State 
is divided, either by mutual consent, or by war; as the body of the 
Persian empire was divided among the successors of Alexander. When 
this happens, there are several sovereignties in the place of one, each 
having its rights over the separate parts. If there was anything 
which they had in common, that is either to be administered in com- 
mon, or to be divided proportionally. 

To this head also is to be referred the separation of a Colony from 
the mother-country. For in this case also there is produced a new 
people which is its own master : They are sent out not to be slaves, but 
to have equal rights, says Thucydides. And so he says that the second 
Colony was sent by the Corinthians to Epidamnus to havefoir and equal 
rights, Tullus in Dionysius of Halicamassus says, That the mother^ 
country should govern her colonies, as a necessary law of ncUure, we do 
not think either trite or just, 

XL 1 There is a very celebrated question among historians and 

138 WHEN LORDSHIP AND [Book H. 

jurists, To whom now belong the Righto which did belong to the 
Roman Empire ? 

Many hold that these righto belong to the German Kingdom^ as it 
was formerly called, or the German Empire ; (it makes no difference 
which name you adopt :) and they conceive that, in some way or 
other, one Empire was put in the place of the other. And yet it is 
well known that Great Germany, that is, Germany beyond the Rhine^ 
was, for the greater part of the time, entirely without the drde of 
the Roman Empire. It appears to me that such a change or transla- 
tion is not to be presumed, except it be preyed by certain documents. 
I therefore hold that the Roman people is still the same people as 
formerly, before it receired the admixture of strangers ; and that the 
Roman Empire remained in it, as in the body in which it existed and 
lired. For what the Roman people had formerly a right to do, before 
the Emperors reigned, it had the right of doing the same, when one 
Emperor was dead, and another not yet created. And eren the election 
of the Emperor belonged to the people ; and was sometimes made by 
the people, by itoelf, or by the Senate. And the elections which 
were made by the Legions, sometimes by one and sometimes by 
another, were not valid by any righto which the L^ons had ; (for in 
, 00 rague a name there could be no certain right ;) but through the 
approbation of the people. 

2 It does not make any objection to this view, that by a con- 
stitution of Antonine^ all the inhabitanto of the Roman Elmpire were 
made Roman citizens. For by that constitution, the subjecto of the 
Roman Empire obtained those righto which the Colonies formerly 
had, and the Municipalities (Municipic^) and the Togate Proyinces, 
(ProvincicB Togatce;) namely, that they should participate in the 
honours of the state, and use the Roman Law (jtu Qiuiritium ;) but 
not that the source of Empire should be in other peoples, as it was in 
the people of the city of Rome; which to do, was not in the power of 
the Emperors, because they could not change the manner and cause 
of holding the imperial authority*. 

Nor did it detract any thing from the right of the Roman people, 
that the Emperors chose to live at Constantinople rather than Rome. 
It must bo supposed that the election was made by that part of the 
Roman people which livod at Constantinople (whence Claudian calls 
the Byzantines Quirites,) and confirmed by the whole people. And the 
Roman people preserved no small monument of ito right, in the pre-- 
rogatives of the city, in the honour of the consulship, and in other 
things. And therefore all the right that those who lived at Con- 

* Grotias here Beto up one fiction, that, under the Emperors, the right of 
election was in the people of Rome ; and then another fiction, that this first 
fiction is not to be extended to persons not belonging to the city of Borne, 
though they had been made Boman citizens. We cannot wonder that he baa 
fbund opponents in this Tiew, as Gronoyios in his Notes. 

Chap. IX.] OWNERSHIP CEASE. 139 

staniiaople had to elect the Roman Emperor, depended on the will of 
the People of Rome. And when the Byzantines had, contrary to the 
desire and practice of the Roman people, elected a woman, Irene, to 
ihe empire, to omit other reasons, the Roman people revoked that 
concession, express or tacit, and elected an emperor itself; and de- 
clared its election by the yoice of its First Citizen, that is, its Bishop*; 
(as in the Judaic republic before the kings existed, the High-priest 
was the first person.) 

3 This election was a personal election in the case of Charle- 
magne and some of his successors : who themselTes carefully distin- 
guished the right of authority which they had over the Franks and 
Lombards, from their right over the Romans, as obtained on new 
grounds. But afterwards, when the Frank people were diyided into 
a western people, which now holds France, or Gallia, and an eastern, 
which holds Germany or Alemamiia ; and when the eastern Franks, 
(the Germans) had begun to elect kings, (for at that time the succes- 
sion of Frankish kings was quasi agnatic, but depended more on 
popular suffrage than on certain right,) it was agreed by the people 
of Rome, in order that they might be sure of a protector, not to 
hare a king of their own, but the king whom the Germans had elected: 
yet so that they might retain some power of confirming or annulling 
the election, so far as they were concerned. 

4 This approbation was wont to be proclaimed by the Bishop, and 
solemnly celebrated by a special coronation, [that of King of the Ro- 
mans.] Wherefore he who is elected by the Seven Princes who re- 
present Germany, has authority to rule over the Germans according 
to their usages. But the same person is, by the approbation of the 
Roman people, made Roman Emperor, or King, or, as historians often 
speak. King of the kingdom of Italy. And by that title, he has under 
him whatever belonged to the people of Rome, and that has not passed 
under the authority of other peoples by compact, or by occupation of 
derelict, or by the right of conquest. 

And hence we easily understand by what right the Bishop of 
Rome, during the vacancy of the Empire, gives the investitures of 
the fiefs of the Roman Empire ; namely, because he is the first person 
in the Roman people, which at that time is free. For whatever 

* Here we have a third fiction, that the election of the Byzantine Emperors 
was made by the Boman citizens at Byzantium, (though the Roman citizens in 
other cities had not such power of election, by the second fiction ;) and a fourth 
fiction, that it was confirmed by the Roman citizens at Rome : which last fiction 
is slightly countenanced by the protest against Irene : and a fifth fiction, that 
the Pope, as the first citizen of Rome, declared the election made by the Roman 
People according to their ancient right ; which is probably, as Gronovius says, not 
a Tiew which would hare pleased the Pope. 

Grotius's scheme does howcTer explain the relation of the Emperor of Ger- 
many, the kings of the Romans, and the Pope; and thus makes a jural transition 
from the ancient to the modem world, W. 

140 WHEN LORDSHIP AND OWNERSHIP CEASE. [Book H. 

office belongs to any body, is wont to be discharged by the first person 
of that body, as we have elsewhere said. 

Nor is that unsound which Cynus and Raynerius hare laid down, 
that if the Roman Emperor were preyented from dischar^g his 
office by disease or captiyity, there might be a substitute for him 
appointed by the Roman People. 

Xn. That the person of the heir, as to the continuation both 
of public and priyate ownership, is to be conceiyed as the same with 
the person deceased, is undoubted law. 

XUI. How far the Conqueror succeeds to the Conquered, will be 
explained below in speaking of the effects of war. 

CHAPTER X. 

Of the Obligation arising from Oumerahip. 

Sect. I. 

Obligation of restoring alien 

VII. 

things. 

VIII. 

IL 

Of restoring the profit made 
of them. 

IX. 

IIL 

Bona fide possessor not bound 
for things lost : 

X. 

IV. 

Bound for the profit extant : 

XI. 

V. 

And consumed. 

XII. 

VL 

But not what was not col" 
lected : 

XIII. 

Nor what was given awag t 
Nor sold. 

When may he keep the 
price $ 

An alien thing bought not 
to be restored to the seller, 
A thing, owner unknown, 
A thing due for civil cause^ 
Fungible things. 

L 1 TTAVING expluned, as far as is requisite for our purpose, the 
XI Right which we may have over persons or things, we must 
DOW see what obh'gation upon us arises therefrom. Now such obli- 
gation arises either from things extant, (including in things, persons,) 
or from things not extant. 

2 From things extant, this obligation arises ; that he who has a 
thing of mine in his power is bound to do so as much as he can that 
it may come into my power. I say, as much as he can : for he is not 
obliged to what is impossible, nor to restore the thing to me at his own 
expense ; but he is bound to indicate it, that another may recover 
what is his. For as in the state of community of things, a certain 
equality came to be observed, so that one might bo able to use those 
common things not less than another ; so when ownership is intro- 
duced, there is a sort of association established among owners, that 
ho who has in his power a thing belonging to another, is to restore it 
to the owner. For if ownership were only so far effective, that the 
thing is to be restored to the owner if he asks for it, ownership would 
be too feeble, and custody too expensive. 

3 Nor is it here considered whether a person has obtained pos- 
session of the thing bona fide or mala fide, believing that he has a right, 
or not : for the obligation from delict (mala fides) is one matter, but 
the thing (and possession of it) is another. The Lacedssmonians 
tried to free themselves from the delict by condemning Phoebidas who 
had seized Cadmea, the citadel of the Thebans, in violation of the treaty; 
but as they, nevertheless, retained the citadel, they were charged 
with injustice : and this injustice, as being flagrant, was avenged by 
a singular providence of God, as Xenophon notes. So Cicero 
blames M. Crassus and Q. Hortensius who had kept possession of 
legacies by a will which was false, though fabricated without fault of 
theirs. 

4 But because this obligation binds all men, as by a universal 

142 OP THE OBLIGATION [BooKn. 

contract, and giyes a certain right to the owner : hence it comes that 
special contracts, as later in time, are subject to exception. Hence 
light is thrown on the case put by Tryphoninus. A robber took my 
property and deposited it in the hands of Seiusy who was ignorant of the 
crime : ought Seius to restore it to the robber or to me f If we look only 
at the giver and receiver, bona fides requires that the thing deposited 
should be restored to him who gave it. If we look at the equity of the 
whole matter, taking into aecoimt all the persons concerned, the property 
must be restored to me, from wh<ym it was most wrongJuUy taken. And 
he rightly adds: I am of opinion that justice requires to give to each man 
his oum in stich a way, that it be not again to be transferred by the more 
just demand of another person. In fact, the claim of the owner is more 
jost, in yirtue of that right which we have spoken of as contemporary 
with ownership. And hence it follows, as we find in the same Try- 
phoninus, that he who in ignorance has received, as a deposit, a thing 
which is his own, is not bound to restore it: and the question dis- 
cussed a little before, concerning things deposited by him whose pro- 
perty had been forfeited, is to be decided on these grounds, rather 
than by the consideration which Tryphoninus adduces, of the utility 
of the punishment. 

5 It makes no difference in the nature of ownership whether it 
arise jure gentium or jure civHi: for it always has along with it the 
accompaniments which are natural to it : among which is the obliga- 
tion of every possessor to restore a thing to its owner. And this is 
what Martinus says, that, jure gentium, things may be sued for from 
him who possesses them without just cause. 

From this source arises that which is delivered by IJlpian, that he 
who finds anything is so far bound to restore it to the owner, that he 
cannot demand a reward for finding it. Also the produce of the thing 
found is to be restored, saving the expense. 

n. 1 Concerning things not extant, this is the rule established 
by mankind (the jus gentium), that if you are made richer by some- 
thing which is mine, and which I am deprived of, you are bound to 
make restitution to the extent of your gain. For by what you have 
gained from my property, you have so much the more, and I the less. 
But ownership was introduced to preserve equality, that is, each having 
his own. So Cicero. [See.] 

2 This rule of equity extends so far that the jurists define many 
points by means of it, without applying rules of law, referrmg to 
equity as the plainest ground. Thus a person is held responsible for 
the acts of a servant whom he has set over a shop, except he have 
warned people against trusting him. And even when he has given warn- 
ing, if the servant have only a share in the business, and if the surplus 
of profit go to the master, his warning is not held good. For, says 
Proculus, he appears to act fraudulently (dole male) who tries to get 
gain by the loss of others (the servants creditors) ; where dolus malu$ 
means anything contrary to natural right and equity. 

Chap. X.] ARISING FROM OWNERSHIP. 143 

If a friend, at the request of the mother, haye advanced money for 
the son's agent, he has not properly an action against the agont, for 
eommission discharged or work done ; nor was it properly the agent's 
work which he did ; for it was in regard to the mother that he gave 
his money; yet, according to Papinian, there will lie an (indirect) 
action for work done, against the agent, because he has been liberated 
from responsibility by the money of the friend. 

If a wife hare given money to her husband, which she could by 
law call back again, she has an action establishing her claim to that 
wMeh has been bought with the money: for, says Ulpian, it cannot be 
denied that the husband is the richer by the proceeding : and there 
is to be an inquiry what he possesses which is his wife's. 

If money, which my servant stole from me, you have spent, think- 
ing that it was his own property, I have an action against you, as if my 
property had come into your hands without any just title to it. 

Wards are not bound to repay loans according to the Roman Law ; 
yet, if the ward thereby become richer, an indirect action will lie. 

If a debtor pledge a thing belonging to another, and it be sold by 
the creditor, the debtor is relieved, in respect to the creditor, to the 
extent of the price received for the thing : because, says Tryphoninus, 
whatever be the kind of obligation which the debtor has, the price 
paid in consequence of the debtor's proceeding, may more equitably 
go to the debtor's profit, than to that of the creditor. But the debtor 
will be bound to the buyer, because he is not to gain by another's 
loss. If the creditor had taken a greater part of the produce than 
would pay him, he would have to account for the whole which he had 
received. 

In like manner, if you dealt with my debtor, not as thinking him 
indebted to me, but to another person, and borrowed money of him, 
you are bound to me; not because I have entrusted money to you; 
(for this cannot be done without mutual consent ;) but because my 
money, which has made its way to you, it is fair and equitable that 
you should render to me. 

3 The later jurists extend these principles to other similar cases : 
for instance, that if a person have absconded and his goods have been 
sold, when he had a case which would have protected them, he is 
to be admitted to the money raised by the sale : and he who has 
lent money to support the son, if the father be insolvent, and the son 
have maternal property, has an action against the son. 

These two rules being rightly understood (for extant and non- 
extant property), the answer will not be difficult to the questions 
which are wont to be proposed by Jurists and by Theologians, writ- 
ing for the instruction of the internal tribunal of the mind. 

m. In the first place, it appears that a bona fide possessor is not 
bound to any restitution, if the thing be destroyed ; for he neither 
has the thing nor any gain from the thing : [a mala fide possessor is 
bound by his own act, besides the consequences of wrong doing.] 

144 OF THE OBLIGATION [Book U. 

IV, Secondly, a bona fide possessor is boand to restore also the 
still extant produce of the thing: I say the produce of the tJUng; 
for the produce of industry, even if it would not take place without 
the thing, is not due to the thing. The cause of this obligation is 
ownership : for he who is owner of a thing is naturally owner of 
the fruits of the thing. 

v. Thirdly, that a bona fide possessor is bound to restitution 
both of the thing and of the produce of it consumed by him, if in 
any case he would have consumed as much : for by so much he is 
held to be richer. And accordingly Caligula is praised for haying, 
in the beginning of his reign, when he restored goremments to per* 
sons, giren them also the income of the interral elapsed. 

YI. Fourthly, a bona fide possessor is not bound to restore the 
produce which he neglected to take ; for he neither has the thing, 
nor anything which has come into its place. 

VU. Fifthly, if a bona fide possessor has given to another a thing 
giren to himself, he is not bound to restitution, except, in any case, 
without haying this thing, he would haye given something of equal 
value : for then he has gained by sparing his own property. 

VIII. Sixthly, if ho sell a thing which he have bought (belonging 
to another), he is not bound *, except in so far as he sold it for more 
than he gave for it. If he have sold a thing given to him (belonging 
to another) he is held to restore the price; except it happen that 
he have spent the price, and would not otherwise have spent the 
money. 

IX. 1 Seventhly, a thing belonging to another which has been 
bona fide bought, is to be restored, and the price paid cannot be 
demanded back*. To which rule it seems to me that this exception 
should be made ; — except in so far as the owner could not probably 
recover possession of his thing without some expense; as, for ex* 
ample, if it were in the hands of pirates : for then we may deduct as 
much as the owner would willingly have expended on it. For the 
actual possession of a thing, especially of a thing difficult to recover, 
is of itself a valuable matter, and in this the owner, after he has lost 
the thing [and recovered it] is richer than he was before. And there- 
fore though the buying of a thing which is one's own is not valid by 
ordinary law, yet Paulus says that it is valid, if it be agreed from the 
first that the possession which another has of it may be bought. Nor 
do I here require that the thing should be bought with a purpose 
of restoring it to the owner, in which case an action for agency 
would lie. Some hold one way, some the other. For the action for 
agency is the creation of the Civil Law, and has none of those foon- 

* These two Bules do not agree well together: according to the seventh, a 
thing belonging to another, which we have bought honajidtt, we mnst restore to the 
owner, not requiring the price from him ; according to the sixth, if we have bought 
it, and then sold it, we are not bound to restore the price. It appears to b« 
assumed, in the seventh Bnle, that we have a remedy against the teller. W. 

Ghap. X.] ARISING FROM OWNERSHIP. 145 

dations by means of which nature induces obligation. And we are 
here inquiring what is Natural Law. 

2 TJlpian's opinion respecting funeral expenses is of the same 
kind ; that a just judge in such cases does not merely imitate the effect 
of an action for agency, but follows equity in a larger manner, the na- 
ture of the action allowing him to do so. And so, what the same writer 
elsewhere says, if any one has transacted business for me, not haying 
a regard to me, but for the sake of his own gain, he may hare an 
action, not for all that he has expended, but for the amount by which I 
am richer. And so the owners of goods which are thrown orerboard 
to lighten the ship, recover a part from the others whose goods are 
sared by that proceeding ; for a person who preserres, by any step, his 
property which was in danger of perishing, is by so much the ridier. 

X. Eighthly ; the person who has bought a thing belonging to 
another, cannot restore it to the seller to save himself the price: 
because, as soon as the thing is in his possession, the obligation of 
restoring it has begun. 

XL Ninthly ; he who has a thing the owner of which is unknown, 
is not naturally bound to give it to the poor: although this is a very 
pious course, in many places properly ordered. The reason is, be- 
cause, in Tirtue of ownership, no one has a right except the owner. 
But that there is no owner, and no apparent owner, is the same thing 
to him to whom he is not apparent. 

Xn. Tenthly, by Natural Law, what is receired either for a 
shameful cause, or for an honest cause to which any one was bound, 
[without reward,] is not to be restored : though such a rule is not un- 
reasonably introduced by some laws. The reason is, that no one is 
bound by the reason for which the thing is given, except it be a thing 
belonging to another : but in the case now supposed, the ownership 
passes in virtue of the will of the former owner. It is another matter 
if there be something wrong in the mode of acquisition ; for instance, 
extortion: for this is another principle of obligation, concerning which 
we do not now speak. 

Alll. Let us add also this, erroneously ruled by Medina : that 
the ownership of things belonging to others may pass to us without 
the consent of the owner, if they are such things as are commonly 
valued according to number, weight, and measure. Things of this 
kind are udd Junetumem reciperej to be such that one portion may pass 
for another, so that they may be restored by means of that which is 
not identical, but only the same in kind. But this can be done only 
when consent has preceded, or may, by law or usage, be understood to 
have preceded, as in lending ; or if the thing, being consumed, cannot 
be e^bited. But without such consent, express or presumed, and 
without necessity, fhtit Junction has no place. 

CHAPTER XL 

Of Promises. 

BCT. L 

Natural Right from Pro^ 
miset. 

XIII. 

IL 

Nude Declaration, 

XIV. 

III. 

PollieitatUm. 

XV. 

IV. 

Promise. 

V. 

U$e qf Reason, 

XVL 

VI. 

Promise made in Error, 

XVIL 

VIL 

Promise made under Fear. 

VUI. 

Promise of what is in our 

XVIIL 

power. 

XIX. 

IX. 

Promise for a tnetous cause. 

XX. 

X. 

Promise to obtain a due. 

XL 

Manner of promising ^ 

XXI. 

ourselves : 

XXIL 

XU. 

Eg others. 

Exercitorian and Jnstito- 
rian ObUgations, 
Acceptance required. 
Must Promiser know the 
acceptance 9 
Revocable Promise. 
Acceptance prevented bg 
death of Messenger. 
Acceptance bg another. 
Condition added to Promise. 
Validation of invalid Pro^ 
mise. 

Promise without cause. 
Promise qfaUen act. 

L 1 r I iJbUfi order of our work has led us to the obligation which ariaes 
I from pronuses. And here we at onoe And opposed to us a 
man of no ordinary erudition, Francis Connanus. For he nuuntains 
this opinion, that,^'tire naturoB ac gentium, those pacts which hare not a 
consideration ((rvwaXXay/Mi), do not induce any obligation; though no 
doubt they may be properly fulfilled, if the matter be such as it would 
hare been, without promise, proper and congruent to some yirtue to 
perform. 

2 He adduces for his opinion not only the dicta of jurists, but also 
these reasons : (I) That there is a fftult no less in him who rashly 
trusts a person who makes a promise for no cause: (2) That there is 
a great danger thrown upon the fortunes of all, if men be judged to be 
bound by a promise, which often proceeds more from ostentation than 
firom real purpose ; or from a purpose, but a light and inconsiderate 
one : (3) That it is right to leave something to each person's honesty, 
and not to bind men to the necessity of an obligation : — ^that it is 
disgraceful not to fulfil promises, not because such a course is ui\just, 
but because thereby the levity of the promise is detected. 

He also uses the authority of Cicero, who says, that promises are 
not to be kept when they are useless to those to whom they are made ; 
nor if they do more harm to you than good to those to whom you 
made them. (De Of, i. 10.) 

If the matter be no longer open, in consequence of some step 
having been taken, he pronounces that what you ought to do, is, not 
what is promised, but what is for the interest of the promisee:— that the 
pacts, not having any force of themselves, receive foroe firom the con- 

Chap. XL] OF PROMISES. 147 

tracts of which they are parts or additions^ or from the delirerj of the 
thing in question; whence arise, partly actions, partly exceptions to 
actions, and prohibitions of suit. 

But pacts which haye an obligatory force according to the Laws, 
as pacts with stipulations and some others, have, he holds, this force 
by the help of the laws, which hare this efficacy, that what of itself is 
proper, they make to be necessary. 

3 But this opinion cannot stand, in the general form in which he 
propounds it. For, in the first place, it follows therefrom that pacts 
between kings and different peoples, so long as nothing thereof is per- 
formed (fi0 irUegrd) hare no force; [the parties being bound by no 
conunon instituted law;] especially in those places in which no regular 
form of treaties and engagements has been introduced. 

And again, no reason can be found why laws, which are in a cer. 
tiun way a common pact of the people, and are so called by Aristotle 
and Demosthenes, should be able to giye obligatory force to pacts ; 
while the will of a person, directed especially, and by erery means, to 
put himself under an obligation, should not be able to do so ; especially 
when the Ciyil Law offers no impediment. 

Add to this, that when the will is sufficiently signified, the owner- 
ship of a thing may be transferred, as we haye already said : why then 
may there not also be a transfer of a jtu in personam, a right to the 
peiformance of a person's promise, or a right to transfer ownership, 
(which is a less thing than ownership itself,) or a right to do anything; 
since we hare the same right oyer our actions as oyer the things 
which belong to us ? 

4 To this is to be added the consent of wise men ; for as it is said 
by jurists, that nothing is so natural as that the will of the owner 
when he wishes to transfer to another a thing which is his, should be 
held yalid; in the same way it is said that nothing is so congruous to 
the mutual confidence of mankind, as to perform the agreements which 
haye been nuule among men. Thus the edict concerning paying 
money agreed to be paid at a certain time, when in the person so 
agreeing no cause had preceded except consent, is said to fayour natu- 
ral equity. Paulus also says, that a man owes us a debt, when, jttre 
ffeniium, he ought to giye it us, we relying upon his good faith ; in which 
place^ first, the word aught implies a certain moral necessity: nor can 
we admit what Gonnanus says, that we rely upon a man's good faith, 
only when some step has been taken in agreement with the promise : 
for in that place Paulus was speaking of an action for recoyering what 
has been paid and was not owing; which falls to the ground, if the 
money be paid in yirtue of a compact of any kind whateyer : for then, 
eyen before any step had been taken (re ocK^uo integra,) by Natural 
Law aad jure geaUumf it ought to be paid ; eyen if die Ciyil Law did 
not lend its aid, to cut off occasions of litigation [by stopping the ac- 
tion after it has been pud]. 

5 Cioero^ in Us Ofiee$f giyes so much weight to promises, that he 

L2 

148 OF PROMISES. [Book II. 

eallfl Good Faith the foundatioii of JuBtioe. So Horace : and the Pla- 
tonists often call Justice, TVulA, or TnUh/ulnees, which Apuleius trans- 
lates Fideliku. SimonideSi as quoted in Plato's EepuhUe, says that 
Justice is, to return what is entrusted to us, and to speak the truth. 

6 But in order that the thing may be well understood, there 
are three ways of speaking concerning the future, which must be 
carefully distinguished. 

II. The first degree is an assertion explaining our present pur- 
pose with respect to some future action: [/ irUend to give you:] and 
that this may be free f^om fault, a requisite is, a truth of the thought 
for the present time, but not that the thought be perseyered in. For 
the human mind has not only a natural power of changing its 
purpose, but also a right. And if there be any fault in the change, 
or accessory to it, that is not intrinsic to the change, as a change, 
but belongs to the matter; for instance, if the first intention was 
the better of the two. 

in. The second degree is, when the will determines itself for a 
fhture time, with a sufficient sign to indicate the necessity of perse- 
rering; [/ wiU give you]. This may be called polUcitation ; it is 
obligatory without the Ciyil Law, either absolutely or conditionally, 
but it does not gire to another person a proper right. For in many 
cases it happens that there is an Obligation in us, and no corresponding 
Bight in another* : as appears in the duties of mercy and gratitude ; 
and to these, the duty of constancy or fidelity is similar. Therefore 
in yirtue of such pollicitation, the thing so promised cannot be 
retained, or he who made the promise be compelled by Natural Law 
to fulfil it. 

17. 1 The third degree is, when to such a detennination is 
added a sign of wishing to confer a proper right upon another: [/ 
promiee you .*] which is a perfect promise, with the same effects as 
alienation of ownership. For it is either a way to the alienation of 
the thing, or it is an alienation of some portion of our liberty. To the 
former head belong promises to give, to the latter, promises to do. 

A strong example of what we say is furnished by the Scriptures, 
which teach us that God himself^ who cannot be compelled by any 
instituted law, would act contrary to his nature, except he performed 
his promises. [See the passages.] Whence it follows, that the perform- 
ance of promises proceeds firom the nature of inunutable justice, 
which is, in a certain way, common to God and to all rationid crea- 
tures. So ProT. Ti. 1. A promise is spoken of as indissoluble: 
and a row. Numb. xxx. 4, 5, 6. So the word vird<rxro'tr is explained 
by Eustathius. So Ovid. [See.] 

2 This being understood, we shall hare no difficulty in replying 
to Connanus's alignments. For the dida of jurists respecting nude 
imots regard the rule which was introduced by the Roman laws, which 

* It is better to me OhUgaHtm only as oorreUtiTe to Bighi^ and Diffy when 
there it no iiioh ooneUAite Bight, Imt a monl clsiin. E. M, 84^ 89. 

Chat. XI.] OF PROMISES. 149 

made tt^puUuion the oertain sign of a deliberate purpose. Nor do 
we deny that Bimilar laws existed in other nations. What law 
Miffm u$ to perform what we Juwe promised to any onef says Seneca» 
spealdng of human law [Natural Law], and a promise not made with 
formal solemnity. 

3 There may, howerer, by Natural Law, be other signs of a 
deliberate purpose, besides the formality of etipulationf or anything 
else which the Ciril Law requires as a ground for an action, fiut 
what is done not of deliberate intention, we also do not hold to hare 
the force of obligation, as Theophrastus also had noted. And eren 
as to that which is done with deliberate intention, but not with a 
purpose of conceding a proper right to another, we deny that it gires 
to any one a right of demanding the performance by Natural Law : 
though, in this case, we allow that not only a propriety, but eren a 
moral neoesuty arises. 

As to what is adduced from Cicero, we shall treat below, when 
we hare to speak of the interpretation of pacts. 

y. But let us see what conditions are required to produce the 
force of a perfect promise. 

1 first there is required the use of reason : and therefore mad- 
men, and idiots, and children, cannot make a promise. With 
regard to minors, the case is different ; for although these are con- 
ceired not to hare a sufficiently stable judgment, as also women 
are not, yet this state is not pcopetual, nor is it of itself sufficient 
to nullify the force of a promise. 

2 When a boy begins to have the use of his reason, cannot be 
defined with certainty: but the inference is to be made from his 
daily acts, or from that which commonly happens in each country. 
8o among the Hebrews, a promise was ralid which was made by a 
boy after he was thirteen years old, or a girl after twelve. Else- 
where, the Ciyil Laws, moved by good reasons, pronounce certain 
promises of wards or minors to be void, not only among the Romans, 
but also among the Greeks, as Dio Chrysostom notes; and against 
some such promises, they introduce the benefit of restitution. But 
these are properly effects of Civil Law, and therefore have nothing 
to do with Natural Law and jus gentium; except that when they ob- 
tidn, it is agreeable to Natural Law that they be observed. 

Hence even if a stranger make an agreement with a citiaen, he 
is bound by the same laws : because he who makes a contract in any 
place, is under the laws of the place as a temporary subject*. 

3 It is plainly another matter if the compact be made at sea, 
or in a desert island, or by letter between persons absent. For 
such pacts are governed by Natural Law only ; as also the pacts of 
sovereigns as such. For in the private acts of sovereigns, those laws 
have place which make the act void, when it is in their favour, not 
to their detriment 

* Lex loci emUraciut: E.M. 1106. 

150 OF PROMISES. [BooKn. 

YL 1 The diflcossion of pacts made in error* is sufficiently per- 
plexed. For a distioction is commonly made between an error as to 
the substance of a thing, and an error not abont the snbstanoe: as, 
whether frand was the occasion of the contract : whether the person 
with whom the contract was made was a party to the fraud : whether 
it be an action strieHjurit or bones fideif. For, according to these 
yariations, writers pronounce some acts yoid, others, yaUd, but open to 
be rescinded or remodelled at the choice of him who is injured. But 
the greater part of these distinctions come from the Roman Law, 
both the old Ciyil Law, and the decisions of Prsotors; and some of 
them are not sufficiently true or accurate. 

2 But the way to find the natural truth, is opened to us by a prin- 
dple concerning the force and efficacy of laws, which is reoeiyed by 
an almost uniyersal consent :— that if the law be founded on the pre- 
sumption of some fact, which fact is really not so, then that law does 
not oblige : because, the truth of the fact failing, the whole founda- 
tion of the law is wanting. But when the law is founded on such a 
presumption, is to be collected from the matter, words, and circum- 
stances of the law. In like manner then we shall say, that when a 
promise is founded on the presumption of some &ct which is not really 
80, that by Natural Law it has no force : because the Promisor does 
not agree to the promise except on a certain condition which in reality 
did not exist : to which we must refer Cicero's question concerning 
the person who, fetlsely belieying his son to be dead, made another 
person his heir. [De OrcUoret i. 38.] 

8 But if the promisor has been negligent in inquiring into the 
matter, or in expressing his intention, and another person has thereby 
suffered loss, the promisor will be bound to make that loss good ; not 
by the force of his promise, but as haying done damage by his fault ; 
of which head we shall hereafter treat. But if there was indeed an 
error, but one on which the promise was not founded, the act will be 
valid, a true consent being there not wanting. But in this case also, 
if he to whom the pronuse is made, fraudulently giye occasion to the 
error, he will be bound to make good whateyer damage the promisor 
has done from that error, from that other head of obligation. If the 
promise was founded partly in error, it will be yaUd as to the renuun- 
ing part. 

Vn. 1 Of promises made through fear{, the treatment is no 
less entangled. For here too a distinction is commonly made be- 
tween a fear which is graye, either absolutely, or with reference to the 
person who fears, and a slight fear ; between fear impressed justly 
and unjustly ; by the promisee, or by another : also between acts of 
liberality, and acts of mutual promise. And according to these diyersi- 
ties, some acts are declared yoid ; others, reyocable at the choice of the 

* Of Erroneom Promises, see E. M, 281. f •^* M. 717, 718. 

t Of Extorted Promises, see E, M, 293. 

Chap. XI.] OF PROMISES. 161 

promisee; othen, eases for entire restitnlion ; not without great variety 
of opinion on these particular cases. 

2 I am entirely of the opinion of those who think that, setting 
aside the Ciril Law, which may either take away or diminish an obli- 
gatiouy he who has promised any thing under fear, is bound * : for here 
was consent, not conditional^ as in the case of erroneous promises, 
but absolute. For as Aristotle says, he, who in fear of shipwreck, 
throws his goods oyerboard, would wish to keep them, conditionally, 
if there was not the danger of shipwreck ; but, absolutely, he is willing 
to lose them, considering the circumstances of time and place. 

But I also think that this is certainly true ; that if the promisee 
has produced a fear, not just, but unjust, eyen though slight, and if 
the promise was occasioned by this, he is bound to liberate the pro- 
miser if the promisor desires it ; not because the promise was invalid, 
but on account of the damage wrongfuUy done : what exception to a 
demand this gives rise to, we shall explain in its own place below. 

3 That some of our acts are rescinded on account of fear im- 
pressed on us by another person than the one with whom we treat, is 
a matter of Civil Law, which often also makes either void or revocable 
acts freely done ; on account of infirmity of judgment. And what we 
have said above, of the force and efficacy of Civil Laws, is to be under- 
stood as repeated here. 

What is the efficacy of an Oath in making promises hold, we shall 
see below. 

VUI. 1 As to what concerns the matter of promises, a condition 
to produce a perfect promise is, that it is, or may be, in the rightful 
disposal of the promiser. Whence, first, prombes are not valid, to do 
an act in itself unlawful ; for such a right no one has nor can have. 
But a promise, as we have said above, receives its force from the 
right of the promiser, and cannot be extended further. When Agesi- 
laus was interrogated concerning a promise which he had made, ho 
said : If it be just, well <ind good: if not, I scud, Imt I did not promiae. 

2 K the matter be not now in the power of the promber, but may 
at some time be so, the efficacy of the prombe will be suspended : 
because then, the promise must be supposed to be made under the 
condition, if the thing come into hb power. But if the condition 
under which the thing may come into the power of the promber, be 
abo potestative [such as he can himself bring about or accelerate], the 
promiser is bound to do whatever b morally equitable, in order that 
the condition may be fulfilled. 

8 But in such cases abo, the Civil Law b wont to make many 
things void for the sake of utility, which by Natural Law would be ob- 
ligatory ; as a prombe of future marriage, made by a man or woman 
who has a spouse alive; and not a few things done by minors or sons 
of families. 

* Ohligatur, layi Grotim : nmUme ohligabtr, says Borbeyrac, and refers to hb 
notes on Pnffendoif. See for the reasons why he b bound, E, M. 200. 

152 OF PROMISES. [Book 11. 

IX. It 18 oommonly made a queetion, whether a promiM made 
for a cause mttnrally yicious is yalid by Natural Law ; as if any thing 
be promised for committing homicide. Here it is erident enough 
that the pronuse itself is yidous, for it is made that another person 
may be induced to commit a crime. But what is done Tidously, is 
not necessarily Toid, as to its jural effects ; as appears by the case of a 
prodigal donation. There is howerer this difference ; that when the 
donation is made, the riciousness ceases : for there is no Tioe in the 
thing being left in the hands of the donatary. But in promises made 
for a yidous cause, the rice remiuns as long as the crime is not per- 
petrated: so long, the ftdfilment of the promise, as a stimulus to 
eyil, has a taint in it, which ceases when the crime is committed. 
Whence it follows, that up to that time, the efficacy of such a pronuse 
is suspended, as we said aboTO, in speaking of promising a thing which 
is not ours to giro: but the crime being perpetrated, the force of the 
obligation comes into play, having been intrinsically in existence from 
the first, but barred by the rice which was connected with it. We 
have an example of diis in Judah, who paid to Thamar her hire^ 
deeming her a harlot 

But if the wrong of the promisee gave occasion to the promise, or 
there be an inequality in the contract, how these things are to be 
remedied, is another question, hereafter to be considered. 

X. What is promised, for a consideration which was due without 
the promise, is still to be paid, if we look at Natural Law, according 
to what we have said aboYO of the acceptance of a thing belonging to 
another, (n. x. 11 and 12.) But here also the damage produced 
by extortion, or the^ inequality of the contract, will require to be re- 
paired, according to rules hereafter to be given. 

XL As to what concerns the mode of nuiking the promise, that, 
as we said of the transfer of ownership, requires an external act ; that 
is, a sufficient sign of the will, which sometimes may be a nod, but 
more frequently, the voice or writing. 

Xn. We may also be bound by means of another man, if there 
be clear evidence of our purpose in appointing him as our instrument 
either for this special purpose, or in a general manner. And in a 
general appointment, it may happen that the person appointed binds 
us, when he acts contrary to our will signified to him alone. For here 
there are two distinct acts of willing : one by which we obliged our- 
selves to hold valid whatever he does in this kind of business; another, 
in which we put him under an obligation to us, not to act except ao- 
cording to our directions, known to him and not to others, which is 
to be noted in those things which Envoys promise for kings in virtue 
of their written powers, when they go beyond their secret instructions. 

XnL Hence we may understand that an exercitarian action (one 
against ship-owners for the contracts of the captain,) and an insti' 
torian action, (one against the owner of a trading concern for the con- 
tracts of the acting agent,) depend on Natural Law, being, not so much 

Chap. XL] OP PROMISES. 153 

dlsiinct kinds of action, as qualities of actions. But it has been im- 
properly added by the Roman Law, that all the ship-owners are bound 
sererally, as well as jointly, by the acts of the captain. This is nei- 
ther in accordance with natiural equity, which is satisfied if each owner 
is responsible for his own share ; nor useful to the public ; for persons 
are deterred from sending adventures in ships, if they are in fear that 
they may be indefinitely involyed by the acts of the captain. And 
therefore in Holland, where commerce has long flourished, that Roman 
law neither preyailed formerly, nor does now ; on the contrary, it is 
the law that, in an exercitorian action, eren the whole body of owners 
are not held responsible, beyond the value of the ship and cargo. 

XIV. In order that a promise may transfer a right, acceptance 
is required here no less than in the transfer of ownership ; but in such 
a way that here also a precedent asking is understood to remain in 
force, and to have the effect of acceptance. Nor is this contradicted 
by what is appointed in the Civil Law, that offers made to the Public are 
binding; which reason has induced some persons to judge that by the 
Law of Nature^ the act of the promisor alone suffices : for the Roman 
Law does not say this, that the force of such an offer or pollicUation 
is complete before acceptance ; but it forbids it to be recalled, so that 
it may always be accepted : which effect is not a result of Natiural 
Law, but of Civil Law ; very similar to what the jus gentium has intro- 
duced concerning infants and idiots. For with regard to such persons, 
both the purpose of taking possession of things which require such a 
step, and the purpose of acceptance when that is required, are supplied 
by the law. 

XV. The question is also raised, whether it is sufficient that 
acceptance is made, or whether it must be notified to the promisor 
before the promise receives its full effect. And it is certain that a 
promise may be made either way : and also in this way : I desire that 
it be valid, if accepted : or in this manner : I desire that it be valid, if 
I shall understand that it has been accepted. And in matters which 
regard mutual obligation, the latter sense is presumed : but in promises 
merely Uberal, the former meaning rather is supposed to prevail, except 
the contrary appear. [Barbeyrac dissents from this.] 

XVI. Hence it follows, that before acceptance, since the right has 
not yet been transferred, a promise can be recalled without injustice, 
and even without inconstancy, if it were really made with the inten* 
tion that it should begin to be valid on acceptance. Also a promise 
may be revoked, if the promisee die before acceptance : because the 
acceptance seemed to be referred to the promisor himself, not his 
heirs. For it is one thing to wish to give a right which will pass to 
the heirs; another thing to wish to give it to the heirs : for it makes a 
great difference on whom the benefit is conferred. And this was 
NeratTs answer, that he did not think that the prince had conceded 
to a person defunct what he had conceded to him supposing him 
alive. 

164 OF PROMISES. [Book H. 

XVH. 1 A promise may also be reroked by the death of hun 
who was chosen to declare to the promisee the promiser's will ; for 
the obligation ended in his words. The case is different in a mes- 
senger who carries letters merely, and who is not the instrument of 
the obligation, but the carrier of the obUgatory instrument; therefore 
letters indicating consent may be carried by any one. We must 
distinguish also between a minister who is elected to make known the 
promise, and him who is elected to make the promise. In the former 
case, the rerocation will have its force, even if it do not become known 
to the minister: in the other case, the reyocation is Toid, because the 
right of promising was dependent on the will of the minister or agent, 
which ^dll, the reyocation not being yet known, was free from all 
fault. So also in the former case, the donation may be accepted, eyen 
the donor being dead ; as being perfect on one side, although reyocably : 
as may be seen on a large scale in ambassadors : in the other case, the 
donation cannot be accepted, because it was not really made, but only 
ordered to be made. 

2 But in a doubtful case, the will of the person who giyes 
the order is understood to be, that the order be Ailfilled, except some 
great change take place, as the death of the person ordering. But 
there may be conjectures which may fayour another judgment, which 
are readily to be admitted, in order that a donation which was directed 
to be made for a pious cause may subsist. And in like manner may 
a controyersy be decided which was once agitated, whether an action 
will hold against the heir of a person entrusted with such a charge^ 
on which subject M. Drusus the pnetor and Sextus Julius gaye dif- 
ferent edicts. 

XYin. 1 Also oontroyersies often occur respecting acceptance 
made for another : in which a distinction is to be made between a 
promise made to me, to giye a thing to another, and a promise con- 
yeyed in the name of him to whom the thing is to be giyen. If the pro- 
mise is made to me, omitting the consideration whether the performance 
of the promise is to my priyate interest, (which was introduced by the 
Roman law,) it seems, by the Law of Nature, that I acqmre the right 
of effecting, by my acceptance, that the right promised pass to the 
other person : so that in the intermediate time the promise cannot 
be royoked by the promber ; but I, to whom the promise was made^ 
haye power to remit it For that sense is not repugnant to Natural 
Law, and agrees best with the words of such a promise : nor is it a 
matter uninteresting to me, that a person should acquire a benefit 
through me. 

2 But if the promise be oonyeyed in his name to whom the 
thing is to be giyen, it is to be distinguished whether he who accepts 
has either a special mandate to accept, or a commission so geneaal 
that such acceptance may be included in it ; or haye not such com- 
mission. When such a mandate has proceeded, I do not think that 
any further distinction is to be made, (as the Roman Laws direct,) 

Chat. XI.] OP PROMISES. 156 

whether the person be his own master or not, but that by such 
acceptance the promise becomes perfect: because consent may be 
given and signified by a minister. For I am supposed to wish 
what I haye put in the power of another, if he too wishes it But, 
fiiiling such a mandate, if another, to whom the promise was not made, 
accepts, the promisor being willing^ the effect will then be this ; that 
the promisor will not have power to reyoke his promise, before he 
whom the promise concerns, has determined that it shall be yalid 
or inyalid : but so that, in the intermediate time, he who has accepted 
the promise cannot remit it, because he was not employed to receiye 
any right, but to bind the good faith of the promisor in maintaining 
a proposed benefit : so that the promisor, if he reyoke, acts against 
good faith, but not against the right of any one. 

X£S. From what has been said, it may be collected what is 
to be decided concerning a burthen added to a promise. For this 
may be done, so long as the promise is not yet completed by accept- 
ance, nor made irreyocable by an especial engagement. But a bur- 
then, added for the conyenience of a third party, may be reyoked, as 
long as it is not accepted by that third party : although there are 
not wanting^ in this as in other questions, those who think otherwise. 
But to a person who looks rightly at the matter, the natural equity 
will appear eyident, so that it will not need many proofs. 

XX. This also is often disputed, how a promise founded in 
error can recover its force, if the promisor wishes to stand by his 
promise. And the same question may be asked concerning pro- 
mises, which are void by the Civil Law on account of fear or other 
causes, if the cause afterwards have ceased. For to confirm these, 
they require only an internal act, which, conjoined with the former 
external act, they think suffices to produce an obligation. Others, 
not satisfied with this, because an external act cannot be a sign of 
a 8ub$equent internal act, require a new promise expressed and ac- 
cepted. The middle opinion is the true one : that an external act 
is required, but not expressed in words, when the retention of the 
thing promised by the promisee, and its relinquishment on the part 
of the promisor, or any similar event, may suffice to signify consent. 

XXI. This also is not to be omitted, in order that Civil Law 
and Natural Law may not be confounded ; that promises which have 
no cause expressed, are not void by Natural Law, any more than 
donations pi property. 

XXII. Also that he who has promised an act on the part of 
another, is not bound to the extent of the interest of the promisee, 
provided he has not omitted to do what he could on his own part, 
to obtain the doing of the thing promised ; except there be words, 
or the nature of the business, such as to induce a stricter obligation. 
As if he had performed hk engagement^ says Livy, because U did not 
depend on him ihat U was not performed. 

CHAPTER Xn. 

Of Contracts. 

Sbot. I, 

, Diffition qf Beruifidai Ads. 

XIV. 

How is Price to beestimatedf 

IL 

Simple. 

XV. 

When is a tale completed f 

IIT. 

Permutatory, distribuHng 

XVI. 

What Monopolies unlaw- 

itUngt; 

ful. 

IV. 

Or conjoining. 

IXVIL 

How is Money fungible 9 

V. 

Acts are mixed primarilp ; 

XVUL 

Letting and hiring. 

VL 

Or by accession. 

XIX. 

Hire augmented. 

VIL 

What are Contracts. 

XX. 

Usury rightly prohibited. 

VIII. 

They require equaiity : in 

XXL 

What is Usury$ 

preceding acts. 

XXIL 

Force of Civil Laws in this. 

IX. 

In knowledge. 

xxm. 

Insurance, 

X. 

In freedom. 

XXIV. 

Fellowship. 

XL 

And in the act itself. 

XXV. 

Marine Insurance, 

XII. 

And in the matter. 

XXVL 

Inequality unth consent. 

XIII. 

EqtMlity in beneficial acts. 

I. /^F human acts which tend to the utility of others, some are 

V^ simple, some are compound. 

II. Of simple acts, some are gratuitously heneficialf others are of the 
nature of exchange of one act for another, permutcUorial, Beneficial 
acts are either merely so, or with some mutual obligation. Mere bene- 
ficial acts are either discharged in the present time, or stand oyer for 
the future. A useful good office is performed in the present time, and 
of this it is not necessary to speak, since it produces adycmtage indeed 
by the recipient, but no effect as of right: so also a donation, by which 
ownership is transferred, of which we treated abore, when we spoke of 
acquisitions of ownership. As acts standing oyer for the future, we 
reckon promises both of giying and of doing; concerning which we haye 
already spoken. 

Beneficial acts with a mutual obligation, are those which dispose 
of any thing without alienation, or so dispose of an act that some effect 
suryiyes. Such is a concession of the use of a thing, which is called a 
Loan ; and of acts, the undertaking of an office ezpensiye or obligatory, 
which we may call a Commission ; of which kind is a Deposit, namely, 
the office of keeping a thing in custody. Similar to these acts are the 
promises of acts, except that, as we haye said, these stand oyer for the 
future ; which also we desire to haye understood of the acts now to be 
explained. 

UL 1 Permutatorial acts either separate the parties or produce a 
community between them. Those acts which separate, diremtorial 
acts, the Roman jurists rightly diyide into these : do ut dea: fotcio xU 
facioB.'/aeiout des. See Paulus and the Digests. [Dig. xix. 6.] 

Chat. XH.] OP CONTRACTS. 167 

2 But the BomaiiB except from this diiision certain contracts 
which they call nominate contracts* ; not so much because they hare 
proper names, (for p&rmuiaHon or exchange, which they exclude from 
nominate contracts, has also a proper name,) as because, from their 
more frequent use, they have receiyed a certain force and nature, 
which may be sufficiently understood by the name, although nothing 
be said specially. Whence also with regard to them there were certain 
established formuin of actions. While in other contracts, which are 
less frequent, that only was implied which was expressed ; and there- 
fore there was not any common and usual form of action, but a form 
accommodated to the fiict, which was therefore called a form tn pre- 
script wordi. 

For the same reason, of a more frequent use in the nominate 
contracts, if certain requisites were present, the necessity of fulfilling 
the contract was held as the rule ; as in sdU^ if the price had been 
agreed upon, the contract was good, eren re integrd^ that is, though 
nothing had been performed on either side : while in the rarer con- 
tracts, re integrdf there was allowed the liberty of retracting, that is, 
impunity, because the Ciril Law withheld coactire force from those 
contracts, leaying them to stand on the good faith of the contracting 
parties only. 

8 Natural Law does not recognize these distinctions: for the 
contracts which are called by men innominatey are neither less natural 
nor less ancient than the nominate. Nay Exchange, which is reckoned 
among the innominate, is both older and simpler than Buying. Eus- 
tathius, where in the Iliad (B. x.) a public contest is mentioned 
with a prize appointed, which in Homer is said to be earned^ inter- 
prets it, taken in exchange, adding, /or it is a sort of contract ; namely, 
faeio ta de»f I work that you may pay. We therefore, foUowing 
nature, shall refer all diremtory contracts to the three kinds which 
we have mentioned, making no distinction of nominate and inno- 
minate. 

4 Hence we shall say that do ut dee, I give that you may give, either 
one thing for another, which is specially call^ Permutation or 
Exchange, and is doubtless the oldest kind of commerce : or money for 
money, to which the merchants giro the technical name of Exchange : 
(CanMum :) or a thing for money, as in Buying and Selling : or the 
use of a thing for a thing : or the use of a thing for the use of a 
thing : or the use of a thing for money, which is Letting and Hiring. 
By tue, we here mean both the naked use, and that which is com- 
bined with the enjoyment of the produce, whether temporary, or 
personal, or hereditary, or circumscribed ui any other way ; as that 
which among the Hebrews continued to the year of the Jubilee. In 
a Loan, the thing is giren, in order that after the lapse of a certain 
time, the same in quantity and kind may be returned, of things which 

* 8m JF. AT. 708, &e. 

168 OP CONTRACTS. [Book H. 

are estimated in weight, measnrey and number^ both other things and 
money. 

6 The exchange of act for act may hare innumerable kinds 
according to the diversity of the acts. But fa/do ut detf iBf I ad 
that you may give, either money, (and this includes Letting and 
Hiriog, and Assurance against risk, a contract formerly hardly 
known, now among the most common,) or that you may give a 
thing, or the use of a thing. 

IV. Acts communicatory, either establish a community of acts, 
or of property, or property on the one side, acts on the other for 
the common utility; idl which are called Partnership. In which 
class are included associations for the mutual Protection of ships in 
time of war, against pirates or other enemies, which is called an 
AdmircUiy, 

y. Acts are nuxed (or compound, § l) either as principal, or by 
the accession of another act. [Fiist as principal.] Thus if I know- 
ingly buy a thing for more than it is worth, and give the seller the 
excess of price, it is partly buying, partly donation. If I promise 
money to a goldsmith for making rings for me of his own gold, it is 
partly buying (of material), partly hire (of labour). So in Partner, 
ships it happens that one person contributes acts and money, ano- 
ther money only. And in the Feudal Contract, the concession of the 
fief is a benefice, but the pact of military sendee for protection is 
faeio ut faeicu. And if the fief be burthened with an annual pay- 
ment, it is, so far, a letting for a money-rent. So money lent to 
shipowners is partly a Loan and partly Insurance. 

YI. Acts are mixed by the accession of another act, as in giving 
security, and in pledge. For suretiship, if you regard the business 
which takes place between the surety-giver and the principal debtor, 
is for the most part a commission : if you regard the business be- 
tween the creditor and the surety-giver, who receives nothing, it is an 
act merely liberal : but because this liberal act is added to an onorose 
contract, it is reckoned with such contracts. So the giving of a 
pledge seems to be a liberal act, by which the detention of a thing 
Is conceded ; but this also takes its nature from the contract which Is 
thus supplied with a security. 

YII. All acts useful to others, with the exception of merely 
beneficial acts, are called Contracts. 

VUl. In Contracts, nature requires equality, and in such a way 
that, from inequality, he who has the worse share, acquires a right. 
This equality consists partly in the act, partly in the matter concern- 
ing which the act is, and in the acts both precedent and principaL 

IX. 1 It belongs to the preceding acts, that he who makes a 
contract about any thing, ought to make known the fsults of the 
thing so far as he knows them, which is not only the usual rule of 
Civil Laws, but also agreeable to the nature of the act For be- 
tween the oontracting parties, there is a connexion closer than the 

Chap. XIL] OF CONTRACTS. 159 

common society of mankind. And in tliiB way we answer the argu- 
ment of Diogenes of Babylon on this subject, who says that all that 
Is untold is not therefore concealed : and that it is not necessary for 
me to say all that it is useful for you to hear : thus I need not tell 
you how the heayens moye. For the nature of Contract, having for 
its object common utility, reqmres some closer union. So Ambrose 
and Lactantius. [See.] 

2 The same does not apply to circumstances which do not affect 
the thing itself: as if any one know that there are many ships on 
their way bringing com. To tell this is kind and laudable ; often so 
fw, that it cannot be omitted without riolating the rule of charity : but 
the omission is not unjust; that is, it is not repugnant to the right of 
him with whom I deal : so that here that may hold which the same 
Diogenes said, as Cicero reports'*', / bring my wares to market: I offer 
them for »ale: I seU what is my own: not dearer than others; perhaps 
eheaperi as I have a larger stock. Whom do I wrong f Therefore 
we are not in general to follow the rule which Cicero lays down, that 
it is concealment, if those whose interest it is to know anything, you 
would haye ignorant of it for the sake of your gain. That holds with 
regard only to points which affect the thing itself: as if a house 
which is to be sold is unhealthy ; if it has been ordered by the ma- 
gistrate to be pulled down : where see the examples which he giyes. 

3 The faults which are known to the person with whom you deal, 
need not be mentioned ; as the servitude to which the house was sub- 
ject which Gratidianus sold to Oratas, haying bought it of him before : 
for both parties, haying equal knowledge, are on an equality. So 
Horace; Plato. 

X. Nor is it only in the understanding with respect to the matter, 
but also in the use of the will, that there ought to be a certain 
equality between the contracting parties: not indeed that if there 
haye gone before any fear justly Impressed, that must be remoyed, 
for that is extrinsic to the contract: but that no fear is to be un- 
justly impressed with a yiew to the contract; or if it be impressed, 
that it be put away. Looking at this rule, the Lacedaemonians re- 
scinded the purchase of the land which the Thebans had extorted 
from the possessors by fear. See Xenophon. What exception there 
is to this in the Law of Nations, we shall see in its own place. 

XL 1 Li the principal act of a contract this equality is required, 
that more be not demanded than is equitable. Which, in beneficial 
contracts, can hardly haye place. For if any one demands some 
payment for a loan, or for executing a commission, or keeping a de- 
posit, he does no wrong, but he alters the nature of the contract, 
and makes it, from being gratuitous, become semipermutatory. But 
in all permutatory contracts this is carefully to be obseryed* Nor Is 
it enough for any one to say that what the other party has promised 

* See J?. 3f. 71G. 

160 OF CONTRACTS. [Book H. 

more than equality, ib to be regarded as a donation. For snch is not 
the intention of contracting parties, and is not to be presumed so, 
except it appear. For what they promise or giye, they are to be 
supposed to promise or give as equivalent to what they are to receire, 
and as what is done on the ground of such equiralence. 

2 Authorities of Chrysostom, Hermias* Leyit. zxr. 14 and 17. 

Xn. 1 There remains to be considered, equality in the thing 
itself, consisting in this, that though nothing was concealed which 
ought to have been told, nor more exacted than was thought to be 
due; yet if there be an inequality in the thing itself, though without 
any fault of the parties ; if for instance there was some latent defect, 
or some error about the price, that also is to be made good, and the 
difference paid to him who suffers by it ; because, in a contract, there 
was intended, or ought to have been, that each party should have 
the same ralue. 

2 The Roman law appointed this as the rule^ not in erery ine- 
quality, (for the law does not follow matters to their smallest dimen- 
sions, and also wishes to obriate the multitude of lawsuits,) but in a 
grave inequality, as for instance, one which exceeds the half of the 
fair price. In fact, laws, as Cicero says, remove what is not equitable, in 
cases when you can take hold of it with your hand ; the philosophen, so 
fEur as you can grasp it by reason and intelligence. But those who 
are not subject to Civil Laws ought to follow that which right reason 
dictates to them as equitable; and even those who are subject to 
laws, whenever the question is what is right and pious; since the 
laws do not create or destroy right, but only deny their support to 
some rights for certain causes. 

Xin. 1 It is to be noted that a certain equality of matter is to 

be regarded even in beneficial contracts ; not a complete equality, as 

in commutatorial, but one according to the nature of the transaction: 

so that a person may not be damaged by a benefit which he bestows : 

for which reason a commissioner or agent is to be indemnified for 

the expense and loss which he incurs by his agency : and a loanee is 

bound to make good the thing lent if it be destroyed; because he is 

bound to the owner, not in respect to the thing alone, that is, by 

virtue of ownership, as any possessor of it would be bound, (as above 

said,) but also in virtue of the benefit received : which holds true, 

except the thing would have perished also, if it had remained with 

the owner. For in this case, the owner loses nothing by the loan. 

On the other hand, a depositary receives nothing but a reliance on 

his good fiuth: therefore if the thing perish he is not bound; not by 

reason of the thing, for it no longer exists, and he is no better off 

for it; nor by reason of his having accepted it, for by accepting it, 

he bestowed, not received, a benefit. In a pledge, and in a thing 

hired, a middle way is to be followed : so that he who has accepted 

the thing is not bound to make it good like a loanee, and yet is bound 

to use more diligence than a depositary : because the acceptance of 

Chap. Xn.] OF CONTRACTS. 161 

a pledge is gratuitous indeed, but is usually an accompaniment of an 
onerose contract. 

2 All which rules agree indeed with the Roman Laws, but appear 
not to come originally from them, but from natural equity. And 
hence the same rules are to be found also among other nations. So 
Maimonides, Senoca. And according to these principles we must 
judge also of other contracts. But haying finished the general dis* 
cussion so far as our purpose requires it, let us run oyer certain 
special questions of contracts. 

XIV, 1 The most natural measure of the yalue of any thing is 
the need for it, as Aristotle rightly shews : which is seen most clearly 
in the exchange of things amongst barbarians. Yet this is not the 
only measure. For the will of men, which is the master of things, 
desires many things more than are necessary. Pearls^ says Pliny, 
derive their value /rom luxury. And so Cicero of pictures : the measure 
of man** desires in these thirigs is the measure of value. And, on the 
other hand, it comes to pass that the most necessary things are of 
small Yalue for their abundance. So Seneca shews by many examples, 
and adds. The price of any thing is a temporary accident : however 
much good you may say of them, they are worth just so much as they 
will fetch when sold. So Paulus, The prices of things are not from 
the opinion or utility of individuals, but are a common function ; that 
is, as he explains elsewhere, what they would be worth to people in 
general. Ilence it comes to pass that a thing is supposed to be of 
such yalue as is giycn or offered for it commonly ; which cannot help 
haying a certain latitude, within which more or less may bo giyen or 
asked, except when the law has appointed a certain point of price for 
things, as Aristotle speaks. 

2 For that common price, account is commonly taken of the labour 
and expense of the sellers, and it undergoes sudden changes according 
to the excess or defect of buyers, money, and wares. There may also 
be certain accidents of the things, capable of an estimation, on account 
of which the things may bo lawfully bought or sold aboye or below 
the common price ; suppose, on account of loss to be incurred, cessa- 
tion of gain, particular tastes, or if they are bought or sold to oblige 
a person, being otherwise not to be bought or sold. Also account 
may be taken of the loss or cessation of gain which arises from the 
payment deferred or anticipated. 

XV. 1 With regard to Buying and Selling, it is to be noted that 
the ownership may be transferred at the moment of contract, without 
deliyery, and that this is the simplest process. So Seneca says, that 
selling is the alienation of the thing, and the transfer of one's pro- 
perty and one's right to another : as exchange also is. And if this be 
the case, if the ownership be not to pass immediately, the seller is 
obliged to giye the ownership [at an appointed time]. And in the 
meanwhile, the thing is in the possession and at the risk of the seller. 

M 

162 OF CONTRACTS. [Book II. 

Whorefore that selling and buying consist in giving the means of 
baying the thing sold, and remedy if the title to it proTO bad, and that 
the thing is necessarily forthwith at the risk of the buyer, and also 
that the produce belongs to the buyer eren before the ownership 
passes, are all fictions of the Ciyil Law, and are not ererywhere ob- 
served. Indeed most legislators have proTided that up to deliyerj 
the possession and risk are the sellei^s, as Theophrastus holds : and as 
we find in Stobseus, where you find many other rules about the for- 
malities of sale, about earnest of sale, about retraction, very different 
from the Roman Law : as also that among the Rhodians sale was to 
be completed, as well as some other contracts, by public registry, as 
Dio Prusceensis notes. 

2 This also is to be obsenred, that if a thing be sold twice over, 
that sale of the two is valid which included a present transfer of the 
ownership either by delivery or otherwise. For by this means the 
jural claim passes from the seller, which it does not by a mere 
promise. 

XVI. It is not all monopolies which are at variance with Natunil 
Law. Monopolies may sometimes be permitted by the government 
for just cause, and at a settled price ; of which we have a remark- 
able example in the account of Joseph's administration of Egypt. 
So under the Romans the Alexandrians had the monopoly of Indian 
and Ethiopian wares. Monopolies may also be established by pri- 
vate persons, provided they be on equitable terms. But if persons, 
like the Volabrian oil-merchants, enter into a combination to raise 
the price above the common price, or prevent by fraud or force the 
importation of a larger quantity, that they may buy up the article 
and sell it at a price which at the time of sale is unreasonable, they 
are guilty of a wrong, and are bound to repair it. If in any other 
way they prevent the importation of wares, in order to sell them at a 
higher price, though in the state of the market not an unreasonable one, 
they offend against the law of charity; as Ambrose shews; but they 
do not properly violate the rights of others. 

XVII. Concerning Money, it is to be noted that it naturally 
operates /unctioncUl^, that is, one portion of it may do the office of 
another ; and this, not only as to the material [gold for silver and 
reciprocally], nor in its special appellation and form [crowns for 
dollars], but in a more general sense, in its relation to all other 
things, or at least to the most necessary ; and the estimation of this 
relation, if no other agreement is made, is to be made with reference 
to the time and place of payment. So Michael Ephesius says that 
money, though not in itself immutable, is the if easure of all other 
things : the sense of which is this : that whatever is taken in order to 
be the measure of other things ought to be such that of itself it is 
least subject to change : and of this kind are gold, silver, brass : for 
their value is nearly the same at all times and everywhere : and as 

Chap. XIL] OF CONTRACTS. 168 

other things which mon need are plentiful or scarce, the same money 
of the same material and weight, is sometimes worth more of those 
things, sometimes less. 

XVIII. Letting and Hiring, as Caius rightly says, come nearest 
to selling and buying, and are goyemed by the same rules ; the price 
corresponds to the rent or wages, and the ownership to the use of the 
thing hired or service rendered. Wherefore as, when a thing is 
destroyed, the loss falls on the owner, so by Natural Law barrenness 
of land hired, and other accidents which impede the use, are at the 
loss of the Hirer ; and neyerthelcss the Letter has a right to the rent 
promised, because he gaye up the power of using the thing himself, 
which at the time of letting was worth so much ; though this may be 
changed by laws and coyenants. But if the Letter, when the first 
Hirer is prerented making use of the thing, lets it to another, what- 
arer he receiyes from that bargain he must pay to the first Hirer, 
that he may not become richer by what belongs to another. 

XIX. And what we said aboye of Selling, that a thing may be 
bought or sold for more or less if it be done to gratify a person, being 
otherwise not open to be bought or sold, is to be understood also of 
a thing or of seryice let and hired. Or if one seryice may be useful 
to many persons, as, for instance, a journey undertaken by an agent, 
and if the latter (the agent) hare engaged himself to seyeral persons 
jointly, he may demand from each the payment which he would 
require from one, if the law do not forbid. For the same labour 
being useful to a second person as well as to the first, is something 
extrinsic to the contract entered into with the first, and does not 
diminish the yalue of his services to the first. 

XX. 1 As to Lending Money, it is commonly made a question 
by what kind of law usury is forbidden. And although the more 
receiyed opinion is that it is forbidden by Natural Law, Abulensis is 
of a contrary opinion. And in truth the arguments on the other 
side are not such as compel assent. For when it is said (l) That 
money lent is a gratuitous benefit, the same may be said of any 
other thing lent, and yet it is not unlawful to demand payment for 
the loan of a thing; this only makes the contract take another 
name, letting instead of lending. 

Nor is it more conyincing to say (2) That money is barren by its 
nature ; for houses and other things which produce no fruits by nature, 
the industry of man makes fruitful. 

The other arguments are more specious, (3) That here, a thing of 
the same kind is repaid for a thing, and that the use of the thing, 
money, cannot be distinguished from the thing itself, since it consists 
in almnt^ in getting rid of it: and therefore nothing ought to be 
demanded for it. 

2 (4) It is said in the decree of the Senate'*', That though there 
cannot be properly usufruct of a thing which perishes in the using, 
* Under Tiberini. Helneco. Elem» Jur. Civ. 419. 

M 2 

164 OF CONTRACTS. [Book H. 

yet there may be quasi usufruct of such a thing, but that it does not 
thereby become the property of the tenant. But this merely defines 
the word usufrucU Certainly that word does not properly agree with 
the right of usury. But it does not follow that there is no such right: 
since, on the contrary, it is certain that if any one were to grant a 
proprietor such a right, money might be paid for it. 

And the right of not having to repay anything, whether money 
or wine, till after a certain time, is something which has an esti- 
mable value. For he who pays later, pays less. And therefore, in 
the way of exchange the use of money may be paid for by the use of 
land. 

As to what Cato, Cicero, Plutarch, and others say against usury, 
it does not touch its intrinsic nature, but its ordinary accompaniments 
and consequences. 

3 But whatever may be our opinion of such arguments, it ought 
to suffice for us that there was a law given by God to the Hebrews, 
which forbad Hebrew to lend Hebrew money on usury. For the 
matter of this law, if not necessary, b certainly morally good ; and so is 
assumed in Ps. xv. 6. Ezek. xviii. 8. And precepts of this kind bind 
Christians also, as being called to higher pitches of virtue than others; 
and what was then the duty towards a Jew, is now a duty to all men, 
the separation being taken away by the Gospel, and the term neigh- 
hour more widely extended. So Lactantius and Ambrosius condemn 
usury. And Augustus noted for rebuke some who borrowed money 
at low interest and lent it at high. 

XXI. It is to be observed, however, that there are some things 
which approach to the nature of usury, and commonly are held to 
be usury, which are pacts of another kind : as pacts for making good 
the loss which he suffers who lends money, by being kept out of his 
money so long : and on account of the gain which the money-lender 
loses by lending, deducting what corresponds to the uncertainty of his 
hopes, and the labour he would have had to undergo. And again, 
if anything be demanded on account of expenses incurred by him who 
lends money to many, and has it ready for that purpose ; and for the 
danger of losing the principal, where due security is not taken; this 
is not usury. So Demosthenes in his oration against PantsenetuSf 
denies that he is to be stigmatized as an usurer because, what money 
he gained by commerce or manufacture, he lent out at moderate in- 
terest, partly to keep the capital, partly to gratify another. 

XXII. Human Laws which allow something to be covenanted for 
the use of money,' if the rate lie within a due compensation, are not 
opposed to Natural or Divine Laws, as in Holland it has long been 
granted to persons in general to require 8 per cent, per annum, and 
to Merchants 12. If they exceed that standard, laws may afford 
impunity, but they cannot give a right 

XXIII. Contracts for averting risk, which are called Insurance, 
are void if either of the contracting parties know that the thing 

Chap. XII.] OF CONTRACTS. 165 

Insured has either reached its destination safely, or is lost : not only 
on account of the parity which the nature of permutatorial contracts 
requires, but also because the proper matter of this contract is loss 
uncertain. The yalue of such danger is to be sought in common esti"- 
jnation. 

XXIV. 1 In Partnerships in trade, where money and money are 
contributed by the parties, if the sums are equal, the gain and loss 
ought to be equally shared : if unequal, proportionally to the shares : 
Aristotle's rule. The same will hold if equal or unequal shares of 
labour are contributed. But money may be compared with labour, 
and labour with money. See Plautus. 

2 But this joint contribution may be made in yarious ways: 
for either labour may be supplied by one party and the use of money 
(annual payment) by the other : in which case if the money-share be 
lost, the loss is the owner's, and if it be sared the gain is his: or 
labour and the ownership of money (capital) are the relative contri- 
butions ; in which case he who supplies the labour partakes in the 
money-share. In the first case that which is compared with the 
labour is not the monoy^share, but the risk of losing it, and the gain 
which might be expected from it. In the other case the value of the 
labour is considered as something added to the money-share, and 
according to such value, ho who supplies the labour has a share in 
the capital. What we have said of labour is also to be understood 
of the labour and risk of navigation, and the like. 

3 That any one of the partners shall share the profit and not 
suffer by the loss, is against the nature of partnership ; but such an 
agreement may be made without wrong. For then the contract will 
be a mixture of Partnership and Insurance ; and the equality will be 
preserved, if he who in case of loss has taken the risk of loss, receives 
more of the profits in proportion. But that any one should bear the 
loss without profit, is not to be admitted, because in partnerships the 
community of interests is so natural, that without it partnership 
cannot subsist. What the Jurists say, that when the shares are not 
mentioned they must be understood to be equal, is true only if the 
contributions are equal. And in the common undertakings of good 
men, we must compare, not what happens here or there, but what 
may be probably hoped. 

XXV. In associations of shipowners for mutual protection 
against pirates, the common utility aimed at is the protection ; some- 
times also the taking of prizes (privateering). The custom is to value 
the ships and cargo and to make up a sum in this way, and to appor- 
tion the losses which take place, among which are the expenses of the 
wounded men, among the owners of the ships and cargoes according 
to their proportion of that sum. And what we have hitherto said on 
this subject is agreeable to Natural Law. 

XXVI. 1 Nor in these matters is anything changed by the insti- 
tuted Law of Nations ; excepting this only, that if an inequality of the 

166 OP CONTRACTS. [Book II. 

coDtribotions be agreed upon, this, where there is neither false deola* 
ration nor reticence of what ought to hare been said, is in exterior 
actions held for equality. And thus, as by the Ciyil Law before Dio- 
cletian there was no action before a court of law for such inequality, 
so now among those who are connected only by the Law of Nations^ 
there is no demand or compulsion allowed on that account. This 
agrees with what Pomponius says, that in the price of selling and 
buying, it is naturally allowed to men to circumvent one another s 
where aUowed means, not that it is right, but that there is such per^ 
mission that no remedy exists against him who offers such a defense. 

2 Naturally, in this place, as in some others, is put for what is 
ererywhere a received custom : as St Paul says that nature herself 
teaches us that it is shameful for a man to have long hair ; though it 
is not repugnant to nature, and is the usage among many peoples. 
(1 Cor. xi. 14.) So the Author of the Book of Wisdom calls the 
worshippers of idols (not all men) vain by nature (xiii. l), and St Paul, 
by nature the children of wrath (Eph. ii. 3), not speaking so much in 
his own character, as in that of the Romans, among whom he was 
then living. So Euenus, Galen, Thucydides, Diodorus: and so the 
Greeks spoke of naturalized virtues and vices. So Pomponius, when 
be says that a civilian could not die both testate and intestate, adds 
that the two things are naturally at variance : although that rule de- 
pends solely on the customs of the Romans, and has no place among 
other peoples, and not even among the Romans in soldiers' testaments. 

3 The utility of introducing such rules as I have mentioned is 
evident, in order to obviate infinite controversies, which could not 
have been put on clear grounds in consequence of the uncertain 
prices of things among those who have no common judge, and which 
would have occurred if it had been reckoned lawful to depart from 
pacts on account of the inequality of conditions. So the Imperial 
Laws recognize Buying and Selling as being the result of long haggling 
and final agreement. So Seneca, and Andronicus Rhodius. 

4 The writer of the life of Isidore calls this, injustice allowed 
by law. 

CHAPTER XIIL 

Of Oaths. 

6iCT. L Pagan opinion of Oaths. XIII. 

IL Deliberate purpose required XIV. 

for Oaths. 
III. Sense in which Oaths oblige. X.Y. 

lY. Oath by deceit. 

V. Oath not to be too rigorously XVI. 

interpreted. X V I L 

TI. Oath to a thing unlawful, XVIII. 

void : 
TIL Or which impedes moral XIX. 

good: 
VIII, Or which becomesimpossibie. XX. 

IX. IloWf if impossible for the XXI. 

time? 
X. Oaths f naming God : XXII. 

XI. And other things. 
XII. Oath by false gods. 

Effects of an Oath. 
When man obtains a right, 
when God only. 
Oath to a Robber or a Ty- 
rant. 

Oath to a Faithless Person, 
Obligation on the Heir, 
Obligation when the quality 
is changed. 

Things void when done a* 
gainst Oath. 

Effects of acts of Superiors. 
Christ's warnings against 
Swearing. 

Force of Oaths without the 
Form, 

I. 1 A MONG all peoples, and in every age, the force of Oaths in 
j[\ proposals, promises, and contracts, has always been very 
great. So Sophocles in the Hippodamia ; Cicero. 

2 And a heavy punishment was understood to await the perjured : 
so Hesiod. So that the posterity would have to expiate the crime of 
their ancestors, which was only believed in the case of the greatest 
crimes: and it was believed that even the will to commit perjury, 
without the deed, would bring down punishment. See Herodotus in 
the story of Glaucus, and Juvenal. 

3 Cicero says well. An Oath is a religious affirmation : what you 
promise solemnly, God being re/erred to as witness, is to he kept. What 
he adds. For then the matter pertains, not to the anger of the gods, for 
there is no suchfeeling, but to justice and good faith, is not to be rejected, 
if by anger he understands a perturbation, a passion : but if a purpose 
or will of punishing, is by no means to be received, as Lactantius 
proves. 

Let us now see whence the force of an Oath arises, and to what it 
tends. 

n. First, that has place here, which we said of promises and 
contracts, that there is required a mind master of its reason and de- 
liberate. Hence if any one, not thinking to swear, utters the words 
of an oath, it is not swearing. See in Ovid the story of Cydippe, 
[who read aloud on an apple which Aeon tins her lover had thrown at 
her, / swear that I unll marry Acontius.] So Euripides in the Hip- 
polytus. 

168 OF OATIIS. [BookU. 

But if any one, willingly swearing, wifihcd not to bind himself, he 
is not the less obliged, because obligation is the necessary effect of an 
oath, and inseparable from it, 

III. I But if any one utters the words of an oath, but with a 
purpose of not swearing, there are writers who hold that he is not 
bound, but that he sins by swearing rashly. But the sounder opinion 
is, that he is bound to make true the words to which he took God to 
witness : for that act, which is of itself obligatory, proceeded from a 
deliberate mind. And hence it follows that, as Cicero says, not to do 
what you intentionally swear is perjury. See Homer. 

2 This is so, with the exception of the case in which you who 
swear, know or belieye that he with whom you hare to do takes your 
words othorwiso : for in taking God to witness his words, he ought to 
perform them as he supposes them to be understood. So Cicero 
regulates an oath by the mens de/ererUis, the mind of the proposer. 
Tacitus speaks of men in fear changing the words of the oath : Au- 
gustine, of men keeping the words and balking the expectation. So 
Isidore. To swear without reserve is liquido jurare. So Metellus, 
rightly, would not swear to the Apuleian law, though it was roid, as 
being informally passed. 

3 For though in promises some tacit condition may be understood 
which absolves the promiser, that is not so in an Oath. So St Paul« 
Hob. yl. 18, That by tuH> immutable things, in which it was impossible 
for God to deceive : speaking after the manner of men. 

4 For God does not really change his decrees. He is said to 
change and to repent, when he acts otherwise than the words seem to 
imply, which he does on account of a condition tacitly understood* 
which has ceased. See the passages. And in this sense God may 
improperly be said to deceive us; the word often meaning to JrustrcUe 
hope. See the passages. And this appears more plainly in threats, 
because they give no right : sometimes in promises, where there is a 
tacit condition. 

5 Therefore the Apostle speaks of two things which mark immu- 
tability ; the promise, which gives the promisee a right ; and the oath, 
for that repels tacit and latent conditions. See the Psalms as quoted. 
For it is another thing if any conditions are openly indicated by the 
nature of the transaction. And to this some refer Numb. xiv. 30 : 
Ye shall not come into the land concerning which I sware to make you 
dwell tJterein. But it is more exact to say that the land was sworn, not 
to the individuals, but to the People, namely, the posterity of those to 
whom God bad sworn, as vor. 23. Such a promise may be fulfilled^ 
at any time, and is not restricted to certain persons. 

IV. 1 From what has been said, it may be understood what is to 
bo judged of an oath obtained by fraud. For if it be certain that the 
swearer supposed some fact which is not so, and would not have sworn 
except he hod so believed, then the oath is not binding. But if it bo 
doubtful whether, even without that fact, ho would not have sworn the 

Chap. XIU.] OF OATHS. 169 

same, ho must stand by his words, because simplicity In the highest 
degree is suitable in swearing. 

2 To this I refer the oath of Joshua and the elders of Israel to the 
Gibeonites, Josh. ix. They were deccired by the simulation of the 
Gibeonites, but it did not follow that Joshua and the Israelites, if they 
knew that they were neighbours, would not hare spared them. For 
what they said, yer. 7, PerctdverUure ye dwell among us, and how shall 
we make a league with you f may be understood as an inquiry whether 
the Gibeonites asked for a league of equality or of submission ; or that 
they might shew that it was not lawful for the Hebrews to make 
leagues with certain peoples ; not to imply that they would not spare 
their lires if they surrendered. For the divine law, which deroted 
those peoples to destruction, was to be understood by comparison with 
the rest of the law, in such sense that it was to take its course except 
any one attended to the warning, and did what was commanded them. 
This appears in the history of Rahab, who was spared ; and of Solomon, 
who put the remainder of the Canaanitcs under a tribute of bond- 
seryice. 

3 And to this view belongs what is said in the book of Joshua, xi. 
19, 20, that none of the seven cities of Canaan made peace, for God 
had hardened their hearts that they might hare no favour ; wherefore 
it is probable that if the Gibeonites had stated the actual fact, they 
would have obtained their lives on condition of submission ; the oath 
therefore was good. So much so, that God inflicted heavy punish- 
ment for the violation of it. 2 Sam. xxi. 6. So Ambtose maintains 
this oath. And the Gibeonites were punished for their deceit with 
personal servitude, whereas, if they had acted openly, they might have 
escaped on condition of paying a tribute. 

Y. But the signification of an oath is not to be extended beyond 
the received usage of speech. Therefore those were not perjured. 
Judges xxi. 7, who, when they had sworn that they would not give 
their daughters to wife to the tribe of Benjamin, still permitted them 
to live with those who had taken them by violence. For it is one 
thing to give, another, not to ask back rigorously. So Ambrose. 
Not dissimilarly the Achseans, when the Romans wore dissatisfied with 
something which they had done and sworn to, requested the Romans 
to change it themselves, and not to ask them to make void what they 
had sworn to uphold. 

VI. That an oath may bo valid, the obligation must be lawful. 
Wherefore there is no force in a sworn promise concerning a thing 
unlawful, either by Natural Law, or Divine Prohibition, or Human, of 
which wo shall speak afterwards. So Philo Juda^us. Thus David 
spared Nabal, whom he had sworn to kill. Cicero mentions, as an 
example, Agamemnon's vow; Dionysius, the conspiracy of the de- 
cemvirs. So Seneca, Ambrose, Augustine, Basil. 

VII. 1 Even if the thing promised be not unlawful, but something 
impeding a greater moral good, the oath will not be valid : because we 

170 OF OATHS. [BooKn. 

are bound by God to aim at a moral progress ; so that we may not take 
this liberty for ourselves. So Philo Judasus, of persons who in anger, 
&c. swear that they will not change their minds, or do good to this or 
Uiat man. The forms of such oaths occur in Hebrew. [See.] 

2 A TOW of anything to God that another might not hare it, was 
held ralid by the Hebrew masters, even against parents ; which Christ 
condemns. Eyen if the tow be against others it is not binding, 
because it is opposed to our moral progress. 

VIII. Oaths concerning things impossible we need not speak of: 
for no one can be compelled to do what is impossible. 

IX. As to what is for the time or by supposition impossible, the 
obligation is suspended ; so that he who has sworn on the supposition, 
ought to do all that he can, that he may render possible what he hat 
Bwom. 

X. The Forms of Oaths differ in words, agree in substance. 
They ought to have this meaning, that God is called upon, suppose in 
this way : May Ood be my witness; or, May God be my Judge; which 
two forms come to the same thing. For when a superior, haying the 
right of punishing, is called in as a witness, he is also called upon to 
punish perfidy : and He who knows all things is the Avenger, because 
he is the Witness. Plutarch says every Oath ends in imprecations on 
the false swearer. To this view belonged the ancient forms of leagues, 
in which victims were slain : of which see the meaning in the passages 
quoted. So Abram's sacrifice. Gen. xv. 9. 

XI. 1 fiut it is also an old custom to swear, mentioning other 
things or persons, either as imprecating harm from them, as the sun, 
the earth, heaven, the prince ; or as calling to be punished in them, 
as one's head, children, country, prince. And this was done not only 
by the heathen, but by the Jews ; as Philo shews. He says that those 
who are going to swear, ought not forthwith to go up to the Creator 
and Father of all, but to sweai^by parents, heaven, earth, the universe. 
And so Eustathius notes that the ancient Greeks did not commonly 
swear by the Gods, but by other things present ; as by the sceptre ; 
and this was instituted by Rhadamanthus. [See.] So Joseph swore 
by the life of Pharaoh, following the Egyptian custom ; and EUsha to 
Elijah, As thy soul Itvetht 2 Kings ii. 2. 

And Christ, in Matth. v., does not, as some suppose, teach that 
these oaths are less lawful than those in which God's name is ex- 
pressed, but that they were true oaths, though the Hebrews thought 
more lightly of them. As Ulpian says, that he who swears by his own 
salvation, swears by God f so Christ taught that he who swears by the 
temple, or by heaven, swears by God. 

2 The Hebrew teachers of that time held that men were not bound 
in oaths in which they had sworn by created things, except the thing 
sworn by, were, as a penalty, vowed to God. This is the oath of 
Corbatif which is not only mentioned in Matthew, but also was known 
to the Tyrians, as we learn from Josephus against Appion. And hence 

Chap. XIIL] OF OATHS. 171 

I snpposo the oriental peoplcB were called K<»*haniy as in ^schylus 
and EuripidcB*. Christ refutes this error. 

Tertullian says that the ancient Christians swore by the Safety of 
the Prince. In Yegetius, as above stated, the formula is, By God and 
the Majesty of the Emperor, which, after God, is to be reverenced and 
honoured by men. 

Xn. Moreover he who swears by false gods is bound ; because^ 
though under false notions, he refers to the general idea of Godhead : 
and therefore the true God will interpret it as a wrong to himself if 
perjury be committed. We do not find that holy men ever proposed 
an oath in that way, much less that they swore such an oath, which I 
wonder that Duarenus permits f. But if those with whom they were 
dealing could not be brought to swear otherwise, they contracted 
with them, taking such an oath as was to be had, as Jacob from Laban^ 
Gen. zxzi. 51. So Augustine says. He who swears by a stone, if he 
swear falsely, is perjured : not that the stone hears the speaker, but 
that God punishes the perjurer. 

XIII. 1 The principal effect of an oath is to put an end to 
strife, as the writer to the Hebrews, vi. 16. So Philo, Dionysius, 
Diodorus. 

2 Therefore the swearer must 9wear sineereJi/f bo that his words 
agree with his thoughts, and swear faithfully^ so that his deeds agree 
with his words : the violations of these duties we might call faUe 
swearing and perjury, but the distinction is not adhered to. [See the 
Greek words.] 

XIV. And if the matter be such, and the words so conceived, that 
they refer not to God only but to a man also, [as if I swear to give 
you a thing,] then, undoubtedly, the man acquires a right by the oath, 
afi from a promise or contract simply. But if the words do not regard 
a man as conferring on him a right, or regard him, but have something 
opposed to them ; then the effect of the oath will be that the man 
will acquire no right ; but he who has sworn to God will be obliged to 
stand by his oath. This is exemplified when one, by inspiring unjust 
fear, has given occasion to a sworn promise. So we see the Hebrew 
kings rebuked by the prophets, and punished by God, for not keeping 
their faith with the Babylonian kings. Cicero lauds Pomponius, who 
kept an oath given under terror : tueh^ he says, was the force of an 
oath at that time. And hence Regulus was bound to return to his 
imprisonment, though unjust ; and those ten whom Cicero mentions, 
to return to AnnibaL 

XV. 1 And this is not only true between public enemies, but 
any parties : for respect is not had to the person to whom the oath is 
made, but to God by whom we swear ; and this is sufficient to produce 

* Barbejrac says, not in Eoripides, bat in Lycophron ; and be questions the 
etymology of Korbtmi, 

•f Duarenns does not pennit men to swear, but only to accept, an oath by 
Mahomet, J. B. 

172 OF OATHS. [Book II. 

an obligation. Thorefore Cicero is to be repudiated when he says 
that it is no perjury if wo do not pay the price which we have pro- 
mised to robbers for sparing our life, not even if we hare sworn : 
because a robber is not an open enemy, baring the rights of war, but 
a common enemy of all men : which also the same Cicero says else- 
where of tyrants, as does Brutus in Appian. 

2 But though, in the Instituted Law of Nations, it is true that an 
enemy differs from a robber, as we shall shew below ; yet this differ.^ 
ence cannot have place when, though the right of the person fail, our 
business is with God : on which account an oath is called a vow. Nor 
is that true which Cicero assumes, that we have no common ground of 
rights with robbers : for that a deposit is to be restored when made 
by a robber, if the owner do not appear, is rightly ruled by Trypho- 
ninus. 

3 Wherefore I cannot approve what is delirered by some writersy 
that ho who has promised anything to a robber may discharge his duty 
by a momentary payment, and be allowed forthwith to take back what 
he has paid. For words used in an oath, and so, towards God, are to 
bo understood with entire simplicity; and therefore, so as to hare 
effect. And therefore, he who returned to the enemy clandestinely and 
oame away again, did not satisfy his oath that he would return, as 
was rightly judged by the Roman Senate. 

XVI. 1 Are oaths to a faithless person not to be kept: as Acciusy 
quoted in Cicero's Officea, holds? 

Not if the sworn promise had evidently respect to another pro- 
mise which was a sort of implied condition. But they are to be 
kept, if the promises are of a diverse kind, and without mutual refer- 
ence : for then each must observe what he has sworn. And thus 
Begulus is praised by Silius for keeping faith with the faithless. 

2 That inequality in contracts, by Natural Law, gives ground 
either for rescinding or remodelling them, we have said above. And 
though the Law of Nations has changed something in this matter, we 
are often allowed by the Civil Law, which is of force over those who 
are parts of the same people, to return to the Natural Law. But 
here if an oath have been introduced, although nothing, or less than 
the contract, may be due to the person, our faith to God is to be kept. 
So Ps. XV. 4, He that sweareth to his neighbour^ and disappointeth him 
noU though it were to his own hinderance. 

XVII. But it is to be observed, that when there is no right of a 
person produced, in consequence of some of these defects, but only 
our faith engaged to God; the heir of the swearer is not bound. 
Because as the goods pass to the heir, that is, the things about 
which men deal, so do the burthens upon them : but not the obli- 
gations which any one was liable to, as duties of piety, kindness, or 
good faith. For these do not belong to what is strictly called jw or 
right, as we have shewn. 

XYIIL So when a right is not acquired by a person, in yirtue 

CflAP.Xm.] OF OATHS. 173 

of anoihei^s oath, yet if the oath respect the utility of any one, and 
he will not have this utility, the swearer is not bound. Also he is 
not bound if the quality under which he swore has ceased. So in 
Cesar, Curio addresses those who had been Domitius's soldiers : Who 
could hold you by an oathj when he himedf, throwing away the ermgnt 
of authority^ and laying down his command, as a private man and a 
capHvCf has himself become subject to others f And afterwards he says 
that their oath is rescinded by his degradation. 

XIX. It is made a question whether that which is contrary to 
an oath is only unlawful, or also void. 

For this we must distinguish : if good faith alone be engaged, an 
act done against the oath is valid ; as a testament, a sale. But not, if 
the oath be so expressed that it contains at the same time a full ab- 
dication of power to do the act. 

And these are the natural consequences of oaths ; from which we 
must form a judgment of the oaths of kings, and the oaths which 
foreigners swear to foreigners, when the act is not necessarily suh* 
jected to the laws of the place. 

XX. 1 Let us now consider what the authority of superiors^ 
that is of kings, fathers, masters, husbands (in marital matters), can 
do [in modifying the effect of oaths]. The act of a superior cannot 
effect that an oath, so far as it was obligatory, is not to be performed ; 
for that it is to be so, is a matter both of Natural and of Divine 
Law. But because our acts are not fully in our power, but in such 
a way that they depend on superiors, therefore there may be a double 
act of a superior as to the matter sworn ; one direct, on the person of 
the swearer, the other, on the person to whom the oath is made. 

2 The act of the superior may be directed on the person of the 
swearer, either before swearing, rendering the oath yoid, in so far as 
the right of the inferior is subject to the superior ; or after the swear- 
ing, forbidding that it be fulfilled. For the inferior, as inferior, was 
not able to bind himself except so far as it should please his superior; 
he had no further power. And thus by the Hebrew Law the 
husband might make void the tows of his wife. Seneca proposes 
this question : If a law be made that no one shall do what I had pro^ 
mised my friend I would do, what then f And he solves it, saying. 
The same law which forbids me defends me. But there may be a 
mixed act of both parties; as if the superior should direct that 
what the inferior shall swear in this or that case, say from fear or 
from weakness of judgment, shall be valid, only if ho himself approves 
of it. And on this ground may be defended the absolutions from 
oaths which were formerly granted by princes ; and are now, by the 
consent of princes, for the sake of piety, granted by the governors of 
the Church. 

3 The act of the superior may be directed on the person of him 
to whom the oath is made, by taking from him the right which he 
has thus acquired : or even, if he have no right, by forbidding that 

174 OF OATHS. [BookH. 

he receive anything in yirtue of such oath : and that, in two ways, 
either as a penalty, or for public utility, in yirtue of his Eminent 
Dominion. And hence it may be understood, if the swearer be not 
under the same subjection as the person sworn to, what the gover- 
Dor of each may do in respect to the oath. 

*He who on oath has promised anything to a mischierous person, 
as such, as for instance a robber, cannot take from him the promised 
right on the ground of penalty: for then his words would hare no 
effect, which is by all moans to be avoided. 

In like manner what is promised cannot be given as a compensi^ 
tion for a right which was in controversy before^ if the agreement took 
place after the controversy began. 

4 Human Law may take away the impediment whioh it had 
thrown in the way of certain acts, if an oath, either in general, or in a 
particular form, be Introduced : which the Roman Law did in the case 
of those impediments which regard, not directly public utility, but the 
private utility of the swearer. And if this be done, the act so sworn 
will bo valid in the same manner as it would, without the Human Law, 
have been valid by Natural Law; either only by binding good fiiith, 
or by giving a right to another, according to the different nature of 
such acts, as already explained. 

XXL 1 It is here to bo noted in passing, that what is said in the 
precepts of Christ, and in St James, of not swearing, does not properly 
apply to an oath of assertion, of which there are some examples in 
St Paul himself, but to an oath of promise with regard to an uncer- 
tain future. This plainly appears in the words of Christ, Matth. v : 
and In the reason which St James adds, v. 12, kat ye/all into condemnor 
turn, vfroKpta-iv, is, lest ye be Jound /allaeioua. See the passages. 

2 The same is proved by the words of Christ, Let your words he 
yeOf yea, and nay, nay : which St James explains. Let your yea be yea, 
and your nay, nay : that is, let your yea mean a sincere consent, and 
your nay a resolute refusal. See the illustrations. 

3 On the contrary, those whose acts are at variance with their 
words are those whose word is yea and nay, 1 Cor. i. 18, 19, that is, 
their yea is nay, and their nay is yea : as St Paul himself explains. 
See Festus's etymology of naucum. 

4 Therefore Christ said the same thing as Philo, that the best 
thing is that our word should be as our oath. So the Essenes, accord- 
ing to Josephus. 

5 Pythagoras seems to have taken this from the Essenes, or 
those who followed the Essenes. His precept is, Not to swear by the 
gods, for you ought to act so that men believe you without an oath: so 
the Scythians in Curtius: so Cicero for Roscius; Solon; Clemens 
Alexandrinus ; Alexis the Comic Poet Cicero relates that at Athens, 
when a certain man, noted for his holiness and gravity, had to give 
his testimony, and approached the altar to swear, the judges with one 

* Th6M two mloi refer to promieet rather than oaths. W. 

Chap.XIH.] of oaths. 175 

Toice refused to hare the oath administered, his character heiog 
guarantee sufficient. 

6 The maxims of Hierocles on the Golden Poem are not different* 
He who said. Reverence an oath^ by that very precept enjoined you to 
abstain from swearing with regard to future uncertain matters. About 
such it is neither worthy nor safe to swear. So Libanius in praising 
the Christian Emperors : Eustathius on the Odyssee. 

XXII. Hence, in many cases, instead of an oath, was introduced a 
practice that good faith should be confirmed by giving the right hand» 
or some other sign ; with this implication, that if the promise was not 
fulfilled, the promisor was held no less detestable than if he had per- 
jured himself. Especially it is a common saying, concerning kings and 
princes, that their word goes for their oath. For they ought to be such 
that they can say with Augustus : I am a man of good faith : and with 
Eumenes, that they would sooner forfeit their life than their word : as 
also Guntor says to Ligurinus. 

Cicero in his oration for Deiotarus, praises Cesar by saying that 
his hand was as firm in pledging truth as in fighting battles. And in 
the heroic times^ a sceptre was set up as the king's oath, as Aristotle 
notes. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Of the Promises, Contracts^ and Oaths of Sovereigns. 

Sect. L Can Sovereigns release 
themselves 9 

Effect of Laws on royal acts. 
When is a King bound by 
his Oath $ 

How far by Promises with' 
out cause $ 

Application of these Rules. 
Is the King bound to his sub^ 
jeets naturally or civilly 9 
How rights may be taken 
from subjects. 
Is there distinction qf rights 

IV. 

V. 
VI. 

VII. 

by Natural and by Civil 
Law 9 

IX. Are {fie Contracts of Kings, 
Laws 9 

X. Are the Heirs of Kings 
bound 9 

XI. Are their Successors bound9 
XII. How far 9 

XIII. What grants of Kings are 
revocable. 

XIV. Are States bound by Con^ 
tracts qf Usurpers 9 

vin. 

I. 1 rpHE Promises, Contracts^ and Oatibs of Kings, and other 
I persons who have like aathority, give rise to peculiar ques- 
tions, both as to the lawful power they hare over themselves and their 
own actions, and that which they have over their subjects, and that 
which they have over their successors. 

As to the first head, it is made a question whether the king, as he 
can relieve his subjects from an oath, can do the same to himself, and 
put himself back into his original condition. Bodinus thinks that the 
king may be so reinstated, on the same grounds as a subject would be 
so ; whether he have been circumvented by the fraud and deception 
of another party, or by his own error, or fear; and this, both in 
matters which affect the rights of the sovereignty, and those which 
pertain to private advantage. He adds, that the king is not even 
bound by an oath, if the conventions made are of that kind from 
which the law permits parties to recede, even though the agreement 
is conformable to propriety ; for (he holds) he is not therefore bound, 
because he has sworn, but because every one is bound by just con- 
ventions, so far as the interest of another is concerned. 

2 We make a distinction hero, as we have done in other places, 
between the acts of the king which are royal acts, and acts of the same 
person which are private acts. For in royal acts, what the king does 
is to be held as if it were done by the community : and as laws made 
by the community itself would have no force over such acts, because 
the community is not superior to itself, so neither have laws made by 
the king any such force. Therefore against such contracts, restitution 
will not hold: for this restitution is a creature of the Civil Law. 
And thus kings are not relieved from contracts which they had made 
as minors. 

Chap. XIV.] OF THE PROMISES, CONTRACTS, Ic. 177 

II. 1 If a people have establifihed a king who has not plenary 
rights, but is under additional legal constraints, acts contrary to 
these laws may bo by them mado void ; cither altogether, or in part ; 
because to this extent the people had retained a right to itself. In 
the case of kings who reign with plenary rights, but hare not the 
kingdom as their own property, such acts of theirs as alienate the 
kingdom or a part thereof, or its revenues, have been discussed abore; 
and wo haye shewn that such acts are by Natural Law Toid, as being 
acts done to the property of another. ^ 

2 But the priyate acts of the king are to be considered, not as tro 
acts of the community, but as acts of a private party, and conse- 
quently, done with the intention of following the common rule of law. 
Wherefore the laws which make some acts void, either absolutely, or 
if the person injured by them demands that they should be so, hold 
hero also ; as if the contract had been made under that condition. 
And accordingly we have seen certain kings protect themselves in this 
way against the evil of usury *. But the king may release his own 
acts, as he may those of others, from these laws: and whether he 
intends to do this, is to be estimated from the circumstances. If he 
does, the matter must then be judged by mere Natural Law. This is 
to bo added ; that if any law make an act void, not in favour of the 
doer, but as a penalty on him, this does not hold against the acts of 
kings ; as in other matters also, penal laws, and all which has a power 
of coercion do not apply to them. For punishment and coercion 
can only proceed from diversity of will : the coorcer and the coerced 
require distinct persons ; distinct relations [of the same person] are 
not sufficient. 

III. A king, as a private person, may nullify an oath, antece- 
dently, if by a prior oath he deprive himself of the power of swearing 
to such an effect ; but consequently, [after the act,] he cannot do this 
[by his royal authority:] for here too a distinction of persons is 
required. For the oaths which are nullified subsequently to the act, 
were already understood to be made with the exception, " except a 
superior refuse his consent ;" but to swear in such a sense, that you 
are bound, except you yourself refuse consent, is absurd, and contrary 
to the nature of an oath. But although a right may not be acquired by 
another person in virtue of the oath, on account of some defect in the 
person who swears, yet that ho is bound to Ood, we have shewn 
above : and this applies to kings no less than to others ; contrary to 
the sentiments of Bodinus in the place cited. 

rv. Also Promises, when full, absolute, and accepted, naturally 
transfer a right, as we have shewn above ; and this likewise applies to 
kings, no less than to others : so that we condemn, in this sense^ the 

* GronoTias sayi that Grotini is here making an excuse for Fhilip II. of Spain, 
who repudiated a portion of his debts in 1596: and refers to Mezeray, B. xviii. 
Barbejrao adds, on the same authority, that two years after, Philip reroked this 
act, and acknowledged his debts. 

N 

178 OF THE PROMISES, CONTRACTS, [Book II. 

opinion of thoso who say that a king is never bound by the promises 
which he made without a cause. In what sense this may be truly 
held, we shall hereafter see. 

y. What we have said above, that the Civil Law of the kingdom 
does not hold in the compacts and contracts of kings, Vasquius also 
has rightly seen. But his inferences, that buying and selling with- 
out a certain price, letting and hiring without stating the hire, a lease 
without a writing, are valid if done on the part of kings, is not to 
be conceded: bocauso these acts are not done by the king as king, 
but by him as by any other person. In this class of acts, it is so far 
from being true, that the common laws of the kingdom have no force, 
that we maintain that even the laws of the town in which the king 
lives are of force : inasmuch as the king abides there in a special 
manner, as a member of that society. Which, however, is as we say, 
except circumstances shew that it pleases the king to make his act 
free from the authority of those laws. Another example which Vas- 
quius gives, of a promise made in any way [informally], agrees well 
with this rule, and may be explained by what we have said above. 

VI. 1 Almost all jurists deliver an opinion that by contracti 
which the king enters into with his subjects, he is obliged naturally 
only, not civilly: which is a very obscure way of speaking. For juristi- 
cal writers sometimes by an abuse of language call that, naiwral Mi' 
gation, which it is by nature a handsome thing to do, though it is not 
truly due: as for an executor to pay legacies entire without the 
deduction which the Falcidian law allows ; to pay a just debt when 
the creditor has been deprived of his legal right by a penal sentence ; 
to return a benefit for a benefit ; none of which, [^hen done,] can be 
recovered by an action of false debt. But sometimes, more properly, 
they use the term for that which truly Miges or binds us; whether 
another person thereby acquire a right, as in pacts, or does not, as in 
a full and firm poUicitaiion or proffer. Maimonides distinguishes these 
three cases; things which are not due, he calls Idndnessesf things 
due by strict law, judgments; things due by propriety, jvutke. So 
Matth. xxiii. 23, mercy , judgment, and jfaith, are by some interpreted, 
as if/aith were put for righteousnese : judgment means what is strictly 
due : see 1 Mace. vii. 18, and viii. 32. 

2 Again ; a person may be said to bo civilly obliged by his own 
act, cither in this sense, — that the obligation does not proceed from 
mere Natural Law, but from the Civil Law, or from both ; — or in 
this sense, that it gives ground for an action in a Court of Law. 

We say then that by the promise and contract of a king, which he 
enters into with his subjects, there arises a true and proper obligation, 
which confers a right upon the subjects: for this is the nature of 
promises and contracts, as we have shewn above, even between God 
and men. But if the acts be such as are done by the king, but done 
by him, only as by any other man, the Civil Laws also will be valid in 
that case : but if the act be an act of the king as king^ the Civil Laws 

CnAP.XIV.] AND OATHS OF SOVEREIGNS. 179 

do not apply to that; which distinction has not been sufficiently 
attended to by Yasquius. But notwithstanding this distinction, in 
either case a legal action will arise from the act ; namely, to the end 
that the right of the creditor may be declared : but coaction cannot 
follow, on account of the condition of those with whom the business 
is. For it is not allowable for subjects to compel him whose subjects 
they are : equals have such a right towards equals, by nature ; supe- 
riors hare it orer subjects by law only. 

YII. Tins also is to be noted, that a right, eren when it haa 
been acquired by subjects, may be taken away by the king in two 
modes ; either as a Penalty, or by the force of Eminent Dominion. 
But to do this by the force of Eminent Dominion, there is required, in 
the first place, public utility ; and next, that, if possible, compensation 
be made, to him who has lost what was his, at the common expense. 
And as this holds with regard to other matters, so docs it with regard 
to rights which are acquired by promise or contract. 

YIII. Nor may we, in this matter, in any way admit the dis- 
tinction which some make, between rights acquired by force of Natural 
Law, and those which come from the CItU Law. For the right of 
the king oyer the one class and the other is equal, and the latter can- 
not, any more than the former, be taken away without cause. For 
when ownership, or any other right, has been legitimately acquired 
by any one, that it may not be taken away from him without cause, 
is a matter of Natural Law. If the king act in any other way, he is 
without doubt bound to repair the damage done : for he acts against 
the true right of the subject. In this therefore the rights of subjects 
and the rights of foreigners differ ; — that the rights of foreigners, (that 
is, of those who are not subjects in any way,) are by no means sub- 
ject to the right of Eminent Dominion ; (whether they are subject to 
Penalty, we shall hereafter see ;) but the rights of subjects are liable 
to that right, so far as public utility demands. 

IX. From what we haye said, this also appears : — how false that 
is which some deliyer, that the Contracts of Kings are Laws. For, from 
laws, no one acquires a right against the king ; therefore, if he re* 
yokes them, he does wrong to no one. (He sins, howercr, if he do so 
without just cause.) But from his promises and contracts, rights 
arise. By contracts, the contracting parties only are bound ; to laws, 
all are subject. But yet some transactions may be mixed of contracts 
and laws, as a treaty made with a neighbouring king, or with a farmer 
of the reyenues, which is at the same time published as a Law, so far 
as it contains things to be obsenred by the subjects. 

X. Let us proceed to the case of Successors : and with regard to 
them, we must make a distinction, whether they are heirs to the whole 
property of the deceased as well as to the kingdom ; as those are who 
receiye a patrimonial kingdom by testament, or by intestacy; or 
whether they are only succescors to the kingdom ; suppose by a new 
election, or by the law of the land, or by some imitation of the com- 

N 2 

180 OF THE PROMISES, CONTRACTS, [Book 11. 

mon rule of inheritance, or oihcrwise: or whether, finally, thej succeed 
by mixed right. For with regard to those who are heirs of all the pro* 
perty as well as of the kingdom, there can bo no doubt that they are 
bound by the promises and contracts of their predecessor. For the 
rule, that the property of the deceased is bound for debts, even for 
personal debts, is a rule coeval with property itself. 

XI. 1 But of those who succeed only to the kingdom ; or to the 
property as sharers only, but to the kingdom, alone ; how far they are 
bound, is a matter worthy of inquiry, especially as it has hitherto been 
treated very confusedly. That the successors of the kingdom, as 
such, are not directly and immediately bound [by those contracts,] is 
evident enough; because they receive their rights, not from him who 
has lately deceased, but from the people ; whether the rule of suc- 
cession approach more nearly to the rule of common inheritance, or 
recede further from it ; of which difference we have treated above. 

2 But mediately^ that is, by the mediate effect of the State, such 
successors also are bound; which will be thus understood. Every 
society, no less than individual persons, has the right of binding itself, 
by its own act, or that of the majority. . And this right it may trans* 
for, either expressly, or by necessary consequence ; suppose, by trans- 
ferring the government : for in moral matters, he who gives the end, 
gives the means which lead to the end. 

XII. 1 But this does not go to an infinite extent. For an infinite 
power of imposing such obligations is not necessary, in order rightly 
to exercise the government : as such power also is not necessary for a 
guardian or a Tutor; but only so much as the nature of the ofiice 
requires. The Tutor is reckoned in the place of the owner, says Julian, 
when he administers his pupiFs affairs, not when he plunders him : and 
in this sense we are to understand what Ulpian says, that the contract 
of the master of a society, may not only bring advantage to the society, 
but also disadvantage. But yet we are not, as some hold, to re- 
duce the engagements of a king to the rules of one man undertaking 
another's business; namely, that his acts are then only valid when 
they turn out to the advantage of the principal party. For to put 
the Ruler of the State to such a strait, would be dangerous to the 
State itself. And accordingly, the community is to be supposed to 
have held this opinion, when it bestowed the government upon him. 
And what the Roman Emperors declared, in a Rescript with respect to 
the corporation of a town, — that what was transacted by the magis- 
trates should be of force in a doubtful case, but not, if what was un- 
questionably due was given away, — ^may be and ought to be applied 
to our question, relative to the whole People, observing a due pro- 
portion in the application. 

2 As the subjects are not bound by every law ; for there may bo 
laws, (even without going to those which command something unlaw- 
ful,) which are evidently foolish and absurd ; — so too the contracts of 
Governors then bind their subjects, when they have a probable reason; 

Chap. XIV.] AND OATHS OF SOVEREIGNS. 181 

and in a doubtful case, this may be presumed, on the authority of the 
GoyemorB. And this distinction is much better than that which is put 
forth by many, governed by the result, according as it is a mode- 
rate or an immoderate damage. For it is not the result which is to be 
regarded in such a case, but the probable reason for doing the thing ; 
if there be such a reason, the People itself will be bound, if by any 
event it should become its own master; and the successors to the 
government, as the heads of the People. For, in like manner, if a free 
People had made any engagement, he who afterwards should receive 
the sovereignty, in the fullest manner, would be bound by the engage- 
ment. 

3 The emperor Titus is praised on this account, that he would 
not allow himself to be petitioned to confirm any thing which his pre- 
decessors had granted, [holding the grants valid without such process ;] 
while Tiberius and those emperors who followed him, did not recog- 
nize the grants of their predecessors as valid, till they had themselves 
repeated them. The excellent emperor Nerva, following the example 
of Titus, says, in an edict which is extant in Pliny, Let no man suppose 
th<U what he has obtained from another Prince, either privately or pub^ 
liely, shall be by me revoked, that so, if J confirm those grants, lie may be 
ike more obliged to me ; no man's congratulation need be accompanied by 
Btuih petitions. But on the other hand, when Tacitus had related of 
Vitellius, that he had torn the empire in pieces, reckless of the inte- 
rests of posterity, the common world flocking about him to catch his 
extravagant gifts, and some even purchasing his favour with money ; 
he adds: Wise men held those grants to be void, which could be nci^ 
ther given nor received without damage to the State. 

4 That must also here be added ; that if in any case a contract 
begins to tend, not only to some loss, but to the ruin of the commu- 
nity, so that, from the beginning, the contract in its extension to that 
case would have been unjust and unlawful ; then that contract may, 
not so much be revoked, as declared not to be binding any longer, as 
being made without the condition without which it could not justly be 
made. 

6 What we have said of contracts, holds also of the alienation of 
the People's money, and of any other things which the king has by 
law a power to alienate for the public good. For here too a simi- 
lar distinction is to be applied, whether there was a probable reason 
for giving or otherwise alienating. 

6 But if the engagements have reference to the alienation of the 
kingdom or its parts, or of the royal patrimony, they will be invalid, 
as being a contract about that which is another's. The same will 
hold in limited monarchies, if there be any matter or kind of act 
which the people has excepted from the royal power. For in order 
to give validity to such acts, there is required the consent of the 
People, either by itself, or by those who legitimately represent the 
People ; as may be understood by what we have said above respect- 

182 OF THE PBOMISES, CONTRACTS, &c. [Book II. 

ing alienation. By the application of these distinctions, it will be 
easy to judge whether the pleas of kings who refuse to pay their 
predecessors' debts, not being their heirs, are just or unjust: of 
which examples may be seen in Bodinus. 

Xin. Nor is that which many have deliTered, that the farours 
of Princes, granted out of pure liberality, may at any time be re- 
Toked, to be allowed to pass on without distinction. For there are 
■ome grants which the king makes out of his own property, and 
which, except they are granted expressly during pleasure only, have 
the force of a complete donation. And these cannot be reroked, 
except, in the case of subjects, in the way of penalty, or for the sake 
of public utility, and then with compensation if it may be. There 
are other grants which merely remore legal restrictions, without any 
contract. These are revocable. Because, as the law which is re- 
laxed universally may always be re-established universally, so, that 
which is relaxed particularly may be re-established particularly. For 
In this case no right against the author of the law is acquired. 

XIY. By contracts made by those who without right have usurped 
the government, the People, or the Legitimate Sovereign are not 
bound. For Usurpers have no authority to bind the People. 

However, the People are bound by what has been expended for 
their benefit [by an Usurper;] that is, so far as they are the richer 
for it. 

CHAPTER XV. 

Of Treaties and Sponsions*, 

Sect. I. 

, Whai are Publio Conveiu 
Hansf 

XL 

IL 

They are divided into Trea- 
Hes, Sponsions, and other 

XII. 

Conventions, 

XIII. 

III. 

Difference of Treaties and 

Sponsions. 

XIV. 

IV. 

Menippus's division of 

Treaties, 

XV. 

V. 

Treaties agree tpith JVa- 

iural Law, 

XVI. 

VL 

Or add to it : either equal 

VU. 

Or unequal. 

VIII. 

Treaties with Infidels 

XVII, 

IX. 

Not prohibited by Jlebrew 
Law, 

X. 

Not Christian Law, 

Cautions respecting such 
Treaties. 

Christians have a league 
against Infidels. 
When several Confederates 
have Wars^ 

Whether a League is tacitly 
renewed. 

Whether the perfidy of one 
party liberates the other. 
To what are Sponsors bound 
if the Sponsion be disal- 
lowed. 

Is a Sponsion^ if not disal- 
lowed, binding by notice and 
silence 9 

I. /^ OMPACTS or Conyentions are divided by Ulpian into public 
V>/ and private : and public, ho expounds, not by definition, but 
by examples which he gives ; a treaty of peace, which is the first example; 
or when thiC generals in a war make some convention, which is the second. 
By public compacts or conventions, therefore, he understands those 
which can only be made by the supreme government or Eomo public 
governor ; by which character they differ, not only from the contracts 
of private persons, but from the contracts of kings about their private 
concerns. For though causes of war arise from the latter also, they 
proceed more commonly from public questions. Therefore, since we 
have discussed many points with regard to compacts in general, we 
must add some remarks belonging to this more eminent kind of com- 
pact. 

II. These publio agreements we may divide into Public Treaties, 
Sponsions, and other Compacts f. 

III. 1 With regard to the difference of Public Treaties (Fcedera) 
and Conventions made on personal responsibility (Sponsioncs), we may 
take Liv/s view, in which he says that fcedera are treaties made by 
the sovereign power of the State, in which the people is liable to the 
Divine wrath if it do not make good its engagements. Among the 

* Mr'Wheaton adopts the term Sponsions, exactly in the sense In which 
Grotini usee it in this Chapter, as denoting engagements made without full 
anthority. Jniemaiional Law, Part ill. Chap. 11, § 3. (1836). 

t See JS. M. 1124. 

184 OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. [Book II. 

Komans they wore formally made by the Feeiales, with the Pater 
Patratus at their head. Sporuions is the term which we may use 
when persons not having a commission from the Supreme Authority 
make any engagement which properly touches that authority. Sallust 
says, The Senate^ as vku to be expected, decreed that no TretUy 
(foedus) could be made without its direction and that of the people* 
Hieronymus, king of Syracuse, made a Convention of alliance with 
Anhibal ; but afterwards sent to Carthage to convert the Convention 
into a Treaty. So that when Seneca says, The Treaty made by the 
Chneral was held as made by the People, he must mean the generals of 
the old time, who had such a commission. In kingdoms, it is the king's 
office to make Treaties. See Euripides. 

2 As a Magistrate's acts do not bind the People, so neither do 
those of the smaller part of the people : which justifies the Romans in 
breaking their convention with the Galli Senones; for the greater 
part of the people was with the Dictator Camillus ; and as Gellius. 
says, the People cannot be treated with in two bodies. 

3 But when they who have not authority from the people have 
made a convention respecting something which belongs to the rights 
of the people, let us see to what they are bound. It may be thought 
perhaps that, in this case, the party who made the convention have 
performed their engagement, if they have done all that was possible for 
them, that the terms of the convention on their part should be ful- 
filled; according to what we have said in speaking of promises. 
But the nature of these affairs, which involve a contract and not a 
mere promise, requires a much stricter obligation. For he who in a 
contract gives anything of his own, or promises it, expects some* 
thing to be done for him by the other side : whence by the Civil Law 
also, which repudiates promises for tho acts of 6thers, yet a promise 
of the agent binds and is valid so far as he is concerned. 

IV. In Livy, Menippus, rather for his purpose than scientifically, 
divides Treaties between Kings and States into three kinds ; treaties 
of a conqueror in war with the conquered, and in these the terms 
depend on tho will of the victor : treaties of peace between parties 
who end a war with equal success; and here the terms are equals 
and possessions whir^h had been disturbed by war are restored by 
agreement; and these treaties are constructed either on the ancient 
forms, or according to the convenience of the parties : and the third 
kind, when those who have never been enemies make a treaty of 
friendship and alliance ; neither party giving and neither receiving 
the law. 

V. 1 Wo must make a more accurate division. We say then 
that Bon\e treaties establish that which is conformable to Natural 
Law ; others add something to it. Treaties of the former kind 
are not only commonly made by hostile parties ending a war, but 
formerly were both frequent, and in a certain way necessary, between 
those who had before liad nothing to do with each other. Which 

Chap. XV.] OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. 185 

arose from this^ that the rule of Natural Law, that there is a certain 
natural relationship among men, and that therefore it is unlawful 
for one man to harm another, as it was obliterated by vicious habits 
before the deluge, so was it again after the deluge : so that robbery 
and plunder of strangers without declaring war, was held lawful : a 
Seythismy as Epiphanius calls it. 

2 Hence we hare that question in Homer, Are ye Pirates? asked 
as an inofPensiye inquiry, as Thucydides notices : and in an old law 
of Solon there are mentioned companies of Freebooters; since, as 
Justin says, up to the time of Tarquin, Sea Borers were objects of 
admiration : and again, in the old Roman law. If there bo any nation 
with which the Romans have neither friendship, nor friendly inter- 
course, nor alliance, they are not enemies indeed ; but that what 
belonging to the Romans goes into their power is theirs, and a free 
Roman taken by them becomes a captive ; and the same if any come 

•from them to the Romans. [Dig, xlix. 15.] Thus the CorcyroanSy 
before the Peloponnesian war, wcro not enemies of the Athenians, 
but h^ neither peace nor truce with them, as appears by the oration 
of the Corinthians in Thucydides. Sallust says of Bocchus, not known 
to U8 eithsr in war or in peace. Hence Aristotle praises those who 
plunder barbarians : and the old Latin word Jiostis meant only stranger. 

3 In this class are comprehended treaties in which it is provided 
that there shall be on both sides the right of hospitality and of inter* 
course, so far as they come under Natural Law, of which we have 
treated elsewhere. This distinction is referred to by Arcus in Livy, 
where he says, that the question is not concerning alliance but inter- 
charge of rights ; namely, that they should not let the Macedonian 
slaves find a refuge among them. The whole of this class of con- 
Tentions the Greeks call Peace^ and oppose to Truce, Sec Andocides. 

VI. 1 Conventions which add something to Natural Law are 
cither equal or unequal. Those are equal, which bear equally and 
commonly on both parties, as Isocratos says. So Virgil. The Greeks 
distinguish them from Unequal Compacts and Conventions of Command* 
which are less dignified, and, as Demosthenes says, to be avoided by 
those who love liberty, as approaching to servitude. 

2 Conventions of both kinds are made for peace, or some alli- 
ance : equal treaties of peace are those which stipulate restitutions of 
captives and captures on both sides, and mutual security. Equal 
treaties of alliance either pertain to commerce, or to alliance in war^ 
or to other matters. Equal treaties on the subject of commerce may 
be various, for instance, that no import duties bo paid on either side, 
which was the agreement in the old treaty of the Romans and Cartha- 
ginians, except what was paid to the harbour-master and the public 
crier; or that no duties be paid greater than at present, or greater 
than a certain rate. 

3 In alliances for war, the terms may be, that each side supply 
equal forces of infantry, cavalry, and ships : either for the whole war. 

186 OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. [Book IL 

which the Greeks called Sf/mnuichia, and which Thucydides ezplainSy 
to liove the same friends and the same enemies : as also in Liyy ; or for 
defensive purposes only, which was Eptmaehia; or for a certun war, 
or against certain enemies ; or agunst all, excepting allies, as in the 
league between the Carthaginians and Macedonians, in Polybius ; so 
also the Rhodians by treaty promised aid to Antigonus and Demetrius 
against all, except Ptolemy. 

An equal treaty may also, as we have said, pertain to other matters; 
as, that neither shall have fortresses within the boundaries of the other ; 
that neither shall defend the subjects of the other ; that neither shall 
giro passage to the enemies of the other. 

YII. 1 From the explanation of what are equal conrentions, it is 
easily understood what are unequal. Unusual Treaties are either 
proposed by the superior party, or by the inferior. By the superior, 
as if he promises assistance without any reciprocal stipulation : by 
the inferior, when there is an inferiority of claim, are what we have* 
spoken of as Conventions of Command. And these are either with, 
out infringement of the sovereignty of the inferior, or such as 
infringe it. 

2 Such as infringe the sovereignty, as in the second treaty of the 
Romans with the Carthaginians, that the latter should not make war 
without the permission of Rome : from that time, as Appian says, the 
Carthaginians were by treaty submiss to Rome. 

To this class wo might add surrender on conditions, except that 
this contains, not an infringement, but a transfer of the sovereignty, of 
which we have spoken elsewhere. Such a convention Livy calls /oMftif 
In the case of the Apulian Theates. 

3 In unequal treaties made without infringement of the sove- 
reignty, the burthens imposed on the inferior are either transitory or 
permanent : Transitory, as the payment of a subsidy, the dismantiing 
of strong towns, the withdrawing from certain places; the giving up 
hostages, ships, elephants : Permanent, as the paying deference to the 
authority and majesty of the superior ; of which engagement I have 
elsewhere spoken. Nearly of the same kind is the engagement to 
have for enemies and for friends those whom the other party shall 
prescribe; not giving passage or provisions to a party with whom the 
other is at war. And the smaller matters; not building forts in 
certain places, not having a moveable army, not having ships beyond 
a certain number, not founding a city ; not navigating ; not raising 
soldiers in certain places, not attacking allies, not supplying pro- 
visions to the enemy; rescinding treaties before made with other 
parties : of all which we may find examples in Polybius, Livy, and 
others. 

4 Unequal treaties may be made, not only between the conqueror 
and the conquered, as Menippus thought, but between the more and 
the less powerful who have never been at war. 

VIII. It is often made a question whether it is lawful to make 

Chap. XV.] OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. 187 

treaties wiUi those who are straDgers to the true Religion; which 
point, in Natural Law, is open to no doubt. For that Law is so £ar 
common to all men that it recognizes no distinction of Religion. But 
the question is put on the ground of the Diyine Law, and so treated, 
not only by Theologians but by Jurists, and among them, by Oldradus 
andDecianus. 

IX. 1 First of Dirine Law. We hare examples of ooTenants 
for mutual forbearance, with str&ngers to true Religion, before the 
law of Moses, as Jacob with Laban, not to speak of Abimeloch. 
The law of Moses did not change this : for example, the Hebrews are 
forbidden to treat the Egyptians as enemies. The seren Peoples of 
Canaan are an exception, on account of their obstinate idolatry. 

2 Treaties of commerce, and the like, may be made with such 
persons : so Darid and Solomon with Hirom king of Tyre. 

3 The Law of Moses separates the Jews from the rest of man* 
kind. But that the Jews were not to do good to other nations, was 
a penrerse interpretation of later masters. See Juvenal, Cicero, 
Seneca, Apollonius Molo, Diodorus, Philostratus, Josephus. 

4 This was not Christ's interpretation. Also, see Dayid's inter- 
course with strangers : and Solomon's. 

6 Besides the exception of the Peoples of Canaan, the Ammon- 
ites and Moabites also are excepted. Beneficial leagues with them 
are forbidden, but war is not authorized. See the passages. 

6 See also the example of Abraham and his league with the 
king of Sodom. And the Maccabees made leagues with Greeks and 
Romans. 

7 If any kings or peoples were condemned to destruction by 
€k>d, doubtless it was then unlawful to protect them or to join with 
them. So 2 Chron. xix. 2, Jehu the prophet says to Jchoshaphat, 
Shatddest thou help the ungodly ^ $c. f So 2 Chron. xxv. 7 to Amaziah. 
But this was on account of personal considerations, not the nature 
of the treaty, as appears by the circumstances: [which see.] 

8 Obsenre that the case was worse with the Ten Tribes, who, 
though descended from Jacob, had deserted God, than with others. 

9 Sonietimes also treaties are condemned on account of the bad 
motive from which they proceeded. Thus, 2 Chron. xri. 2, Asa's 
league with the Syrians. So other kings sinned. And trust in 
Egypt is condemned ; but Solomon made a league with Egypt. 

10 Moreoyer the Hebrews had a promise of success if they 
obeyed the law, and so, did not need human aid. Solomon's pre- 
cepts in the Proverbs about shunning the fellowship of the wicked 
belong to private prudence, not to public policy, and admit of many 
exceptions. 

X. 1 The Gospel changed nothing in this matter: it rather 
favours conventions with all men that we may do them good : as God 
makes his sun to rise on the just and on the unjust. So Tertuliian. 

2 Which must be taken with a difference, that we are to do good 

188 OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. [Book U. 

to all, bat Bpecially to those who are our partakers in religion. See 
the Clementine Constitutions, Ambrose, Aristotle. 

3 Familiar intercourse is not forbidden with strangers to Religion, 
nor even those who have gone back from religion ; but only unneces« 
Bary familiarity. St Paul's warnings, 2 Cor. ri. 14, &c. refer to idola* 
try, as appears by what follows, and by 1 Cor. x. 21. 

4 Nor does the proof follow, [that we are not to make treaties 
with them,] because we are not willingly to come under the authority 
of the impious, or to contract marriage with them. For such steps 
produce much more danger to religion, and are more permanent, 
and more free ; while treaties depend on occasion of time and place. 
And as we may benefit the profane, so we may ask their help, as 
Paul claimed the help of Ceesar and of the chief Centurion. 

XI. 1 Hence in an alliance with those of a false religion, there 
is no inherent or uniyersal prarity : the case is to be judged by the 
circumstances. But care is to be had that too much mixture with 
them do not taint the weak. For which purpose, separate habitation 
is good, like that of the Israelites in Egypt. So Anaxandrides. And 
to this pertains what we hare said of Jews and Christians serring as 
soldiers with heathens. 

2 But if the strength of the profane is likely thus to be much 
increased, we must abstain from such alliances, except in case of 
necessity : such as Thucydides speaks of. [See.] For it is not mere 
right which justifies men in doing what may indirectly harm religion. 
We must seek first the kingdom of God, that is, the propagation of 
the Gospel. 

3 It were to be wished that many princes and peoples would lay 
to heart that liberal and pious saying of Fulk, Archbishop of Rhcims, 
who thus admonished Charles the Simple : Who is not alarmed when 
you seek the friendship of the enemies of Qod; and invite the co-opera* 
tion and the arms of pagans for the calamity and ruin of the Christian 
name f It makes no difference whether any one joins himself with pagans, 
or denies Ood and worships idols. There is in Arrian a saying of Alex- 
ander, that Those grievously offend who enter the service of Barbarians to 
fight against Greeks and Grecian rights, 

XII. Add that all Christians are members of one body ; are com-* 
manded to bear each other^s sufferings and sorrows: and as this 
applies to indiriduals, so does it to peoples, as peoples, and to kings, 
as kings. Each must serve Christ according to the power giren him. 
But this they cannot do, when the infidel is powerful, except they 
help each other: and this cannot well be done except a general 
league be made with that view. Such a league has been made, and 
the head of it created by common consent Roman Emperor*. 
Therefore all Christians ought to aid in this cause according to their 
power with men or money : nor do I see how they can be excused, 

* Frederic III., a.i>.1461, fays Gronoviiu; and refers to Boecleri Dispntatio de 
Passagiis, 

Chap. XV.] OP TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. 189 

except they be detained at home by an ineyitable war or some 
similar evil. 

XIII. 1 The question often arises, if soreral parties carry on 
a war, to which of two in preference ought he to give assistance who 
is under agreement with both. This is first to be understood, as we 
have said aboye, that no one is bound to unjust wars. Therefore 
that one of the allies who has a just cause is to be preferred, if the 
transaction is with a stranger : and also if it be with another of the 
allies. Thus Demosthenes, in the oration concerning Megalopolis, 
shews that the Athenians ought to assist the Messenians, who are 
their allies, against the Lacedaemonians, who are also their allies, if 
the wrong be on the side of the latter. In the treaty of Hannibal 
with the Macedonians, it stood. We wiU be the enemie$ oft/our enemies, 
except the kings, states and ports with which we are in league andfriendr 
ship. 

2 If two allies quarrel, being both in the wrong, which may hap* 
pen, we are to take part on neither side. So Aristides. 

3 But if two allies make war on others for just cause, if we can 
send aid to both, soldiers or money for example, we are to do so ; 
as we are to pay several personal creditors. But if our indiridual 
presence, as having promised, bo required, reason requires that he 
be preferred with whom the league is oldest : so the answer of the 
consul to the Campanians. 

4 But an exception is to be added, if the later league contain, 
besides a promise, anything which contains a transfer of ownership^ 
or a subjection to the other party. For thus in selling also, we say 
that the prior sale is valid, except the later sale transfer the owner- 
ship. So in Livy the Nepesini held their surrender more binding 
than their alliance. Others make more subtle distinctions, but I 
boliere this, as most simple, to be also most true. 

XIV. When the time is ended, the treaty ought not to be tacitly 
supposed renewed, except by acts which receive no other interpreta* 
tion : for a new obligation is not lightly presumed. 

XV. If one party violate the league, the other may withdraw 
from the agreement: for every article of the agreement has the 
force of a condition. Take two examples from Thucydides. [See.] 
But this is only true if it be not otherwise agreed, as is sometimes 
done; that a withdrawal from the league is not to be justified by 
every slight offense taken. 

XVI. 1 Sponsions, that is, conventions made on personal respon- 
sibility (see c. m.) may be as various in their subject-matter as publio 
treaties. They differ in the power of those who make them. But 
there are two common questions concerning such conventions : First, 
if the convention be rejected by the king or the state, to what are the 
responsible parties bound? To give an equivalent; or to restore 
things into the state in which they were before the convention ; or to 
g^ve up their persona ? The first course appears to be conformable to 

190 OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. [BookIL 

the Roman Ciril Law; the second, to equity, as was urged by the Tri« 
bunes in the Caudlno controversy ; the third, to usage, as the con- 
spicuous examples of the Caudine and the Numantian conventions 
•hew*. 

But the important point is, that the supremo authority is not 
bound to any one course. As Posthumius says : You (the people) 
have made no convention with the enemy ; you have not authorized any 
citizen to make a convention for you : you have nothing to do with ut, to 
whom you gave no commisiion, nor with the Samnites, with whom you 
have had no transaction. He adds well : / deny that without the per* 
mistion of the people^ any engagement can he made which hinds the 
people: and, also well: If the people can he hound to anything [by 
the acts of others] it may he hound to all things. 

2 Therefore the People was not bound either to compensation or 
to restitution. If the Samnites wished to deal with the People, they 
ought to have kept the army at the Caudine Forks, and to have sent 
ambassadors to Rome, to treat with the Senate and People con- 
cerning peace, leaving them to estimate the safety of the army at 
what value they might And then they might have said, what Vel- 
leius reports that they and the Numantines said, that the violation of 
public faith ought not to be deemed expiated by the blood of an in- 
dividual. 

3 With greater speciousness it might be said, that all the soldiers 
were bound by the treaty. And that would have been equitable, if 
the treaty had been negociated in their name, and under their direction, 
by the acting parties, as was done in the treaty of Hannibal with the 
Macedonians. But if the Samnites were content with the engagement 
of the persons negociating, and of the 600 hostages whom they de- 
manded, they had themselves to blame. On the other hand, if the 
negociators pretended that they had the power of making a con- 
▼ention in the name of the public, they were bound to restitution, as 
having done damage by fraud. If that does not appear, they wore 
bound to a reasonable compensation to the Samnites, according to the 
purport of the negooiations. And in this case, not only the bodies, 
but also the goods of the negociators, were bound to the Samnites, 
except they had paid such a compensation as we have spoken of. 
For, with regard to the hostages, it was agreed that if the engagement 
did not stand, their lives were to be forfeited. Whether the same 
penalty was agreed upon for the negociators, does not appear. But 
the stipulation of a penalty affects what is done, in this way : that if 
the thing to be done cannot be performed, there is nothing else in the 
obligation [but the penalty] : for the penalty is introduced as some- 
thing certain into the place of an uncertain compensation. And at 
that time the common opinion was, that a man's life might be seriously 
given as a pledge. 

4 But with us who think differently, I am of opinion that by such 

* Flor. I. 10, and ii. 18. Gronov, 

Chap. XV.] OF TREATIES AND SPONSIONS. 191 

a conrention, first, the party's goods are liable for compensation of the 
interest affected, and if they are not sufficient, that his body is for- 
felted to slavery. When Fabius Maximus had made an agreement 
with the enemy, which the Senate repudiated, he sold his landed pro- 
perty for 200,000 sesterces, and made good the loss. And the Samnitca 
rightly conceiyed that Bnitulus Papius, who broke a truce, should be 
given up along with his property. 

XVII. 1 Another question is, whether a convention made by a 
subordinate person, on his own responsibility, binds the supreme 
power, by knowledge and silence on their part. Here we must first 
distinguish whether the convention is made simply, or under condition 
of being ratified by the supreme power. For if so, this condition, not 
fulfilled, (for conditions must be expressly fulfilled,} nullifies the con- 
vention ; which applies to the convention of Lutatius with the Cartha- 
ginians ; to which was to be added, that the people, because that con* 
vention was made without its authority, denied that it was bound 
thereby : and therefore another treaty was made on a fresh footing 
by the public authority. 

2 We must next see whether, besides silence, any other circum- 
stance has been added. For silence, without some thing or act, does 
not supply a sufficiently probable conjecture of the will ; as may be 
understood by what we have said above, of the dereliction of owner- 
ship. But if any act have been added which cannot be probably 
referred to another cause, then the act of convention is rightly under- 
stood to be accepted as valid. And so the convention with the Gadi- 
tani was proved valid, as Cicero notes. 

3 The Romans urged silence against the Carthaginians in refer- 
ence to the convention made with Asdrubal. But since that conven- 
tion was conceived in negative expressions — that the Carthaginiang 
should not pass the Ebro — it was scarcely a case in which silence 
alone could establish a ratification of the act of another : since no act 
of theirs had followed, except it might be that some Carthaginians, 
wishing to pass the Ebro, had been prevented by the Romans, and 
the Carthaginians had acquiesced : for such an act has the force of a 
positive act, and is not merely negative. But if the pact of Lutatius 
had had more parts, and it appeared that the other parts, though 
dissenting from common rule, had been observed by the Romans, then 
there would be a sufficient proof of the confirmation of the con- 
vention. 

4 It remains for us to treat of the conventions which generals and 
commanders of armies make, not concerning political matters, but 
their own proceedings and business : but we shall have a better oppoi^ 
tunity of discussing this in treating of the rules of War. 

CHAPTER XVL 

Of Interpretation. 

Sect. I. How promUes bind exier^ XVL 

naUy, XVU. 
IL Words to be understood ae- 

cording to popular pro- XVIIL 

priety, XIX. 

III. Words of art according to XX. 
art, XXL 

IV. Cases for conjecture : 

V. From the matter : XXIL 

VI. From the effect : XXIII. 

VII. From origin or place : 

VIII. From motive. XXIV. 

I X. Lax and strict sigr^fication, XXV. 

X. Promises, favotirable, odi' XXVI. 
ous, S^c. 

XI. Distinction of bona fide and XXVII. 

stricti Juris rejected in Trea^ XX VIII. 

Hes, XXIX. 

XII. Rules of Interpretation. XXX. 

XIII. Allies future, XXXL 

XIV. Case^ when making war is 

not free, X XXIL 
XV. That Carthage shall be free. 

Personal and real compacts. 
League unth the King holds 
after he is expelled. 
Not with Usurpers, 
To whom the promise is due. 
Extension by conjecture. 
Mandate fulfilled by equi" 
valent. 

Restriction by conjecture. 
By cessation of the only 
reason. 

By defect of (he matter. 
Remark on conjectures. 
Repugnance of case emerge 
ing. 

Too heavy burthen. 
Engagement in writing. 
Rules for that case. 
Writing not required. 
Treaties not to be inter^ 
preted by the Roman Law, 
Words of offer and accept- 
ance compared. 

I. 

1 TF we merely consider bim who has promised, he is bound to 
X perform, without compulsion, that to which he was willing to 

be bound. In goodfakh^ what you thought, not what you said, ie to be 
considered, says Cicero. But because internal acts of themsekes are 
not an object of sense, and some certain rule must be established, in 
order that obligations may not be frustrated, as they might be, if any 
one, by pretending any sense of his words which he chose to assign, 
could free himself; natural reason dictates that what is promised to 
any one, compels the promisor to that which a right interpretation sug- 
gests; for otherwise the matter would hare no detorminate result; which 
in moral matters is held to be impossible. Perhaps it was in this sense 
that Isocrates, treating of pacts, spoke of the common rule which all 
observe. So JAtj : sine dolo mcdo iniellecta, 

2 The measure of right interpretation, is the purpose, as inferred 
from the most probable signs* These signs are of two kinds, words, and 
other conjectures; which are considered either separately or conjointly. 

IL If there is no conjecture which points another away, the words 
are to be understood,not according to grammatical and etymological, but 
popular propriety, as r^ulated by usage. That was a foolish eyasion 

CnAP. XVI.] OF INTERPRETATION. 193 

iheirefore of the Locrians, who, when they had sworn that they would 
keep their compact as long as they stood upon the earth and carried 
heads on their shoulders, put earth in their shoes, and heads of gar- 
lick on their shoulders, and then threw them away ; as if they could 
in that way free themselves from thoir oath: as the story is in 
PolyhiuB. There are some examples of similar had faith in Polyasnus, 
which it is not necessary to transcribe, because there is no controTcrsy 
in such cases. Cicero rightly says, that such artifices do not ex- 
tenuate, but establish perfidy. 

m. In Terms of Art, howerer, which are popularly hardly intel- 
ligible, the definition of the meaning by persons learned in the Art 
is to be taken : as, what is Treason, what is Parricide ; in which writers 
on Oratory refer to definitions. As Cicero says, The words of the 
ZHalectieians are not those of common language^ hut of their own art, 
and the same is the case in every art. Thus if in pacts mention be 
made of an Army, we shall define an Army to be a body of soldiers 
which openly invades an enemy's territory ; for historians perpetually 
put in opposition what is done stealthily in the manner of robbers, 
and that which is done with a regular army. And therefore what 
numbers make an army, must be judged according to the force of tho 
enemy. Cicero calls six legions with auxiliaries an army. Polybius 
says, the Roman army consisted commonly of 16,000 Romans and 
20,000 allies : but a smaller number may satisfy the name. For Ulpian 
says, that he commands an army who commands a single legion with 
the auxiliaries; that is, as Yegetius explains, 10,000 foot and 2000 
horse. And Livy makes the force of a regular army 8000 men. In 
the same way we must judge of a Fleet. So a Fort is a place strong 
enough to be held agunst the enemy for a time. 

IV. 1 It is necessary to haye recourse to conjectures, when the 
words or the connexion of the words is ambiguous, admitting of 
numerous significations, which 'the Rhetoricians call an Amphiboly*. 
The Dialecticians, more subtly, distinguish Homonymyy in which 
these several senses are in one word, from Amphiboly, in which they 
are in a connexion of words. The like conjectures are necessary 
when there is in pacts an Enantiophany, an appearance of contradiction. 
For the conjectures are to be sought which may reconcile one part- 
with another, if it may be done. For if the contradiction be real, the 
latter agreement of the contracting parties must supersede the former ; 
because nobody can will two opposite thiugs at the same time : and 
the nature of acts which depends on the will is, that by a new act of 
the will they may be changed, either in one part only, as in a law, 
and a testament, or in seyeral parts at the same time, as in contracts 
and pacts. Here they speak of Antinomies*. In these cases, then^ 
the evident obscurity of the word compels us to recur to conjectures. 

2 Sometimes the conjectures are so evident, that they spon- 
taneously suggest themselves, even contrary to the more received 
* Ad Hereon. 1. 11, and 13 ; Qointil vii. 7 and 9. 

o 

194 OP INTERPRETATION. [Book II. 

Bignification of words. This is the received distinction of What is said, 
and what is meant. The topics, from which conjectures of the mean- 
ing are collected, are principally, the Matter, the Effect, and the con- 
joined Circmnstances. 

y. From the Matter; as if a truce of 30 days is made, the word 
Day is to be understood, not of natural days but of civil days ; for 
that agrees with the matter : so the word d^Mxt^ for giving up one's 
rights conditionally : so the word orms^ which sometimes means the in- 
struments of war, sometimes armed soldiers, must, according to the 
matter, be interpreted one way or the other : so he who promises to 
give up men, must give them up alive, not dead, as the Platcsans quib- 
bled. So when persons are to lay down their steel, this is to be satisfied 
by laying down their swords, not their steel buckles, as Pericles inge- 
niously suggested ; and when men are to be allowed to depart from a 
city, they are to do so freely and in safety, contrary to Alexander's 
proceeding : so to give up the half of the ships, is habf the number of 
whole ships, not each ship cut in halves : as the Romans did to An- 
tiochus. And the like cases must be judged in the same manner. 

YL From the Effect; in which the main case is, when a word 
taken from ordinary use draws with it an absurd effect. For if the 
word be ambiguous, the interpretation is rather to be taken which 
involves no absurdity. Hence the quibble of Brasidas was not to be 
admitted, who, having promised that he would depart from the Boeo- 
tian territory, denied that that was Bosotian territory which he occu- 
pied with his army ; as if the term were to be understood of warlike 
possessions, not of the ancient boundaries ; in which sense the com- 
pact was unmeaning. 

VII. Things are conjoined in their origin, or in place. Those 
are conjoined in their origin which proceed from the same will, al- 
though uttered at a different place and time; whence a conjecture 
is drawn, because in doubtful cases the will is supposed to be in 
agreement with itself. Thus in Homer, the agreement between Paris 
and Menelaus, that Helena should be given to the victor, must, from 
what follows, be so expounded, that he is victor who kills the other. 
Plutarch gives the reason, that judges take the view which is least 
ambiguous. 

VIU. Of things conjoined in place, that which has the greatest 
force, is the reason of the law, which many confound with the inten- 
tion, though in fact it is one of the indications by which we trace 
the intention. But among conjectures, this is the strongest, if it 
appear certainly that the will was moved by any reason as a sole 
cause ; for there are often several reasons ; and sometimes the will 
determmes itself by its liberty and without regard to reason, which 
suSGices for producing an obligation. Thus a donation made in con- 
templation of a marriage has no power if the marriage does not 
follow. 

IX. But it is to be remarked, that many words have several sig- 

Chap. XVI.] OP INTERPRETATION. 195 

niilcaiionB, one» stricter, one» laxer ; which happens for many causes : 
either because the name of the genus is appropriated to one speciesy 
as in the word cognation, which, meaning any relationship, is used 
for one kind; and adoption, which meaning any assumption of a 
child, is used for one with certain formalities : and so in masculine 
words which are used as common to both genders, when common 
words are wanting ; or because the usage of art is more wide than 
popular usage ; as death, in Civil Law, includes civil death, transpor* 
tation for life, though it does not mean this in popular language. 

X. It is also to be observed, that of the things which are pro- 
mised, some are promises of favour, others of odium, others mixed, 
others medium. Those are of favour, which are equal to both par- 
ties, and regard the common utility. In proportion as this is greater 
and more extensive, the greater is the favour included in the pro- 
mise ; as greater, thus, in things which make for peace than for war ; 
and greater for defensive than for other war. Those are promises 
of odium which lay a burthen on one party only, or on one more 
than another, and which impose penalties, and nullify acts, and 
change former promises. If any thing be mixed, as for instance, 
what changes former agreements, but for the sake of peace, that must 
be held favourable or odious as the one or the other may predomi- 
nate, leaning to favourable, ccateris paribus. 

XI. The distinction of acts bonce fidei and strieti juris, so far as it 
flows from the Roman Law, does not pertain to the Jus Gentium, 
Tet in a certain sense it may be adapted here : so far as this for 
instance, that if in any place certun acts have a certain common 
form, that, so far as it is not changed, is understood to be inherent 
in the act: in other acts, more indefinite in kind, such as donative, 
and promise made of mere liberality, we must stand more by the 
words. 

Xn. 1 This being understood, the following rules are to be ob- 
served : In non-^ious promises, the words are to bo taken according 
to the general propriety of popular usage, and if such usage is mani- 
fold, according to that which is widest; as that the masculine 
gender goes for the common gender, and an indefinite for an 
universal locution. So the words [in the form of the Interdict for 
recovering possession] Unde quis d^ecius est, will apply to restore him 
who was not ejected, but forbidden to return to his property, as 
Cicero rightly argued. 

2 In favourable promises, if he who speaks understands the law, 
or if he have had the advice of persons skilled in the law, the words 
are to be taken more laxly, so that they may include a technical or a 
legal signification. But we must not recur to significations plainly 
improper, except otherwise some absurdity or the inutility of the pact 
would follow. On the other hand, words are to be taken more strictly 
even than propriety requires, if that be necessary to avoid injustice 
or absurdity ; but if the necessity be not such, but a manifest justice 

O 2 

196 OF INTERPRETATION. [Book U 

and atility in the restriction, we most confine oarBelres within the 
narrowest boundaries of propriety, except circumstances counsel an- 
other course. 

3 In odiotu promises, figuraUre language is in some small mea- 
sure admitted, to avoid the odium. Therefore in a donation and 
grant of any right, words, howeyer general, are usually restricted to 
that which was probably thought of. And in this class, that is some- 
times spoken of as occupied, which there is hope of retaining. Thus 
auxiliaries promised on one side only, are understood to be at the 
expense of him who asks for them. 

XIII. 1 It is a noted question, whether under the title of Allies, 
those are included only who were so at the time of the league being 
made, or those who became so afterwards; as in the league between 
the Romans and Carthaginians after the war about Sicily : The allies 
qf each People shall be unJiarmed by each People. Hence the 
Romans inferred, that though the league struck with Asdrubal, that 
he should not pass the Ebro, was not available to them, because 
the Carthaginians had not ratified it ; yet that if the Carthaginians 
gave their sanction to the act of Annibal who besieged the Saguntines, 
who had ^become allies of the Romans after the treaty, war might 
be declared against them as baring violated the treaty. Livy gives 
the reasons, which are taken almost word for word from Polybius. 

How shall we pronounce on this point? That the word cUlies 
may mean, in a reasonable usage, both those who were so at the time 
of making the treaty, and a larger signification including future allies, 
is indubitable. Which interpretation is to be preferred, we must con- 
sider, on the preceding principles : and according to them, we say 
that it does not comprehend future allies, because it treats of break* 
ing the league, which is a matter of odium, and of taking away the 
liberty of the Carthaginians, to punish with arms those who had 
wronged them ; which is a natural liberty, not likely to be supposed 
abdicated. 

2 Was it then not lawful for the Romans to take the Saguntines 
into alliance, or when allied, to defend them? Certainly this was 
lawful, not in virtue of the league, but in virtue of Natural Law, 
which they had not abdicated by the treaty : so that the Saguntines 
should be in the same situation as if no convention had been made 
about allies : in which case the Carthaginians would not be acting 
against the league, if they made what they conceived to be a just war 
against the Saguntines ; nor the Romans, if they defended them : just 
as at the time of Pyrrhus, an agreement was made between the Car- 
thaginians and Romans, that if either of those Peoples made a leaguo 
with Pyrrhus, it should be lawful for the other to do so likewise. I 
do not say the war could have been just on both sides ; but I deny 
that this point had to do with the violation of the league : as in the 
question concerning the Mamertines, Polybius distinguishes the points^ 
whether it was just, and whether it ^fas consistent with the league. 

Chap. XVI.] OF INTERPRETATION. 197 

3 And this is exactly what the Corcyreans in Thacydides say to the 
Athenians, that it is lawfiil for them to send aid to them, and that it 
is not an objection, that the Athenians had a league with the Lacedae- 
monians, since by that league it was lawful to acquire new allies. 
And this opinion the Athenians themsolyes afterwards followed ; for 
they gave command to their officers that they should not fight against 
the Corinthians, except they attacked Corcyra, or inraded its soil, in 
order not to break the league. For it is not at yariance with a league, 
that they who are attacked by one party should be defended by the 
other, peace remaining as to other matters. Justin says, of these eyents, 
that 2^ trecUy which they had made in their own name^ they broke in the 
person of their alliee, tic. So in the Oration on Halonesus, it appears 
that, by the peace between the Athenians and Philip, it was pro- 
yided that the cities of Greece, not comprehended in that treaty, 
should be free ; and if any one attacked them, those comprehended 
in the peace might defend them. And this is an example in an equal 
league. 

XIV. In an unequal league we shall suppose other terms : that 
it is agreed that neither of the allies shall make war without permis- 
sion of the other : which were the terms of the league of the Romans 
and Carthaginians, after the second Punic war, as mentioned aboye : 
as also in the league of the Macedonians and Romans before the 
reign of Perseus. Since ''making war" may include all kinds of 
war, both offensiye and defensiye, we must suppose this to be taken in 
the narrower sense, and to mean offensiye war, that the liberty of the 
parties be not too much restricted. 

XV. Of the same nature is that promise of the Romans, that Car- 
thage should be free : which, although, from the nature of the act, it 
could not be understood of full soyereign power, (for they had already 
lost the right of making war and other rights,) yet it left some 
liberty to them, and at least so much, that they should not be com- 
pelled to remoye the seat of their goyemment by extraneous com- 
mand. It was in yain, then, that the Romans laid stress on the word 
Carthage [shall be free,] as if it meant the population, not the city ; 
(which, though an improper expression, might be conceded, the attri- 
bute ,^100 belonging to the population rather than the city). For in 
the wordf Jree, oMvofioVf as Appian says, there was a mere quibble. 

XVI. 1 To this is to be referred that frequent question concem-* 
ing personal and real pacts. If the transaction be with a free peo- 
ple, it is not doubtful that what is promised is by its nature real, be- 
cause the subject (the People) is a permanent thing. And eyen if the 
state be conyerted into a kingdom, the league will remain, because 
the body remains, though the head is changed ; and, as we haye said, 
authority exercised by the king does not cease to be the authority of 
the people. Exception is to be made, if it appears that the cause of 
the treaty was peculiar to the republican state, as if free cities make 
« league in defense of their liberty. 

198 OP INTERPRETATION. [Book U. 

2 Eren if the compact be made with the king, it is not necessarily 
personal: for as Pedias and Ulpian say, commonly the person is 
inserted in the compact, not that it may be a personal compact, but 
that it may appear on the face of it with whom it was made. And 
if it be added to the treaty, that it is to be perpetual, that it is made 
for the good of the kingdom, or with him and his successors, as is 
commonly added in treaties, or for a definite time, it is plainly real. 
Such appears to hare been the treaty of the Romans with king 
Philip, which, when Perseus his son refused to acknowledge as per- 
taining to him, war arose on that ground. But other words also, and 
the matter itself, sometimes supply probable conjecture on this sub- 
Ject. 

3 If there be equal conjectures each way (for a real and a per- 
sonal pact), the result must be that fa?ourable pacts are to bo be- 
lioTod real, odious ones, personal. Treaties of peace or commerce 
are farourable : those made with a view to war, not all odious, as 
some think, since epimachieSf engagements of support in defensive 
war, are nearer to farour ; symmachies, engagements to war in general, 
nearer to burthens. Add to which, that in a treaty looking to any 
war, it is presumed that account is had of the prudence and piety 
of the person treated with, as one who will not undertake a war 
unjustly, nor eyen rashly. 

4 The maxim, that partnerships are separated by death, I do not 
here adduce : for that belongs to private partnerships, and is a maxim 
of Civil Law. Whether the Fidenates, Latins, Etruscans, Sabines, 
were right or wrong in renouncing their league with the Romans 
when Romulus, TuUus, Ancus, Priscus and Servius were dead, we can- 
not judge, not having the words of the treaties extant. Not unlike 
this is the controversy in Justin, whether the cities which had been 
tributaries of the Modes, when the empire was changed, had changed 
their condition. For the argument of Bodlnus is by no means to 
be accepted, that treaties do not pass to the successors of kings, be- 
cause the force of an oath does not go beyond the person. For the 
obligation of the oath may bind the person only, while the obliga- 
tion of the promise may bind the heir. 

6 Nor is it true, as he assumes, that treaties depend entirely upon 
oaths ; for the promise of itself gives force to the treaty, and the oath 
is added only for the sake of religious reverence. So when the 
Roman people had sworn that they would make a treaty under 
direction of the Consul, and Valerius the Consul died, some of the 
Tribunes held that the people was not bound : but Livy judges other- 
wise : As ytty he says, men had not hecomej (u now, eardess of ocUhs, 

XVII. If a treaty be made with a king, and he or his successor 
be expelled by his subjects, the treaty renoains valid : for the right of 
the kingdom remains with him, though he have lost possession. So 
Lucan, speaking of the Roman Senate in exile. 

XVin. On the other hand, if an Usurper of the kingdom be 

Chap. XVL] OP INTERPRETATION. 199 

attacked by its ally with the consent of the true king; or if the 
oppressor of a free people be so attacked, before the sufficient consent 
of the people can be obtained ; nothing is done against the treaty : 
for such persons haye possession, but not right. As Quintius said to 
Nabis, We made no alliance with you^ lut with Pelops, ths just and 
legitimate king of the Lacedcemoniana, And these qualities, (just and 
legitimate,) in treaties, refer to the right of the king and bis succes- 
Bors : the cause of Usurpers is an odiotts cause. 

XIX. Chrysippus had treated this question, Whether a prize pro- 
posed to him who reaches the goal first should, if both arri?e there at 
the same time, be gi?en to both or to neither. And in fact, the word 
Jirtt is ambiguous : it means either him who gets before all others, or 
whom none gets before. But because the prizes of excellence are 
matters of favour ; the sounder opinion is, that the two should share 
the prize: though Scipio, Csesar, Julian, more liberally gave a full 
prize to both of those who had mounted the walls at the same time. 

And so much of the interpretation which is adapted to the proper 
or improper signification of words. 

XX. 1 There is also another kind of interpretation, from Con- 
jectures extraneous to the signification of the words in which the 
promise is made : and this interpretation is twofold, either extending or 
restricting the meaning. But the interpretation which extends, proceeds 
more difficultly, that which restricts, more easily. For as in all things, 
in order that the effect may not follow, it is enough if one of the 
causes be wanting ; and in order that it may take plac^ it is necessary 
that all conspire ; so in obligation also, a conjecture extending the 
obligation is not lightly to be admitted ; and in this case it is much 
more difficult than in the case which we spoke of before, to assign to 
words some large but unusual signification. For here, besides the 
words of promise, we have to look for some conjecture, which ought 
to be yery certain, which may induce an obligation ; nor does analogy 
suffice, we must haye identity of reason : nor is it always enough 
that we can say the words are to be extended for existing reasons : 
for, as we haye said, reason often so operates, that neyertheless, the 
will may be a sufficient cause, without any reason. 

2 Therefore, in order that such an extension may be rightly made^ 
H is necessary that it should be apparent that the reason under which 
the case comes which we wish to comprehend, should be the sole and 
efficacious cause which moyes the promisor ; and that that reason was 
considered by him in its generality; because otherwise the promise 
would haye been unjust or useless. This is also treated by Rhetori- 
cians in their sections on What is said and what is meant ; of which one 
kind which they mention is, when we always utter the same sentence. 
But also another section. On reasoning, belongs to the subject: 
lAamely, when from what is written we deduce what is not written, as 
Quintillan says : and also what is deliyered by the Jurists as to what 
is done fraudulently. 

200 OF INTERPEETATION. [Book IL 

3 Take an example in an agreement made that no place shall he 
walled round, made at a time when there was no other way of fortifi- 
cation. That place cannot even have an earth- work made round it» if it 
appear that the only cause for prohibiting walls was that the place 
might not be fortified. An example is often taken in the conditions 
introduced in the will of a testator in case his posthumous child die, the 
testament being made by one who fully expected a posthumous child ; 
and the rule is used to extend the dispositions of the testament to the 
case in which the posthumous child is not born : because it is eyident 
that the will of the testator was moyed by the consideration of a pro- 
geny which nerer came into existence : which example we find not only 
in the Jurists, but also in Cicero and Valerius Maximus. 

4 See Cicero in the oration pro Cosetna. And hence the form of 
interdict, Unds tu im vi d^eoeris hominibus coactis armatUvet will 
hold against all force endangering life, though there may not be a 
body of armed men. As Cicero says, the legal effect is the same. 
So Quintilian says. Murder seems to imply steel weapons and blood; 
but if any one is killed in any other way, we still recur to that law : 
for instance, if the man be thrown from a precipice. So Isseus, because 
by the Attic Law a testament could not be made [by a father having 
no son] agiunst the will of a daughter, infers that an adoption could 
not be made without her consent. 

XXI. And on these principles is to be solred that celebrated 
question which we have in GelhuB, about a commission; whether it 
may be fulfill^, not by the identical thing directed, but by another 
equally useful or more useful than that which was enjoined by him 
who ga?e the commission. For it is lawful to do so, if it be clear 
that what was prescribed was not prescribed under its special form, 
but under a more general purpose, which might also be obtained 
in some other way : thus, he who was ordered to gi?e security for a 
loan to be made to a third person, might, instead, give an order to 
the lender to make the payment to the third person; as ScssTola 
held. [Dig, xyii. 1.] But when that is not clear, we must hold, as 
Crassus says, in Gtellius in that place, that the demand of the superior 
is disregarded, if any one, in place of discharging his commission as 
directed, respond by adyice which was nerer asked for. 

XXII. An interpretation restricting a promise, extraneously to 
the signification of the words which contain the promise, is derired 
either from original limitation of the will [of the promisor], or from 
the repugnance with such will which comes to yiew in some occurring 
case. A limitation of the original will is understood — from the ab« 
surdity which would eyidently follow, if it were not so limited; — from 
the cessation of the reason which alone fully and efficaciously mored 
the will ; — and from the defect of the matter. 

The first restriction has its ground in the consideration, that na 
one is supposed to intend what is absurd. 

XXIII. The second in this, that what is contiuned in the pro% 

CiiAF.XVI.] OF INTERPRETATION. 201 

rxase, when Bach a reason is added, or the reason is certain, is not 
considered nakedly, but so far as it comes under that reason. 

XXIV. The third in this, that the matter which is dealt with is 
always supposed to be present to the mind of the speaker (the pro- 
miser), although the words haye a wider signification. This way of 
interpretation also is treated by writers on Rhetoric in the Section, Of 
what is $aid and wJiat is meant : and has for its Title, When the same 
words are tued, but not in t?ie same sense, 

XXY. 1 But with regard to the reasons [of promisors, as here 
applied], it is to be noted that there are comprehended therein many 
things, not as to whether they ezisti but as to their power morally 
considered ; and when this holds, the restriction is not to be intro- 
duced. Thus if it be stipulated that an army or a fleet is not to be 
moYod into a certain place, it must not be moved thither, though it 
be done with no purpose of attack. For in the compact, it was not 
a certain damage, but a danger of any kind which was considered. 

2 This also is often disputed, whether promises have in them- 
selres this tacit condition. If things remain in their present state. 
And this is to be denied, except it bo quite clear that the present 
state of things was included in that sole reason of which we hare 
spoken. Thus we constantly read in history of ambassadors who 
gave up their commission and returned home, because they under- 
stood that the state of things was changed, so that the whole matter 
or cause of the embassy ceased. 

XXYI. 1 The repugnance of an occurring case with the will 
[of the promisor] is commonly, in writers on oratory, referred to the 
Section of which I hare spoken, Of what is said and what is meant. 
It is twofold : for the will is either collected from natural reasons, 
or from some other sign of the will. Aristotle, who has most cor- 
rectly treated this part, ascribes to the intellect a peculiar power for 
judging of the will, which he calls yvtofjkrjf or tvyiwfjuHrvinj, that is 
equitable insight; and to the will he ascribes a corresponding 
power, inuUfta, equity, which he ably defines, The correction of the 
law, when it is defective from the universality of its expression*. 
And this equity is also to be applied to testaments and compacts in 
an appropriate manner. For since all cases can neither be foreseen 
nor expressed, there is a necessity for some liberty for excepting cases 
which he who has spoken would except if he were present. But 
this is not to be done rashly ; (for that would be for the interpreter 
to determine the acts of another) ; but on sufficient indications. 

2 The most certain indication is, if in any case to follow the 
words would be unlawful, that is, at variance with the precepts of 
Natural or Divine Law. For such cases, since they cannot impose an 
obligation, must necessarily be excepted. Some things, says Quin. 
tilian the father, though they are not comprehended in any terms of the 
law, are by their nature excepted. Thus he who has received a sword 

• See E. M, 401. 

202 OP INTERPRETATION. [Book U. 

a depoBity promising to give it up on demand, is not to giye it np 
to a madman, in order that he may not create danger to lumself or 
to other innocent persons. Tryphoninns says, / cigree that ii ia justice 
to give to each his oum^ but in such a way that it may fwt he again 
demanded on a better claim by some other person. The reason is, 
because, as we have elsewhere noted, the force of ownership once 
introduced, is such that not to restore a thing to the owner, when 
known, is altogether unjust. 

XXVII. 1 A second indication of a reason for deviating from 
the words of the promisor, in our interpretation, is, if to follow the 
words will be, not indeed quite unlawful, but to a person f&irly esti- 
mating the matter, grieyous and intolerable : either looking absolutely 
at the condition of human nature, or comparing the person and 
thing in question with the end of the act. Thus be who has lent a 
thing for a few days, may demand it back again within that time, if 
he himself haye great need of it: because this [lending] is an act so 
beneficial in its nature, that it is not to be supposed that any one 
would thereby bind himself to his own great inconyenience. Thus he 
who has promised assistance to a federate ally, will be excused as long 
as he is in danger at home, so far as he has occasion for his powers. 
And a concession of inmiunity from tax and tribute must be un- 
derstood with reference to daily and yearly taxes, not to those 
which some extreme necessity requires, and which the State cannot 
do jyithout. 

2 Whence it appears that Cicero spoke too laxly, when he said that 
your promises are not to be kept which are useless to those to whom 
they are made; nor if they harm you more than they adrantage 
them. Por whether the thing will be useful to him to whom it is 
promised, the promisor is not the judge, except perhaps when the 
promisee is mad, of which case wo haye spoken aboye : and in order 
that a promise may not oblige the promisor, it does not suffice that it 
brings some harm to the promiser; but it must be such barm as 
according to the nature of the act must be supposed to be excepted 
in the promiser. Thus he who has promised his neighbour so many 
days' labour, is not bound if a critical and dangerous disease of his 
father or his son keeps him away. So Cicero in his Offices, (i. 10.) 

3 What Seneca says is to be taken in the same sense, and not to 
be pushed further: / must keep my promise if all things are the same: 
but if anything be changed^ I am at liberty to revise my decision. 
Thus I promised to advocate a cause; but it appears that the cause ia 
intended to injure my father: I promised to accompany one on a 
journey; but it appears that the road is infested with robbers: I wag 
to come at a certain time; but my son is ill, my wife is in child-' 
birth. AU must be the same as it was when I promised, to oblige me 
to keep my word. Understand, aU things according to the nature of 
the act in question, as we haye just explained. 

XXVm. We haye said that there may also be other signs of the 

Chap. XVI.] OP INTERPRETATION. 203 

will, which shew that the case is to bo excepted. Among these signs, 
nothing is more decisiye than words used in another place ; not when 
they directly oppose the promise, which is antinomt/, as mentioned 
abore ; bat when unexpectedly and by the very event of things they 
are in conflict, which the rhetoricians call cireumstantial corUrcuiietion, 

XXIX. 1 In the discussion, Which part of a document ought to 
prerail in case of such a collision, Cicero has giren certain rules 
from ancient authors ; and these, though not, in my judgment, to be 
rejected, seem to me not to be placed in due order. We shall arrange 
them in this way : 

Permission gives way to command, or, as the writer to Herennius 
says, command outweighs permission * : 

What is to be done at a certain time, is to be preferred to what 
may be done at any time : and hence a prohibitive pact outweighs an 
imperative one : except either the time be expressed, or the command 
contains a tacit prohibition : 

Between those pacts which are equal in the above qualities, that 
is to be preferred which is more peculiar, and comes nearer to the 
thing: for special expressions are commonly more efficacious than 
general : 

In prohibitions, that which has a penalty added is to be preferred 
to that which has not, and that with the greater penalty, to that with 
the less : 

That is to be preferred which rests upon causes more honourable 
or more useful : 

Lastly, that which was last said has most weight f. 

2 We must repeat that some pacts are to be understood according 
to the most received propriety of language, repudiating all tacit and 
unnecessary restrictions. Whence if a sworn pact be at variance with 
an unsworn one in a certain event, that is to bo preferred which has 
the sanction of an oath. 

XXX. It is also made a question. Whether in a doubtful case a 
contract is to be held perfect before it is committed to writing and 
delivered. So Murena argued against the convention of Mithridates 
and Sylla. It appears plain to me that, except it be agreed otherwise, 
it must be supposed that writing is adopted as a monument of the 
contract, not as a part of it. If this is not so, it is expressed, as. 
From the day when the conditions are written and delivered. 

XXXI. I do not admit, what many writers have held, that the 
contracts of kings and peoples are to be interpreted according to 
Roman Law; except when the Roman Law has been accepted as 
belonging to the Law of Nations ; which is not lightly to be pre- 
sumed. 

XXXn. As to the question which Plutarch discusses in his ^^ympo- 

* Barbejrac says, not always : a uniyersal command gives way to a particular 
permission. 

-f Barbeyrac obserres that this last role is ont of place here. 

204 OP INTERPRETATION. [BookU. 

«tum, Whether the condition of the offerer or the words of the acceptor 
are more to be attended to ; it appears that, since the acceptor is the pro- 
miser, his words must give force to the business, if they are absolute and 
perfect. If by affirmation (as by saying yes) they respect the words 
of the offerer, then, from the nature of relative words, these are to be 
understood as repeated. But before the condition is accepted, the 
offerer is not bound; till then, the other part acquires no right, eren 
in a promise; and an offer is less than a promise. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Of Damage done wrongfuUy and consequent Obligation. 

SiCT. L 

Fault obliges to Restitution 

XIIL 

of Damage, 

XIV. 

11. 

Wrong is a Damage. 

XV. 

UI. 

Moral claims and Jural 

XVI. 

claims. 

xvu. 

IV. 

Damage to the Produce of a 

thing. 

xvni. 

V. 

Damage by cessation of gain. 

VI. 

Damage from agents, pri' 

XIX. 

marg, 

XX. 

VII. 

And secondary^ 

VIII. 

And from non-agents, pri- 
mary. 

XXI. 

IX. 

And secondary. 

X. 

Efficacy requisite for this. 

XXII. 

XI. 

In what order bound. 

xu. 

Consequent Damage, 

Examples, in Homieidef 
In Violence, 

In Adultery and Stupration^ 
In Theft, Robbery, ^o. 
In Promises under deceit 
or unjust fear. 
Promises under fear, how 
just by Natural Law, 
Or by Jus Gentium, 
Liability of the State for 
subjects. 

By Natural Law men are 
not bound for Damage by 
their beasts, 6fc. 
Damage to Reputation and 
Honour. 

I. 

W".' 

have said above that there are three sources of debts dae 
us ; Pact, Wrong, Law. Of pacts we have sufficiently 
treated: we come to what by Natural Law is duo on account of 
Wrong. We have given the name of wrong to every fault, either of 
doing or of omission, which is at variance with what men ought to do, 
either on the ground of their common connexion, or of some special 
quality. From such fault arises by Natural Law an obligation, if the 
wrong be accompanied with damage : namely, the obligation of re- 
pairing the wrong. 

U. 1 Damage, damnum (perhaps from demo,) is when a man has 
less than what is Am, whether it be his by mere nature, or by some 
human act in addition, as ownership, pact, law. Things which a man 
may regard as hia by nature are life, not indeed to throw away, but to 
keep, his body, limbs, fame, honour, his own acts. What is his by 
ownership and pact, and how, we have shewn above, both as to things, 
and as to right over others' acts. In like manner the law determines 
for each what is his, for the law can do more for a man than he can 
do for himself. Thus a ward has a right to a certain care and dill* 
gence from his guardian ; the State, from a magistrate ; and not only 
the State, but each citizen, as often as the law expressly, or by clear 
implication, marks such a consequence. 

2 But a mere Moral Claim, which is not properly a Right, and 
belongs to distributive or assignatory justice, does not produce true 
ownership, and the consequent obligation of restitution : for that is 

206 OF DAMAGE DONE WRONGFULLY [BookIL 

not any one's to which he has merely a moral claim. A man does not 
wrong any one when he r^itses to give from^iUiJberality^ says Aristotle. 
So Cicero. 

in. But here we must take care not to confound things of diverse 
kinds : for he who has to appoint a magistrate is bound to the repub- 
lic to elect one who is worthy ; and the republic has a right to denuind 
this: and therefore, if by an unworthy election he has produced 
damage to the republic, he is bound to make it good. So any citizen^ 
not unworthy, although he has not a right to any office, yet has a 
right to be a candidate along with others ; and if he is disturbed in 
this right by fraud or riolenco, he may demand, not the whole value 
of that which he sought, but the estimated value of his loss. So in 
the case of him to whom a testator was by force or fraud prevented 
from leaving a legacy ; for the capacity to receive a legacy is a certiun 
right, which has for its consequence this, that to impede the liberty of 
the testator as to that right, is a wrong. 

IV. A person may have less than his own, and so, have suffered 
loss, not only in the thing which belongs to him, but in the produce of 
the thing, whether he has collected such produce, or only would have 
collected it : and his loss consists in that produce, minus the expense 
of improving the thing, and of coUectiDg the produce. 

y. Also the hope of gain from a thing which is ours may be 
estimated, not as what it is simply, but according to its prospect; as 
the hope of the harvest in the sower. 

VI. Besides him who immediately causes the loss, others may be 
bound, either by doing or not doing. 

By doing, some primarily, others secondarily : Primarily, he who 
commands it, who gives the requisite consent, who helps, who receives 
what is taken, or who participates in the crime in any other way. 

VIL Secondarily, who adrises, praises, approves. See Cicero. 

VIII. Also by not doing, primarily and secondarily. Primarily, 
when one who by his proper right ought to forbid the act, or help the 
person wronged, does not. 

IX. Secondarily, he who does not dissuade when he ought, or 
keeps silence about a fact which he ought to make known. And this 
oughtj in all these cases, we refer to proper rights and ezpletory justice, 
whether arising from law or quality. For if he ought by the law of 
charity only, he sins indeed in not doing it, but is not held to repara- 
tion ; for this has its origin in a proper right, as we have said. 

X. It is to be noted also, that all those of whom we have spoken 
are bound if they were really the cause of the damage, that is, if their 
influence shared in producing either the whole loss or a part of it. For 
it often happens in agents or negligents of the secondary order, and 
sometimes in those who are of the first order, that even without their 
act or neglect, the person who committed the damage was certain to 
commit it : in which case they will not be liable. Which answer is 
BOt so to be understood as, that if others would not have been want*** 

CflAP.XVn.] AND CONSEQUENT OBLIGATION. 207 

ing to persuade or assist, those who did persuade or assist are not 
liable; if without suasion or assistance the author of the damage 
would not hare done it. For those others who should haye persuaded 
or assisted would hare been liable. 

XI. Those are liable in the first place, who, by command, or in 
any manner, impel any one to the act : failing these, the perpetrator 
of the deed; after him, the rest in any way concerned; and those 
jointly who gaye cause to the act, if the whole act proceeded from 
them, though not from them alone. 

XIL They who are liable for the act, are also liable for the natu- 
ral consequences of the act. Seneca puts a case of a man setting fire 
to a plane*tree^ by which a house was burnt, and holds him liable. 
[See.] Ariarathes, haying wantonly stopped the course of the riyer 
Melanus, caused a flood of the Euphrates, which produced great 
damage in Galatia and Phrygia : and the matter being referred to 
the Romans, paid 300 talents to make good the loss. 

Xin. Take these examples: A person who unlawfully kills 
another is bound to pay the expenses of physicians, if any, and of 
those who depended for subsistence on the person killed, his parents, 
wiyes, children, as much as their hope of support was worth, con- 
sidering the age of the person killed. So Hercules paid a fine for 
the death of Iphitus. So Michael Ephesius on Aristotle. We say 
unlawfully kills ; for if a person was acting lawfully, as if he was 
assailed and did not run away, though he may haye sinned against 
charity, he is not liable. The life of a free man cannot be yalued : 
it is difierent in a slaye, who may be sold. 

XIV. If a person maims another, he is similarly liable to the 
expenses, and to the estimated yalue of how much less the maimed 
man can earn. But as the free man's life, so his wound, is not 
capable of estimation. The same is to be said of unjust impri- 
sonment. 

XV. The adulterer and adulteress are liable not only to in- 
demnify the husband for the expenses of rearing the progeny, but 
also to repay the legitimate offspring what loss they suffer from the 
concourse of the oflbpring so arising in the inheritance. 

He who deflowers a yirgin by force or fraud is bound to pay her 
as much as she loses by the diminished hope of marriage ; and eyen 
to marry her if it was by such a promise that he became master 
of her person. 

XVX The thief and the robber are bound to restore the thing 
subtracted, with its natural increase, and with the consequent loss, 
or consequent cessation of gain ; and if the thing haye perished, 
its estimated yalue, not the highest, nor the lowest, but the medium 
Talue. In this class are to be placed those who defraud the lawf^ 
taxes. Also those are liable who by false testimony haye occasioned 
damage in an ui^ust sentence, or an unjust accusation. 

XVn. Also he who has caused a contract or promise by fraud, 

208 OP DAMAGE DONE WRONGFULLY [Book II. 

trick, or violence, is liable to restore to his original condition him 
who has been thus dealt with: because he had a right not to be 
deceived, and not to be forced : the former, from the nature of a 
contract, the latter from natural liberty as welL To these are to 
be reckoned those who would not do, except for money given, what 
they were bound to do for their office. 

XV 111. He who gave cause why he should suffer force, or be 
compelled by fear, has himself to blame for what happens: for 
an involuntary act arising from a voluntary one is hold morally for a 
voluntary one. 

XIX. As, by the consent of nations, a rule has been introduced^ 
that all wars, conducted on both sides by authority of the sovereign 
power, are to be held just wars ; so this also has been established, that 
the fear of such a war is held a justly imposed fear, so that what is 
obtained by such means cannot be demanded back. And here the 
distinction appears between an enemy and pirates or robbers*. For 
what these take, may be demanded back, except an oath have been 
introduced to prevent it ; what those take, not so. Wherefore, what 
appears to Folybius to be a just cause for the Carthaginians b^;inning 
the second Punic war, that the Romans had before made war upon 
them when they were engaged with the mutiny of their mercenaries, 
and had wrung from them the island of Sardinia^ and a money pay^ 
ment, has some shew of natural equity, but is at variance with the 
Law of Nations, as we shall elsewhere explain. 

XX. 1 ELings and magistrates are liable for neglect, who do not 
apply the remedies which they can and ought, to restrain robbery and 
piracy : on which ground the Scyrians were in ancient times con- 
demned by the Amphictyons. I recollect the question being pro- 
posed to me, — ^from the fact that the rulers of our country had given 
several persons letters of privateering and authority to make captures, 
and some of these persons had captured the property of friends, and, 
learing their country, led a life of sea-rovers, not returning even when 
summoned home; — ^Whether the rulers were bound to restitution; either 
as having used the agency of bad men, or as not having demanded cau- 
tion-money. I gave my opinion, that they were bound to nothing more 
than to punish and surrender the guilty persons, if they could be found; 
and, besides, to make the goods of the plunderers liable : for that they 
had not been the cause of the unlawful spoliation, nor had in any way 
shared in it ; and had forbidden by law the plunder of friends : that 
there was no law obliging them to demand caution-money, since they 
might, if they chose, give all their subjects the right of capturing 
enemy's goods, which in former times had been done : and that such 
permission was not the cause why friends had been damaged, since 
private persons, even without such permission, could arm vessels and 
go to sea. And that whether those who went would turn out good or 
bad men, could not be foreseen; nor was it avoidable to use the 

* And so the connexion between ''primte war** and pnblio war disappears. W. 

Chap. XVIL] OP DAMAGE DONE WRONGFULLY, &c. 209 

i^ncy of bad men as well as good, since otherwise no army could 
be got together. 

2 Nor, if either soldiers or sailors, contrary to command, do any 
damage to friends, are the kings liable ; which has been proved by the 
testimony both of France and England : that any one, without any 
fault of his own, is bound by the acts of his agents, is not a part of 
the Law of Nations, by which this controyersy must be decided, but 
a part of the Civil Law; nor of that in general, but introduced 
against sailors, and certain others, for peculiar reasons. And sentence 
was given to that effect by the Judges of the Supreme Court, against 
certain Pomeranians ; and that, according to the precedent of a similar 
cause, adjudged two centuries ago. 

XXL It is to be noted also that the Rule, that if a slave, or any 
animal, cause any damage or loss, it creates a liability in the master, 
is also a creation of Civil Law. For the master, who is not in fault, 
is not liable by Natural Law ; as also ho is not whose ship, without 
any fault of his, damages another's ship : although by the laws of 
many nations, and by ours, the damage in such case is commonly 
divided, on account of the difficulty of proving where the fault lay. 

XXn. Damages also, as we have said, may be inflicted on a 
man's honour or reputation ; as with blows, insults, abusive language, 
calumny, ridicule, and the like. In which cases, no less than in theft, 
and other offenses, the badness or malice of the act must be dis- 
tinguished from the damage. For the badness of the act is a ground 
for punishment, the loss, for reparation : which, in this case, is made 
by confession of the fault, manifestation of respect, testimony of the 
innocency of the calumniated person, and the like: though such 
damage may also be recompensed by money, if the injured person 
choose ; because money is the common measure of valuable things. 

CHAPTER XVni. 

Of the RiglU of Legation. 

Sect. I. Right of LegaHan is Jure \l, 
gentium, 

II. Between wham 9 V II. 

III. Is a Legation always to be YIIL 

received ? 

lY. Ambassadors acting mis^ IX. 

chievously, X. 
V. Third parties not bound bg 

Legation, XI. 

Enemy to whom he is sent 
is bound. 

Jus TaUonis does not apply, 
T/Us right extends to the 
whole of the Embassy , 
And their movable goods. 
Obligations without eoae^ 
turn. 
Value ofJue Legationis, 

L TTITHERTO we have spoken of things which are doe to ns by 
Xl Natural Law, adding only a few points which belong to the 
institated Law of Nations, in so £ur as, by that, any thing was added to 
the Law of Nature. It remains to speak of the obligations which that 
which wo call the Instituted Law of Nations has of itself introduced: 
in which class, the principal head is the Right of Legation. For we 
everywhere read of the rererence for Embassies ; the sacredness of 
Ambassadors ; the Rights of Nations lodged in them by Dirine and 
Human Law; all which belong to those Instituted Laws; with other 
the like phrases. [See other phrases in the text. Papinius Statins; 
Cicero.] To yiolate this is not only unjust, but impious, by the con- 
fession of all ; as Philip says. 

II. 1 But, in the first place, this Law of Nations, whaterer it be, 
applies to those Ambassadors only who are sent by Sovereign Powers 
to one another. For those who are sent as representatiyos of pro- 
vinces, towns and others, are not governed by the Law of Nations, 
that is, by International Law, but by the Civil Law. An Ambassador, 
in Livy, calls himself the Public Messenger of the Roman People* 
And agidn, the Senate says that the Right of Legation belongs to a 
foreigner, not to a citizen. And Cicero, arguing that ambassadors 
should not be sent to Antony, says, For we have not to deal with 
Hannibal^ an enemy of the Statej but with a eitisen o/the Staio, Virgil 
explains clearly who are strangers (jEn, vu. 369). 

2 Those states which are joined by an unequal league, when they 
do not cease to be their own masters, will have the Right of Ligation : 
and also those who are only partly subject, for the part in which they 
are not subject. But kings who have been conquered in a formal 
war, and deprived of their kingdom, along with their other possessions, 
lose the right of legation. So P. ^milius retained the n^gotiaton 
who came from Perseus, whom he had conquered. 

3 But in civil wars, necessity sometimes makes room for this right. 

CnAP.XVIIL] OP THE RIGHT OF LEGATION. 211 

^jetra regulam : for instance, when the people is diyidod into nearly 
equal parties, so that it is doubtful with which party the right of the 
supreme authority is : or when two claimants for the succession con- 
tend with Tery balanced pretensions. For in such an event, one 
nation is, for the time, two nations. Thus Tacitus accuses the Flavians, 
that the right of Legation, which is sacred even between strangers, 
they had savagely violated in the case of the Yitellians. Pirates and 
robbers, who do not make a State, cannot claim the right of legation. 
Tiberius, when Tacfarinas sent ambassadors to him, was disturbed 
that a deserter and a robber gave himself the air of an open enemy, 
as Tacitus says. But sometimes such persons obtain a right of lega- 
tion by promise given them on good faith, as was the case with a band 
of fugitives in the Pyrenees. 

IIL 1 There are two points with regard to ambassadors which 
we Qw&rywhere find referred to the Law of Nations : that they be ad- 
mitted, and that they be not violated. 

Of the first point ; Hanno inveighs against Hannibal, that, not ad- 
mitting the ambassadors of the allies, he had violated the Law of 
Nations. Which however is not to be understood so absolutely ; for 
the Law of Nations does not prescribe that all ambassadors are to be 
admitted; but that they are not to be excluded without cause. 

The cause may be, on the part of him who sendsi of him who is 
sent, or in the fact that he is sent. 

[Examples of the first case.] 

2 Melesippus, the ambassador of the Lacedaemonians, was dismissed 
beyond the borders of the Attic territory, by the advice of Pericles, 
because he came from an armed enemy [within the territory]. So the 
Roman Senate declared that no embassy of the Carthaginians could be 
received while their army was in Italy. The Achocans did not admit the 
ambassadors of Perseus, when he was organizing a war against the 
Romans. So Justinian rejected the embassy of Totila, who had often 
broken his faith ; and the Goths at Urbino sent back the ambas- 
sadors of Belisarius. So Polybius relates that the ambassadors of the 
Cyneihensos, as being those of a wicked race, were every where ex- 
pelled. 

Of the second case, we have an example in Theodorus, who was 
called the Atheist, and whom Lysimachus would not hear, when he was 
sent by Ptolemy ; and the same happened to others on account of 
some peculiar odium. 

The third case occurs when the cause of the mission is either sus- 
pected, as when Rabshakeh was sent to Hezekiah : or is not con- 
formable to the dignity of the receiver, or to the time. So the Romans 
forbad the Etolians to send any embassy, except by permission of the 
Emperor; commanded Perseus to send, not to Rome, but to Licinius ; 
and ordered the ambassadors of Jugurtha to quit Italy within ten days, 
except they came to surrender the king and the kingdom. The em- 
bassies which may be with the best right excluded, are those resident 

p 2 

212 OF THE RIGHT OP LEGATION. [Book II. 

embassies which are now common, but which are not necessary; as we 
learn from ancient custom, to which they were unknown. 

IV. 1 The question of the inviolability of ambassadors is more 
difficult, and yariously treated by the able men of our time. We 
must first consider the persons of the ambassadors, and then their 
suite and property. 

With regard to the persons of ambassadors, some are of opinion 
that they are protected only from unjust Tiolence : for that their 
priyileges are to be interpreted by common Law. Others think that 
force may be put upon an ambassador, not for any cause, but only if 
he folate the Law of Nations ; which is a rery wide expression; for in 
the Law of Nations, Natural Law is included : and so, according to 
this, an ambassador might be punished for any offense, except those 
which arise from mere Ci?il Law. Others restrict this to what is 
done against the state or dignity of the commonwealth to which the 
ambassador is sent : and others think that even this is dangerous, and 
that complaints against the ambassador are to be transmitted to him 
who sent him, and that he is to be left to be judged by him. Somo> 
again, think that kings and nations who are not interested in the ques- 
tion, should be consulted ; which may be a matter of prudence, but 
cannot bo a matter of right. 

2 The reasons which each of these parties adduce do not conclude 
anything definitely ; because this Law of Nations is not like Natural 
Law, which flows in a sure way from certain reasons ; but this takes its 
measure from the will of nations. For nations might either alto- 
gether refuse to entertain ambassadors, or with certain exceptions. 
For on the one side stands the utility of punishment against grave 
delinquents, [even if they be ambassadors,] and on the other, the 
utility of ambassadors, the sending of whom is facilitated by their 
haying all possible security. We must consider, therefore, how far 
nations have agreed ; and this cannot be proved by examples alone. 
For there are many each way. We must recur therefore to the 
judgments of good authorities, and to conjectures, that Is, probable 
arguments. 

3 There are two judgments of great note, that of Livy, and that of 
Sallust. Livy's is about Tarquin's ambassadors, who stirred up a trea- 
sonable design at Rome : Thyugh they had behaved ao that they might 
have been treated as enemies, the Law of Nations prevailed : here we see 
that the Law of Nations is extended even to those who act as ene- 
mies. The dictum of Sallust pertains to the subordinate members of 
the legation, of whom we shall have hereafter to speak, not to the 
ambassador: but the argument proceeds rightly, from the greater, 
that is, the less credible, to the less, that is, the more credible. He 
says thus : Bomilcar, his companion^ who had come to Rome on the public 
faithy is put under accusation, rather on the ground of equity, than of 
the Law of Nations, Equity, that is, mere Natural Law, allows pen* 
alties to be demanded when the delinquent can be got hold of; but 

Chap. XVIH.] OP THE RIGHT OF LEGATION. 213 

the Law of Naiionfl makes an exception in faTour of ambassadors and 
those who come under the public faith. Hence to put ambassadors 
under accusation is contrary to the Law of Nations, which forbids 
many things which Natural Law permits. 

4 Conjecture also is on this side. For it is the sounder opinion 
that priTileges are so to be understood, that they giro something beyond 
common rights. But if ambassadors were only protected from unjust 
Tiolence, there would be in that nothing great, nothing distinguished. 
Add that the security of the ambassadors may preponderate oyer the 
utility which iuTolyes a penalty. For punishment may be had through 
his means who sent the ambassador ; and if he will not afford it, may 
be demanded by war of him as the approver of the crime. Others 
object that it is better that one should be punished than many inyolTod 
in war : but if he who sent the ambassador approve of what he did, 
his punishment will not save us from war. 

On the other side, the safety of ambassadors is in a very inse- 
cure position, if they have to render account of their acts to other 
persons than him who sent them. For since the yiows of those 
who send the ambassador, and those who receive him, are generally 
diverse, often contrary, it is scarcely possible that something may not 
be sud against the ambassador which may take the form of an accu- 
sation. And though some things of this kind are so manifest that they 
admit of no doubt, the universal danger suffices to establish the 
equity and utility of the universal rule. 

5 Wherefore I quite think thus: that the common rule, that ho 
who is in a foreign territory is subject to that territory, docs, by the 
common consent of nations, suffer an exception in the case of ambas- 
sadors; they being, by a certain fiction, in the place of those who send 
them : [see Cicero :] and by a similar fiction they are, as it were, extra 
t^rritorium ; and thus, are not bound by the Civil Law of the People 
among whom they live. Hence, if there be any delict which can be 
treated lightly, either it is to be overlooked, or the ambassador 
ordered beyond the borders, as Polybius relates was done to him who, 
at Rome, had aided the escape of the hostages. On which occasion, 
in passing, we are given to understand that at another time, the 
ambassador of the Tarentines, who had committed the same offense, 
was scourged ; but that was done, because the Tarentines had begun 
to be subject to the Romans. If the crime be more atrocious, and 
tending to public mischief, the ambassador must be sent back to him 
who sent him, with a demand that he be punished or surrendered ; 
as the Gauls asked that the Fabii should be given up to them. 

6 But, as we have said above, that all human rights are so condi* 
tioned, that they do not bind in cases of extreme necessity, so is this 
true in this doctrine of the inviolability of ambassadors. But that 
extreme of necessity does not occur in the requirement of punishment ; 
which may also be suspended in other cases by the Law of Nations ; 
as will appear below, where we treat of the established effects of war : 

2U OF THE RIGHT OP LEGATION. [Book II, 

still less docs this necessity operate in the place, time, and manner of 
taking punishment; but it does hold in precautions agiunst graver 
evil, especially public evil. Wherefore in order to obviate imminent 
danger, if there be no other effectual course, ambassadors may both bo 
detained and interrogated. Thus the consuls of Rome apprehended 
the ambassadors of Tarquin, lookihg first to the letters which they 
carried, as Livy says, that they might not escape them. 

7 If the ambassador use armed force, he may undoubtedly be 
killed, not in the way of punishment, but in the way of natural 
defense. Thus the Fabii, whom Livy calls the violators of human 
law, might have been killed by the Gauls. So in Euripides, Demophon 
threatens the Herald. The name of this Herald was Copreus, and 
because he used violence, he was put to death by the Athenians, as 
Philostratus relates. Cicero solves, by a not dissimilar distinction, the 
question, whether a son ought to accuse a father who is betraying luis 
country. For he decides that he may do so, to avert the imminent 
danger, but not to invoke punishment when the danger is past. 

y. 1 But the law which I have stated, of the inviolability of am-^ 
bassadors, is to be understood to bind him to whom the embassy ii 
sent ; and more particularly, if he has received the ambassador, as if 
from that time a tacit compact had been introduced. But prohibi- 
tions may be and are often delivered, that ambassadors are not to be 
sent ; and that if sent, they will be treated as enemies : as notice was 
given to the ^tolians by the Romans ; and as it was in old times 
announced by the Romans to the Veians, that except they quitted the 
city, they would be treated as Lars Tolumnius had treated their am- 
bassadors ; [who put them to death :] and as was announced to the 
Romans by the Samnites, that if they presented themselves at any 
public meeting in Samnium, they would not depart inviolate. This law 
does not affect those through whose territory the ambassadors pass 
without having received permission : for in so far as they go to their 
enemies, or come from their enemies, or in any other way appear as 
enemies, they may be put to death. As the Athenians dealt with the 
ambassadors between the Persians and Thebans, and the Illyrians 
with those between the Essii* and the Romans: and much more may 
they bo thrown into bonds, as Xonophon did to certain persons, and 
Alexander to those who were sent from Thebes and Lacedsemon to 
Darius, and the Romans to the ambassadors of Philip to Hannibal, and 
the Latins to those of the Yolsci. 

2 If there be no such cause, and ambassadors [passing through the 
territory] are ill treated, it is not the Law of Nations, of which we 
are speaking, which is violated, but the friendship and dignity, either 
of him who sent them, or of him to whom they go, which is conceived 
to be violated. Justin says of the letter of Philip, king of MacedODy 
that his ambassador to Hannibal being carried to Rome, he was dis* 
missed in safety by the Senate, not out of honour to the king, but in 
* The inhabitants of lata, an island on the coaat of Illjria. Cfronov, 

Chap. XVm.] OF THE RIGHT OF LEGATION. 215 

order that he^ as yet doubtful, might not bo made an indubitable 
enemy. 

YI. But the embassy, once admitted, has, even with enemies, and 
much more with a party merely unfriendly, the protection of the Law 
of Nations. Heralds and negociators are at peace in the middle of 
war, says Diodorus. The Lacedsemonians who put to death the am- 
bassadors of the Persians, are said thereby to have thrown into oon- 
Juiian the rights of mankind. So Pomponius, Tacitus, Cicero, Seneca, 
Liyy, Curtius. [See the passages.] And with great reason ; for in war, 
many things happen which cannot be transacted except by ambassa- 
dors ; and peace itself can scarcely be attained in any other way. 

Vn. It is also made a question, whether by the law of retalia- 
tion, an ambassador may be put to death or ill treated, who comes 
from a person who has perpetrated something of that kind. And 
certainly there are in histories many examples of such roTonge. But 
histories relate not only what was rightly done, but what wrongly, 
angrily, passionately. The Law of Nations not only prorides for the 
dignity of the Sender, but for the security of the Sent ; and there* 
fore there is a contract with the latter also. Wrong, therefore, is in 
such case done to him, though none be done to him who sent him. 
Therefore it was not only magnanimously done of Scipio, but also 
according to tho Laws of Nations, when, after the ambassadors of 
the Romans had been illtreated by the Carthaginians, he had the 
Carthaginian ambassadors brought before him, and being asked. What 
was to be done with them, answered, Nothlog like what the Carthagi* 
nians had done. Livy adds, that he said that he would do nothing 
unworthy of the institutions of Rome. Valerius Maximus, in a simi- 
lar but more ancient fact, ascribes to the Consuls this saying. From 
tueh /eaVf HannOf the faith of cur city liberates you : for there also 
Cornelius Asina, contrary to the rights of legation, had been thrown 
into chains by the Carthaginians* 

Yin. 1 The suite and the furniture of the ambassadors have also 
their own sacredness; and so the ancient formula of the Feciales ran: 
King^ do you make me the royal messenger of the Roman People^ with 
my company and equipments f And by the Julian Law, those are held 
to be guilty of unlawful yiolence who have done injury, not only to 
ambassadors, but also to their companions. But these are sacred, in 
an accessory manner only, and so far as the ambassador chooses : 
and the ambassador may be required to giro them up. But they 
are not to be taken by force. When this was done by the Achseans 
to some Lacedsemonians who were in the company of the Roman 
ambassadors, the Romans exclaimed loudly that the Law of Nations 
was violated. To this may be referred the judgment of Sallust con- 
cerning Bomilcar, which we have quoted above. But if the ambassa- 
dor will not giro them up, the course is to be taken which we have 
pointed out in speaking of the ambassador. 

2 Whether the ambassador has jurisdiction over his own family 

216 OF THE RIGHT OF LEGATION. [Book IL 

and suite, and whether his house is to be an asylum for all who take 
refuge there, depends on the concession of the party with whom ho 
resides : for it is not a part of the Law of Nations. 

IX. Also the moveable property of an ambassador, which is 
regarded as an appendage to his person, cannot be taken or impound-* 
ed for debt ; neither by order of a court, nor (as some think) by the 
royal hand. For all compulsion ought to be removed from an am- 
bassador; that which touches things necessary to him, as well as his 
person, that he may have full security. Therefore, if he have con- 
tracted any debt, and, as may easily happen, has no real property in 
that country, he is to be asked for it in a friendly way ; and if he 
refase, he who sent him is to be applied to : and at last, he may be 
proceeded against in the manner of debtors who are without the 
territory. 

X. 1 Nor is it to be feared, as some think, that on such terms no 
one will contract with an ambassador. For kings also, who cannot be 
compelled, do not ful to find creditors : and in some peoples it has 
been the custom, that he who had given credit on a contract should 
not have a sentence in his favour by a court : any more than if he 
brought an action for ingratitude ; so that men would be compelled 
either to receive ready money, or to trust to the naked good £uth of 
the debtor. Seneca expresses a wish for such a state of things. So 
Appian says this was the Persian practice. 

2 Elian relates the same thing of the Indians. Gharondas made 
the like rule; and Plato approves. Aristotle remarks the same. [See] 
The arguments against this from the Roman Law do not pertain to 
ambassadors such as we speak of, but to representatives of provinces 
and towns. 

XI. Wars engaged in on account of ambassadors being ill used, 
are found in all parts of pro&ne history. Also Scripture mentions 
the war which, on this account, David undertook against the Am* 
monites. Cicero says, there is no juster cause of war. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Of tlie Right of Sepulture. 

Sect. L Right of Sepulture is jure IV. Is it due to Criminals $ 

gentium, V. To Suicides 9 

IL Whence arising 9 YI. Other things done jure genm 

HI. Is due to Enemies. tium. 

I. I nriHE Laws of Nations Toluntarily instituted, direct also the 
I sepulture of dead bodies. Dio Chrysostom, among the 
itsoffetf which he opposes to written law, mentions, after the rights of 
legation, the usage of not refusing burial to the dead. So Seneca the 
fatheri Philo, Josephus, Isidore of Pelusium, who calls this a law of 
nature, the general natural habits of man being included in the term 
fuUure, as elsewhere noticed. So Euripides, Aristides, Lucan, Papiniua 
[Statius], Tacitus. He who prevents it, puts off humanity, as Glaudian 
says; disgraces humanity, as Leo ; insults decency, as Isidore says. 

2 This right, as being common to all civilized men, was referred 
to the gods as its authors. So in the Supplices of Euripides ; the 
Antigone of Sophocles. [See.] 

3 So Isocrates in several places*, Herodotus, Diodorus, Xenophooi 
Lysias and Aristidesf. 

4 And names implying Virtue are given to this office, as humanityXf 
meret/t eompoMumf reltgion, a feeling for our common nature, a re- 
coUection of our human condition, a work of kindness. [See the 
authors.] The Donatists who refused burial to the bodies of Catho- 
lics are accused of impiety. So Papinius [Statius]. Spartian says that 
such are witlunU reverence for humanity. So Livy, Homer, Lactantius. 
[See.] 

IL 1 There are different opinions as to the origin of this prac* 
tice of burying bodies ; either first embalming them, as the Egyptians 
did ; or burning them, as among the Greeks mostly; or without prepa- 
ration, which Cicero notes as the oldest practice. Moschion thought 
the custom intended to be a memorial of the abolition of the practice 
of eating human bodies. [See.] 

2 Others regard it as a willing payment of a debt to Nature, which, 
if not given, she will take. That man is made from earth, was not 
only told to Adam by Qod. Cicero also quotes from Euripides, Earth 
to earth; and in Eccl. zii. 7, we read, Then shall the dust return to the 
earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to Ood who gave it. See 

* The paM8ge about the Thebans is wrongly applied. J. B. 
-f- The panage of Aristides in wrongly applied. J. B. 
X An expresiion which, in this senae^ Qrotios wrongly ascribes to Cicero. J. B. 

218 OF THE RIGHT OF SEPULTURE. [Book H. 

Euripides ; Lucretias ; Cicero, from Xenophon. Pliny says that the 
earth receiyes us when we are bom*, nourishes us as we grow up, 
feeds us at every age, and at last reoeires us into its bosom as a 
mother, when the rest of nature rejects us. 

3 Others think that the hope of the resurrection was intended to 
be marked by this practice, and transmitted to posterity. So Demo* 
critus seems to have thought f. The Christians often refer the prac- 
tice of burial to this hope. So Prudentius ; What mean hollowed 
gUmeSf what mean Moulpiured tonibSf save that what we trtut to them it 
not dead, but sUepethf 

4 It is more simple to say, that considering the superiority of man 
to other annuals, it was deemed unworthy of him that other ^tiimaJiy 
should feed on him, and that sepulture was inrented to obriate this. 
The pity of men protects the body from birds and beasts, says Quin- 
tilian. To be devoured by beasts was considered shocking. So CScero^ 
Virgil, Jerem. zzii. 19, 1 Kings xxi. 19, Lactantius, Ambrose. 

5 And even without regarding such insults, it seems unfit for the 
dignity of man's nature that his body should be torn and oroslied. So 
Bopater, (Gregory Nyssen. 

6 Hence the office of burial is conceired as rendered, not so mndi 
to the man, that is, the particular person, as to Humanity, thai is, 
to Human Nature. So Seneca and Quintilian call it pMic hmnmn^t 
Petronius, transferred hvmanUy. And hence it follows, that sepul* 
tnre ought not to be withheld, either from our friends or from enemies. 
See this thought in the Ajcue of Sophocles: in Euripides: in Viigil, 
and the writer to Herennius, who quotes him}. So Papinius [Statins] 
and Optatus speak of death terminating all enmity. 

TIL 1 Hence all agree that sepulture is due to public enemies ; 
and is a right of war. So Appian, Philo, Tacitus, Dio Ohiysostom, 
Lucan, Sopater, Dio Chrysostom again, 

2 And examples occur in abundance. Enemies were buried by Her- 
cules, Alexander, Hannibal; of the latter case Silius says, Ton might 
have supposed the dead man a Sidonian leader. So the Romans buried 
Hanno ; Pompey, Mlthridates ; Demetrius, several : Antony, Arehe- 
laus. The oath of the Greeks who marched against the Peruans 
included this^. And we constantly read in history that the van<)iiislied 
obtained permission to bury their dead. So Pausanias says the Athe- 
nians buried the Modes. 

3 The Hebrew High Priest, though on other occasions forlndden 
to have anything to do with a funeral, was yet commanded to bury a 
dead body if he found it by accident. Christians thought the burial 
of the dead so important, that in order to do it, as in order to relieve 

* Referring to the {mctioe of lajing a new-bom child on the grwmiL 

t The pessage is wronglj qnoted, and misiiiidentood. J. B. 
t A mistake of Grotios, which Barbeyne has ingeniooilj traced. 
§ A mistake of Grotiiis, as BartMgrrac shews. 

Chap. XIX.] OP tHE RIGHT OF SEPULTURE. 219 

the poor, or to ranBom captiyes, they thought it lawful even to sell 
the consecrated yessels of the church. 

4 There are examples of burial denied, but they are condemned 
by the common judgment See Virgil, Claudian, Diodorus. 

IV. 1 With regard to great criminals, there seem to be doubts* 
The Hebrew law directed the bodies of those who were publicly exe* 
cnted to be taken away and buried before sunset : and the commen- 
tators note this as an evidence of reyerence for the diyine image in 
which man is made. Egisthus was buried by Orestes. Among the 
!Romans, the bodies of those executed were not denied to their rela- 
tives ; or even to any who asked for them, as Paulns thought. So 
Diocletian and Maximian directed. 

2 Examples of bodies thrown out unburied, are more common in 
civil than in foreign wars. And at this day, some criminals are gib- 
beted and left in public view : but whether this be a laudable practice^ 
is disputed both by politicians and by theologians. 

8 On the other hand, we find persons praised, for ordering the 
bodice of those to be buried who had themselves refused the rite to 
others, as Pausanias. So Statins makes Theseus act to Greon. So 
the Pharisees buried Alexander Jannseus. If God punished some by 
denying them sepulture, he did this by his own right. David's pro- 
ceeding with Goliath's head was no general case. 

V. 1 The Hebrews, however, made one exception, in the case of 
those who had died by their own hands. And this is fit; for there can 
be no other punishment, for those to whom death is no punishment 
So the Milesian virgins, and the Plebs at Rome were deterred ft'om 
suicide. So Ptolemy ordered the body of Oleomenes to be hung. Ajid 
it is, says Aristotle, a common practice, as Andronicus explains him. 
And on this ground, Dion lauds Demonassa, queen of Cyprus. And 
it is no objection, that, as the poets sometimes say, the dead feel 
nothing, and are not affected by loss or shame. For it is enough if 
what is done to the dead deters the living. 

2 The Platonists argued well, against the Stoics and others who 
thought that the need of a refuge from slavery and disease, and the 
hope of glory, were just causes of a voluntary death. They replied, 
that the soul must remain at its post in the body, and that we must 
not quit this life without His leave who placed us in it : as we find in 
Plotinus, Olympiodorus, Macrobius. On this ground, Brutus, at an 
earlier period, condemned the act of Cato, which he afterwards imi- 
tated. See Plutarch. And Megasthenes noted that the act of Cal- 
anus, [who burnt himself in the presence of Alexander and his army,] 
was blamed by the wise men of the Indians ; for that their doctrine 
did not approve of such impatience of life. So Darius said, / would 
rather die by anothet^s crime than my own. 

3 Hence the Hebrews called death dissolution and departurey not 
only Luke ii. 29, but also in the Greek version of Gen. xv. 2, Num. 

220 OF THE RIGHT OP SEPULTURE. [Book H. 

zz. 29 ; which mode of speakiog was also used by the Greeks. See 
Themistius, and Plutarch. 

4 Some of the Hebrews make one ezception to the rule against 
suicide, in a case of a laudable retiremerUf if any one foresees that he 
will in future live to the dishonour of God. For since God, not man, 
has a right to our lires, they think that the presumed will of God 
is the only thing which ezcuses the purpose of anticipating death. 
To this they refer the ezamples of Samson and of SauL The 
former saw that in his person the true religion was scorned. The 
latter was restored to a right way of thinking, aftor the shade of 
Samuel had predicted to him his death ; and though knowing that 
this was at hand, he did not refuse to fight for God and his 
country; and fell on his sword to aroid the insults of the enemy: 
thus obtaining eternal praise, eyen from David. The third ezample is 
that of Razis, in the history of the Maccabees, 2 Mace. ziy. 37. la 
Christian history also, we read similar examples of persons who haye 
killed themselves, lest under the pressure of torments they might 
renounce the Christian religion : and of virgins who have drowned 
themselves to save their chastity, and whom the Church places 
amongst its martyrs. But it is worth while to see what Augustine 
says of these cases. 

5 I find that another exception obtained among the Greeks; 
^hich the Locrians objected to the Phocians: It waa the common 
usage of Greece that sacrilegious persons should he catt forth wnbwriedU 
So Dio Prusseensis. So traitors were treated at Athens, as Plutarch 
says. 

But to return to my subject ; the ancients were generally agreed 
in holding that war might justly be undertaken on account of sepul- 
ture denied ; as appears by that history of Theseus which Euripides 
treats in the Supplices, and Isocrates in the Oration quoted. 

YI. There are some other things which are due by the insti* 
tuted Law of Nations; as possession by prescription, succession to 
intestates, and the results of contract, even if unequal. For all these, 
although in a certain way they have their origin in Natural Law, 
yet received from human law a certain firmness, both against the 
uncertainty of conjecture, and against exceptions which othenrise 
natural reason seems to suggest : as we shewed above in passing. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Of Punishments. 

Sect. L D^nition and oriffin qf 

Punishment. 
II. Punishment belongs to Ex- 

pletory Justice, 
II L Punishment by Natural 

Law is a due to any one, 
IV. Human Punishments re-, 

quire utility, 
Y. Js Revenge unlawful 9 
VI, Threefold utility of Punish- 

ment, 
YII. Advantage of thedelinquent. 
VIII. Advantage qf persons in- 

jured, 
IX. Advantage to any one, 
X. The Gospel Law. 
XL The Mercy of God, 
XII. Penitence, 

XIII. Divisions of Punishments. 

XIV. Private Christians not to 
demand punishment, 

XV. Or spontaneously to accuse, 

XVI. Or to frequent tribunals, 

XVII. Is capital pimishment a 
Right $ 

XVIIL Internal acts not punish- 
able. 

XIX. Nor inevitable external 
acts, 

XX. Nor acts by which society is 
not injured. 

X XI. Liberty of Pardomng 
XXII. Existed before Penal Law : 
XXIIL But not always, 

XXIV. Even after Penal Law, 

XXV. External causes qf this, 

XXVI. Internal causes , 

XXVII. What is a just cause of Dis- 
pensation i 

XXVIII. Estimate €f Punishment by 
Desert, 

XXIX. With regard to Impellent 

causes, 
XXX. And Retrahent causes. 

XXXI. And Aptitude of the Of- 
fender. 

XXXII. Desert may be beyond Dam- 
age, 

XXXIII. Harmonic proportion in 
Punishments, 

XXXIV. Punishments lightened by 
Charity, 

XXXV. Facility and Habit. 

XXXVI. Use of Clemency, 

XXXVII. Hebrew and Roman opi- 
nions, 

XXXVIII. War for Punishment. 
XXXIX. War for Inchoate Delicts, 

XL. Is Jurisdiction requisite f 
XLI. Natural Law and Civil 

Custom. 
XLII. And Instituted Divine Law, 
XLIII. Manifest and not manifest, 
XLIV. War for offenses against 

God, 
XLV. The first Precepts of the 

Decalogue. 
XLVI. Punishment of transgressors 

of these: 
XL VII. Not of the others. 
XL VIII. War against Infidels. 
XLIX. War against Persecutors. 
L. War against Heretics. 
LI. War against Impious, 

I. 

1 TTTHEN aboTO we began to speak of the causes for which wars 
V V are undertaken, we said that facts might be considered in 
two waySy either with a view to reparation, or to punishment. We have 
now finished the former part of the subject^ and proceed to the 
latter. Punishment. And this must be the more carefully treated 
by us, because its origin and nature, not well understood, haye given 
rise to many errors* 

222 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Boor II. 

Punishment, in its general signification, is An EvU of mffering 
which is inflicted on account of (ob) am evil of doing. For though 
labour [not pain] may be the sentence of persons as a punishment, 
yet such labour is considered as it is disagreeable, and therefore is a 
sort of suffering. But the inconTeniences which some persons hare to 
suffer on account of an infectious disease [Ley. ziii.], or a mutilation 
of the body [Deut xxiii. l], or other uncleanness [Ler. xr.]; such as, 
to be excluded from public assemblies, or from certain functions, are 
not properly punishments ; although on account of a certain resem- 
blance, and by an abuse of language, they may be called by that 
name. 

2 Among the things which nature herself dictates as lawful 
and not unjust, this stands; that he who has done enl should suffer 
«Til; which the philosophers call the ancient and Rhadamanthean 
law, as we hare elsewhere said [I. n. 3.] So Plutarch; Plato. [See.] 
So Hierax defined justice by this as its noblest element ; and Hiero- 
oles called it the medicine of wickednees. So LactantioB. 

3 And this characteristic of Punishment, that it is the retam for 
transgression, is noticed by Augustine ; [see] ; which belongs also to 
punishments inflicted by God ; though in these sometimes it appears, 
through human ignorance, as he says, that the tranagreesion m hid 
tuhUe the punishment is apparent. 

n. 1 Whether Punishment belongs to attributiye or to exple- 
tory justice there are different opinions. For inasmuch as those who 
transgress more grayely are more heayily punished, and those who 
sin less grayely, more lightly ; and because punishment is assigned by 
the whole to a part, therefore they ascribe punishment to attributiye 
justice. 

But the principle on which they proceed, that attributiye justice 
obtains whereyer an equality is introduced between more than two 
terms, we haye preyed, in the beginning of this work, not to be true 
[L i. 8]. And in the next place, that greater offenders are punished 
more soyeroly, smaller ones more lightly, that only happens by con- 
sequence, and is not what is looked to in the first place and per 
ae. For tho thing first looked at is the equality between the offense 
and the punishment, as Horace says. [See.] And in like manner 
Deut. xxy. 2, 3 ; and the Novella of Leo. 

2 Nor is their other principle more true, that all punishments 
come from the whole to a part, as will appear by what we haye here- 
after to say. But further : it is shewn aboye that the true notion of 
attributiye justice does not properly consist, either in such equality, or 
in the process from the whole to a part ; but in taking account of 
that claim which does not include right strictly taken, but giyes occa- 
sion to it. And although he who is punished ought to haye a moral 
claim, or to be worthy, to be punished, still that does not go to 
proye that he has such a quality as attributive justice requires. 

But neither do they who hold that expletory, or, as it is commonly 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 223 

calledy commutatory justice, is exercised in Punishment, explain them^ 
selyes better. For they regard the transaction as if something were 
paid to the offender, as is commonly done in contracts. They are 
deceired by the yulgar expression in which we say that Punishment is 
ths due of him who has transgressed ; which is plainly an improper 
expression, for he to whom anything is properly a due, has a right 
OTor another. But when we say that punishment is any one's due, we 
mean nothing else than that it is just that he should be punished. 

3 Still, howerer, it is true, that in punishment the justice which is 
exercised is, in the first place and per m, oxpletory justice : because he 
who punishes, in order to punish rightly, ought to have a right to 
punish, which right arises from the delinquency of the offender. And 
in this matter, there is another thing which approaches to the nature of 
contracts ; that as he who sells, although ho say nothing particularly, 
is conoeiyed to hare obliged himself to all tho things which are natu* 
ral to selling ; so he who has wilfully offended, seems to hare obliged 
himself to undergo punishment; because graye crime cannot be other- 
wise than punishable: so that he who directly wills to offend, must 
also by consequence haye willed to incur punishment. And in this 
sense, the emperors say to such a person, Tou have eub^ted yourself 
to ihie punuhmeni ; as those who take wicked counsels are said to haye 
already incurred punishment in their own thoughts : and in Tacitus, 
a woman who had joined herself to a slaye is said to haye consented 
to her own slayery, because that was the punishment for such persons*. 

4 Michael Ephesius on Aristotle illustrates this. 

in. 1 Of such punishment, the subject, that is, the person to 
whom it is due, is not determined by nature itself. Nature dictates 
that eyildoing may be punished, but not who ought to punish: 
except that nature suffidently indicates that it is most suitable that 
it be done by one who is superior : yet not in such way as to shew 
that this is necessary ; except the word superior be taken in this sense, 
that he who has done wrong has, by that yery fact, made himself 
Inferior to any other, and has thrust himself out of the class of men 
into that of the inferior brutes, as some theologians hold. See Demo- 
critus, Aristotle. 

2 It follows, as a consequence of this, that the offender ought not 
to be punished by one who has t)ffended equally, as Christ said, Joh. 
Tiii. 7, He that is without $in among you (that is, such sin) let him cast 
the first stone. And this he said, the Jews being yery wicked and 
adulterous at that time. Bom. ii. 22 ; where the Apostle says what 
Christ had said. Seneca says the same ; and Ambrose, in the apology 
of Dayid. 

IV. 1 Another question is of the End of punishment. For what 
has been said hitherto only proyes that transgressors haye no wrong 

* Tadt. AmutL xii. 68. The pMMge, rightly used, is nothing to the purpose, 
M Barbejrao remariu. 

224 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

done them if thej are punished. Bat from that, it does not necessa- 
lily follow that they must be punished. Nor is it necessary ; for many 
offenders are pardoned for many things both by God and by men, and 
these are often praised on that account Plato's saying is celebrated 
(in his Laws), which Seneca translates, No wise man punishes because 
wrong has been cUmej but in order theU wrong be not done : and so else* 
where ; and in Thucydides. 

2 This is true in human punishments ; for men are so bound toge- 
iher by their common nature, that they ought not to do each other 
harm, except for the sake of some good to be attained. In God the 
case is different, and Plato does ill in extending this doctrine to him. 
For the actions of God may depend on his right of Supreme Autho- 
rity, especially when there is some special merit [or demerit] of man 
in addition, although he propose to himself no extrinsic end : and so 
the Hebrew commentators explain ProT. xri, 4 : The Lord AotA made 
M things /or himself , yea, eveti the wicked /or the day o/ evil. But even 
if we take the more common interpretation, it comes to the same thing : 
that God has done all things by the right of his supreme liberty and 
perfection, seeking and requiring nothing beyond himself; as he is sud 
to be self'-existent. Certainly the words of Scripture testify, that the 
punishments of very wicked men are inflicted on this account, when 
they speak (Dent, xxyiii. 63) of God's rejoicing over them to destroy 
them : of his mocking and laughing at them (Pror. i. 26. Isai. i. 24). 
And that what we hare said against Plato is true, is prored by the 
last judgment, after which no amendment is to be expected : as also 
by the infliction of some inconspicuous punishment, as the hardening 
of the sinner's heart, in this life. 

3 But man, when he punishes a being of the same nature as him- 
self, ought to have some object in riew. And this is what the School-* 
men say, that the mind of him who inflicts punishment ought not to 
rest in the evil inflicted on any one. Plato had said the same before. 
[See.] And Seneca; so also Aristotle. 

y. 1 Therefore what has been said by Tarious writers, that the 
pain of the offender is a remedy of the pain of the injured person, 
(Publius Syrus, Plutarch, Cicero,) does indeed agree with the nature 
which man has in common with brutes ; for anger is, in brutes as in 
man, a heat of the blood arising from the desire of reyenge, which 
appetite is irrational ; so that it is often directed against objects which 
have done them no harm, as against the offspring of the creature 
which did the harm, or against things which hare no sense, as in a 
dog against the stone which hit him. But such an appetite, considered 
in itself, does not correspond to our rational part, of which the office 
is to control the passions ; and consequently, not to Natural Law, be- 
cause that is the dictate of our rational and social nature as such. 
But reason dictates to man that nothing is to bo done by him so as to 
harm another man, except it have some good purpose. But in th<} 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 225 

pain of an enemy, so nakedly regarded, there is no good, but a false 
and imaginary one ; as in superfluous riches, and many other things 
of that kind. 

2 And in this sense rerenge is condemned, not only by Christian 
doctors, but also by heathen philosophers. So Seneca, Maximus 
Tyrius, Musonius. In Plutarch, Dio, who conrerted the Platonic wis- 
dom into acts, says that Tengeance proceeds from the same disease of 
the soul as injurious aggression. [See.] 

3 It is therefore contrary to the true nature of man acting on 
man, to find satisfaction in the pain of another person, as pain. See 
JuYonal on Revenge. [Sat. xni. 180.] So Lactantius. 

4 Therefore man is not rightly punished by man merely for the 
sake of punishing: let us see then what utility makes punishment 
right. 

YI. 1 To this subject pertains the division of punishment stated 
in Plato's OorgiaSt and Taurus on the place, as quoted by Gellius : 
which division is taken from the end of punishment ; except that while 
Plato mentions two ends, amendment and example^ Taurus adds a 
third, retribution. So Clemens Alexandrinus. Aristotle takes the 
two latter ends. Plutarch recognizes retribution. And this is pro- 
perly what Aristotle refers to synallactic justice. 

2 But this must be more minutely examined. Wo shall say then 
that in punishment is regarded cither the utility of the offender, or 
of him who suffers by the offense, or of persons in general. 

VII. 1 To the first of these ends, pertains punishment which is 
called reformatory : of which Paulus, Plutarch, and Plato speak ; the 
object of which is to make a better man of the offender. For as 
repeated acts beget habits, vices are to be cured by taking away the 
pleasure which they bring, and putting pain for their sweetness. So 
Plato and Tacitus. 

2 That punishment which answers such an end, is lawful to every 
one of sound judgment, who is not implicated in that or the like vices, 
appears from what is said of verbal castigation. It is an unofficial 
Duty. [See Plautus.] In stripes and inflictions, which contain any- 
thing of compulsion, the difference between the persons to whom it is, 
and to whom it is not lawful, is not made by nature, (nor could be, 
except that nature commends to parents the office of correcting their 
children,) but by the laws, which, for the sake of avoiding quarrels, 
have restricted that general relation [of correctors and corrected] to 
the nearest family relatives, as we may see in the Codex of Justinian, 
Title De emendatione propinquorwn. So also in Xenophon, Lactantius. 

3 But this kind of punishment cannot extend as far as death, ex- 
cept in what they call a reductive way, in which negations are reduced 
to the opposite class. For as Christ said, it would have been better 
for some if they had never been bom, that is not so ill : so for in- 
curable dispositions, it is better, that is less evil, to die than to live, 
since by living they are sure to become worse. Seneca says they must 

Q 

226 OP PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

perish, in order that they may not perish. So Jamblichus, Plutarch, 
Galen. 

4 Some think that these are those whom St John speaks of as 
sinning unto death. But this is doubtful, and charity requires that we 
should not lightly hold any one's condition for desperate ; and so we 
must rarely punish in such a view. 

YIII. 1 The utility of him whose interest it was that the fault 
should not have been committed, consists in this, that he do not in 
future suffer anything of the same kind from the same person or from 
others. Gellius, from Taurus, says of this case : When iht dignity 
or authority of him against whom the offense is eommitted is to he 
protected, lest punishment omitted produce contempt thereo/t and diminish 
its honour ; but what is said of injury done to authority, is true of 
injury done to liberty, or to any other right. As Tacitus says of a 
person. That he might consult his security by just punishment. 

That he who has been injured may not suffer eril from the same 
person, may be provided for in three ways : first, by the removal of 
the delinquent ; secondly, by taking away his power of doing harm ; 
thirdly, by teaching him, by suffering, not to offend ; which is con- 
nected with the amendment of which we have spoken. That the 
person offended shall not be injured by another, is to be procured, not 
by any casual punishment, but by a punishment open and conspicuous, 
of the nature of example. 

2 Up to these limits then, if yindicative punishment be directed, 
and be kept within the bounds of equity, even if inflicted by a private 
hand, it is not unlawful, if we look at the naked law of nature, that is, 
abstracting divine and human law, and conditions which are not ne- 
cessary concomitants of the thing itself ; whether it be inflicted by 
him who is injured, or by another ; since for man to help man is con- 
sentaneous to nature. And in this sense, we may admit what Cicero 
says, when he declares the law of nature to be that which is given us, not 
by opinion, but by an innate power ; and then places among the exam- 
ples thereof, vindicative punishment, which he opposes to mercy. And 
that no one may doubt how much he would hare understood by that 
term, he defines vindicative punishment to be that by which we rtpd 
force and contumely from us and ours, by defmding or revenging, and by 
whieh we punish offenses. So Mithridates, in Justin, speaks of our 
drawing the sword against robbers, if not for safety, yet for revenge. 
And so Plutarch calls this the law of drfense, 

3 On the ground of this Natural Law, Samson reasoned when he 
said (Judg. xv. 3), Now shaU I be more blameless than the Philistines 
though I do them a displeasure, after they had injured him; and 
again, r. 11, As they did unto me so ?Mve I done unto them. So the 
Platseans in Thucydides said. So Demosthenes against Aristocrates. 
So Jugurtha in Sallust against Adhorbal. Aristides the orator proves 
from the poets, legislators, orators, and from proverbs, the right of 
taking rerenge on those who attack. Ambrose praises the Macca- 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 227 

bees, who, eren on the sabbath-day, aTenged the death of their inno- 
cent brethren. And he too, arguing against the Jews who complained 
of their synagogue as having been burnt by the Christians, says. If I 
went upon the law of nations, I should say how many Christian houses 
of worship the Jews burnt at tJie time of Julian : where the law of 
nations to which he refers is, returning like for like. So Ciyills in 
Tacitus. 

4 But because in things which concern us and ours, we are misled 
by affection, therefore many families were brought together in one 
place, judges were constituted, and to these alone was given the 
power of righting those that were injured, the liberty which nature 
had given to other persons being taken away. So Lucretius of the 
origin of civil society : Demosthenes against Conon : Quintilian ; the 
emperors Honorius and Thoodosius ; and king Theodoric. [See.] 

6 Tet the old natural liberty remains ; first, in places where there 
are no tribunals, as at sea. And to this perhaps we may refer the 
proceeding of Ceesar when, as a private man, having been taken by 
pirates, he collected ships, and partly put theirs to flight, partly sunk 
them ; and then, when the proconsul was slow in punishing those 
who were taken, he himself gibbeted them. The same holds in 
deserts, or where men live a Nomadic life. So among the Umbrici, 
as Nicholas Damascenus relates, every one is his own avenger ; which 
is also the custom among the Muscovites, after a certain time has 
elapsed from the application to the judge. And this was the origin 
of the duels which, before the introduction of Christianity, were com. 
mon among the German nations, and are not yet sufficiently gone 
out of use. And so, as Paterculus relates, the Germans when they 
became acquainted with the Roman jurisdiction, admired to see 
injuries concluded by judicial proceedings, which they were accus- 
tomed to see terminated by an appeal to arms. 

6 The Hebrew Law permitted the relative of the person slain to 
kill the slayer, anywhere without the places of refuge: and the Hebrew 
commentators rightly note, that retaliation for a person slain might 
be executed by personal force; but for the person himself, for 
example, for a wound, no otherwise than before a judge ; because 
moderation is more difficult when the pain comes nearer ourselves. 
That a like mode of avenging murder by the hands of a private 
person prevailed among the Greeks of old, appears in Homer. But 
the examples of this are most frequent among those who have not a 
proper judge. Just wars, says Augustine, are commonly defined to he 
those which avenge injuries; and Plato approves battles on such 
ground. 

IX. 1 The utility of persons in general, which was the third 

end of punishment, offers the same divisions as the utility of the 

injured man. For either the object is that he who has done harm 

to one may not do harm to others ; which is secured, either by taking 

him away, or by taking away his power of mischief, or by constrain- 

a2 

228 OP PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

ing him so that he cannot do harm, or by amending him : or else the 
object is to prerent others from being tempted by impunity to do 
harm to any others, which is provided for by conspicuous punish- 
ments, examples. These are employed, that the punishment of one 
may produce the fear of many ; that others may be deterred by the 
kind of punishment, as the laws speak ; that others may be com- 
pelled to look forward and fear, as Demosthenes says. 

2 The right of inflicting such punishment, is also, by Natural Law, 
in the hands of erery man. So Plutarch says that a good man is by 
nature pointed out as a perpetual magistrate; for by the law of 
nature, authority is giren to him who does just things. So Cicero 
prores that a wise man is never a prirate man, by tibe example of 
Scipio Nasica. And Horace calls Lollius, Consul not for his year 
alone ; so Euripides : which howerer must be understood with refer- 
ence to the laws of the State. 

3 Of this Natural Law Democritus speaks ; first, of the right of 
killing harmful beasts ; and certainly it is not improbable that good 
men did this before the deluge, before God had deli?ered his 
will to man, that other animals should become his food. And then 
be extends this to man: and afterwards says that whoever kills a 
thief or robber, by his hand, command, or rote, is innocent. And 
Seneca seems to hare referred to this. [See the passages.] 

4 But since the proof of the fact often requires great care, and 
the estimate of punishment requires great prudence and great equity, 
communities of men hare chosen, for this office, those whom they 
thought to be, or hoped to find, the best and most prudent. So 
Democritus. 

6 But as in punishment yindicatire, so in punishment exem- 
plary, there remain vestiges of the original law, in those places and 
between those persons who are not under fixed judgments ; and be- 
sides, in some excepted cases. So amongst the Hebrew customs, a 
Hebrew apostatizing from the true God and joining idolatrous wor- 
ship, might be at once put to death by any person. The Hebrews 
call it a judgment of zeal, of which they say Phineas set the first ex- 
ample. (Numb. XXV.) So in the Maccabees (1 Mace. ii. 24), Mattathias 
slew a Jew polluting himself with Greek rites ; and so in 3 Maccab. 
[vii. 16.] 300 Jews were killed by their countrymen. And the stoning 
of Stephen, and the conspiracy against Paul, were on the same pretext, 
as well as many other examples in Philo and in Josephus. 

6 So also among many peoples, masters retained the right of pun- 
ishing their servants, and parents their children, even to death. So 
at Sparta, the Ephori could put a citizen to death without trial. 

From what we have said, we may see what is the Law of Nature 
with regard to punishment, and how far it continued. 

X. 1 We must now consider whether the Gospel Law has limited 
this liberty more narrowly. Certainly, as we have elsewhere said, it 
is not to be wondered at, that some things which are permitted by tho 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 229 

Natural and the Ciyil Laws, are forbidden by the Divine Law; that 
being both the most perfect of Laws, and one which promises rewarda 
beyond the discovery of mere human nature; and to obtain which, 
very reasonably, virtues are required which go beyond the mere 
precepts of nature. But punishments or castigations which neither 
leave behind them infamy nor permanent damage, and which are 
necessary, according to the age or other quality of the offender, if 
they are inflicted by those to whom human laws give such permission, 
as parents, tutors, masters, teachers, have nothing which is at vari- 
ance with the evangelical precepts. These are remedies of the soul, 
as innocent as bitter medicines are. 

2 With regard to revenge, the case is different. For so far as it 
is a mere satisfaction of the mind of the person offended, it is unlaw- 
ful, not only by Gospel Law, but by Natural Law. The Hebrew Law 
too, not only forbids persons to bear malice against their neighbour, 
that is, their countryman, but even commands them to bestow certain 
common benefits on such enemies. And therefore the name of neighs 
hour being by the Gospel extended to all men, it is required of us, not 
only that we do not do harm to our enemies, but that we do them 
good ; which is also directly commanded, Matth. v. 44. The Hebrew 
Law permitted men to revenge the graver injuries, not by their own 
hand, but by recourse to the judge. Christ, however, does not permit 
the same to us ; as appears by the opposition. Ye have Jieard U said^^ 
But I zay unto you. For though what follows properly refers to the 
repelling of injury, and in some degree restricts even the liberty of doing 
that, these precepts are much more to be understood as condemning 
revenge ; for they reject the ancient permission as suitable only to a 
more imperfect time. So the Clementine Constitutions. 

3 TertuUian comments on Christ's teaching, as an addition to that 
of the Old Testament, that vengeance is to be left to God. They 
who believe in Him, are to expect that He will punish ; they who do 
not, are to fear retaliation. 

4 Christ, he adds, did not destroy the teaching of the Old Law. 
God has provided judges of injury. Without this, forbearance loses its 
reward : for it is by the fear of punishment that injury is controlled. 
Without this, violence would go to extremes. 

5 Thus Tertullian thinks that revenge was permitted to the 
Hebrews, not as a thing blameless, but to avoid a greater evil. And 
this is undoubtedly the case, with such demand of satisfaction as 
proceeds from wrath ; and so the purpose of the law was understood, 
as appears in Philo. And this is the point to which Christ's precepts 
tend, when ho enjoins forgiveness of injuries. We are not to pro- 
cure or wish ill to men from the feeling of the ill which they have 
done us. So Claudian: and so Lactantius and Ambrose correct 
Cicero. 

6 But what are wo to say of revenge, as it respects, not the past, 
but protection for the future? Hero also Christ enjoins us to for* 

230 OF PUNISHMENTS. [BookH. 

giro, if he who has injured us shews any signs of penitence; [seo 
the passages ;] in which he speaks of a plenary remission of injury, 
which may restore the offender to his former place in our good 
will; whence it appears that nothing is to ho. required of him in 
the way of punishment. And eren if signs of such penitence ho 
wanting, we are not to take it too severely, as the precept, of 
giving our coat also, shews. And eren Plato said something like 
this. An Action for contumely (such as Christ indicates in speak- 
ing of one striking us on the cheek), Musonius said he would nei- 
ther promote nor authorise, it heing hctter that such things should 
be pardoned. 

7 But if such forbearance bring great peril, we are to be content 
with such precaution as shall do the least harm to the offender. So 
among the Jews, the person offended accepted a pecuniary fine; 
which was also practised at Rome. So Joseph, the husband of 
Mary, and the educator of our Lord Jesus, when he conceived his 
wife to be guilty of adultery, was minded to put her away, not 
to bring her before a public tribunal ; and this, because he was a 
just, that is, a merciful man. And on this account Ambrose and 
Lactantius praise him. So Justin, of the accuser of the Christians, 
says, We do not wish our calumniators to be punished : their depra- 
yity and ignorance are punishment enough. 

8 There remidn punishments which provide, not for private but 
for public good ; partly by coercion of the mbchiovous, partly by 
the effect of example. And that these are not taken away by Christ, 
we have elsewhere clearly proved, in that while he gave his precepts, 
he declared that he did not destroy the Law. The Law, as long as 
it continued, rigidly required the magistrates to punish homicide 
and some other crimes. And if the precepts of Christ could stand 
along with the law of Moses when it pronounced even capital punish- 
ments, they may also stand along with human laws, which in this 
respect imitate the Divine Law. 

XI. 1 There are some, who in defense of the contrary opinion, 
adduce the great mercy of God in the New Corenant, which they 
conceive must be followed by men, and even by magistrates, as the 
Ticars of God : and that this is in some degree true, we do not deny, 
but it does not extend so far as they wish. For the great mercy of 
God in the New Covenant especially regards offenses against the 
primeval law [given to Adam], or the law of Moses, committed before 
the knowledge of the Gospel was received. [See the passages quoted.] 
For transgressions committed after this, especially if there be added 
contumacy, have a threatening of a much more serere judgment than 
that which was instituted by Moses. [See the passages.] And not in 
another life only, but in this also, God frequently punishes such 
transgressions. And such offenses are not commonly pardoned, except 
man punish himself, by serious contrition, 1 Cor. xi. 31, 2 Cor. ii. 7. 

2 They urge that at least they who are penitent ought to receive 

CHAP. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 231 

impunity. But, not to say that true penitence is a matter of which 
men can hardly be assured, and that any one may obtain impunity, if 
it be sufficient to profess penitence in any way he chooses ; God him- 
self does not always remit the whole of the punishment to those who 
are penitent, as appears by the example of David. As therefore 
God could remit the punishment of the law, that is, violent or untimely 
death, and yet inflict evils not at all slight upon the offender ; so now 
also, he may remit the punishment of eternal death, and yet give up 
the offender to untimely death, either inflicted by himself, or, in con- 
formity with his will, by the magistrate. 

Xn. 1 Again, others use this argument, that when life is taken, 
the time for penitence is cut off. But they know that pious magis- 
trates take careful account of this view, and that no one is hurried to 
capital punishment without giving him time to see and seriously to 
detest his sins : and that such penitence, although works correspond- 
ing do not follow, being intercepted by death, may be accepted by 
God, the example of the thief crucified with Christ proves « But if it bo 
said that a longer life might have been profitable for a more serious 
repentance, there may also be found those to whom may deservedly be 
applied what Seneca says. The only good thing which you can nowfur^ 
nish is the spectacle of your death : and again : Let theim ceaee to he bad 
men by death, ihe only way they can. As Eusebius the philosopher 
also says, Sinee they can do it no other way, let them at least in this 
escape the bonds of wickedness, and find that refuge, 

2 This then, in addition to what wo said at the beginning of the 
work, is our answer to those who hold that either all punishment, or 
at least capital punishments, are without exception forbidden to 
Christians: which is contrary to what the Apostle teaches us, who 
includes the use of sword in the royal office, as the exercise of 
divine vengeance; and who elsewhere bids us to pray that kings 
may be Christian, and, as kings, be a protection to the innocent. 
And this, seeing the wickedness of great part of men, even after 
the propagation of the Gospel, cannot be secured, except, by the death 
of some, the boldness of others be repressed ; since even now, when 
oapital punishments and gibbets are so common, there is scarcely 

safety for innocence. 

3 Still it will not be improper for Christian rulers, at least in 
some degree, to propose for their imitation the example of Sabaco, 
king of Egypt, who is reported by Diodorus to have commuted capital 
|>miiii8hment8 for condemnation to the public works, with the happiest 
imicceas. And Strabo says, that even the peoples about Caucasus jpun- 

no erimes with death, not even the greatest. Nor is that of Quin- 
to be despised : None will doubt that if guilty men can be brought 
^ood way of thinking in any way, as it is grcmted that sometimes 
c<in, it would be better for the State that they should be preservedjhan 
^£^'^€>€MXliy punished. Balsamon notes that the Roman laws which enacted 
imu^i^iment of death, were, by the Christian emperors, changed for 

232 OF PUNISHMENTS. [BookH. 

the most part into other punishments, that both the condemned might 
bo more thoroughly driven to penitence, and their punishment being 
prolonged, might be more profitable as example. 

XIII. 1 But in the enumeration of the ends of punishment by 
Taurus, it appears that something was orerlooked. Gellius thus quotes 
him: When therefore there ia either great hope that the offender wUl 
tuUhout punishment correct hinuelf; or, on the other hand, there ia no hope 
thai he can he amended and corrected; or, there is no reason to fear that the 
dignity which is offended will suffer; or, the offense he not «ueA as requires 
exemplary fear to correct it; then the offense does not seem to he one for 
which a punishm£nt need he devised. For he speaks as if when one end 
of punishment is taken away, the punishment should be remored; 
while on the other hand, all the ends must cease to exist, in order that 
there may be no ground for punishment. And moreover he omits that 
end, when a man who is unamendable is removed from life, that he 
may not conmiit more or greater crimes : and what he says of loss of 
dignity, is to be extended to other evils which are to be feared. 

2 Seneca spoke better when he said : In punishing wrongs^ the law 
has had these three objects, which the prince also ought to aim at ; either to 
amend him who is punished; or to make others hetter hy the punishment ; 
or to make the rest of mankind more secure hy removing the had* For 
here, if by the rest, he means not only those who have been injured, but 
others who may hereafter be so, you have a complete division of the 
subject, except that to removing you should add or repressing. For 
both imprisonment, and any other way of diminishing their power, 
tends the same way. He has another less perfect partition in 
another place ; as has Quintilian. 

Xrv. From what has been said, it may be collected, how unsafe it 
is for a private Christian nuin to inflict punishment, and especially 
capital punbhment, either for the sake of his own or of the public 
good, upon a guilty person ; although, as we have said, that is some- 
times permitted by the Law of Nations. And hence we must approve 
of the usage of those peoples by whom navigators are provided with 
commissions from tho public power to suppress pirates, if they find 
any upon the seas ; on which commissions they may act, not as of their 
own motion, but by public command. 

XV. Of much the same kind is the provbion which prevails in 
many places, that not any body who chooses can take up tho accusa- 
tion of crimes, but only certain persons on whom that oflSice is imposed 
by tho public power ; so that no one shall do any thing to shed the 
blood of another, except by the necessity of his office. Accordingly tho 
canon of the Council of Seville provides, that if any one of the faith- 
ful shall turn informer, and by his means any one shall be proscribed 
or put to death, he shall not receive the Communion, even when 
dying. 

XVI. And this too follows from what has been said, that it is not 
advisable for a truly Christian man, nor is even decent, that he should 

Chap. XX.] OP PUNISHAIENTS. 233 

of hiB own accord mix himself with public business which involres 
capital punishment, and seek for a power of life and death, as if he 
were a sort of God among men. For certainly what Christ says, ap- 
plies here, that it is dangerous to judge others, since as we judge them, 
God will judge us. 

XVII. 1 It is a noted question, whether the human laws, which 
permit the slaying of certain men, really justify the slayers in the 
sight of God, or only giro them impunity among men. Coyarruyias 
and Fortunios hold the latter, which opinion Vasquius calls shockiDg. 
It is not doubtful, as we hare said, that, in certain cases the Law can 
do both the one and the other. But whether the law had that in- 
tention, 18 to be understood partly from the words of the law, and 
partly from the matter. For when the law gives indulgence to human 
feeling, it takes away the punishment of the law, but not the sin» 
as in the case of a husband who kills the adulterous wife or the 
adulterer. 

2 But if the law look to future danger from the delay of punish- 
ment, it is to be conceired to give right and public power to the 
prirate person, so that he is no longer a priyate man. 

Of this kind is the law in the Codex under the rubric. When it is 
lawful for any one witJumt a judge to do justice for himself or for 
the public service; [Cod. ni. 27] where any one is allowed to suppress 
by force soldiers who plunder; where too the reason is added, putting 
such soldiers on the footing of robbers. And a similar law is given 
respecting deserters. As Tertullian says : Against traitors and public 
enemies every one is a soldier, 

3 There is a difference in the right of killing exiles, outlawed 
persons : namely, that there, a special opinion has preceded, but in 
this case, a general edict, which is combined with the eyidenco of the 
fact, and has the force of a judicial sentence. 

XVni. Let us now consider whether all Ticious acts are such 
that they may be punished by men. It is certain that they are not 
all such. For, in the first place, mere internal acts, eycn if they come 
to be known, for instance by confession, cannot be punished by men ; 
because, as we haye said, it is not congruous to human nature that 
mere internal acts should give rise to right or obligation. And so the 
Roman law. But that docs not preyent that internal acts, so far as 
they influence external, may not be taken into account in estimating, 
not themselyes properly, but the external acts which recciye from 
them their character of desert. 

XIX. 1 In the next place, acts unayoidable to human nature 
cannot be punished by man. For though nothing is sin which is not 
done freely, yet to abstain from all sin and always, is above the con- 
dition of humanity ; and hence sin is said to be natural to man by 
some of the philosophers, and by many of the Christians. See Seneca, 
Sopater, Philo, Thucydides, Diodorus. 

2 It may even be doubted whether those acts can properly be 

234 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

called sin, which, though they hare an appearance of liberty, are not 
free, when considered in their generality. So Plutarch in Solon, 
Then again there are other acts which arc inevitable, not to human 
nature properly, but to this particular person at this moment, on ac- 
count of the constitution of the body affecting the mind, or inreterato 
habit ; which is commonly punished, not in itself, but on account of 
precedent fault ; because either the remedies were neglected, or the 
diseased thoughts willingly admitted into the mind. 

XX. 1 Thirdly ; those offenses are not to be punished, which 
neither directly nor indirectly regard human society or any other 
man. The reason is, that there is no cause why such sins should not 
be left to Gk)d to punish, who can both know them best, and judge 
them most justly, and punish them most effectually. Wherefore 
if such a punishment were instituted, it would be useless, and there- 
fore blameable. From this remark are to be excepted punishments 
for amendment, which have for their object to make the man better, 
though the interest of others is not concerned. Also punishments 
are not to be inflicted on acts opposed to those virtues of which the 
nature rejects all compulsion, as mercy, liberality, gratitude. 

2 Seneca treats this question. Whether ingratitude ought to meet 
with impunity; and gives many reasons why it ought not [to be 
punished] ; but this as the principal one, which may be extended to 
other like cases : Since grcUitude is a most graceful thing, if it he 
necessary it ceases to be graceJuL : that is, it loses its degree of grace- 
fulness, as appears by what follows : We praise a grateful man only 
as one who returns a deposit or pays a debt without being forced: and 
again, It could not be a glorious thing to be grateful exc^t it were safe 
to be ungrat^uL As Seneca the father says, / do not want to have 
[such] a person praised who is accused^ but to have him acquitted, 

XXI. We must now discuss whether it is ever lawful to excuse 
or pardon : The Stoics denied it, but with a poor argument : Pardon 
is the remission of a due penalty, but the wise man does what is due. 
Here the fallacy is in the word due. For if you understand that ho 
who has transgressed owes the penalty, that is, may be punished with- 
out wrong, it will not follow that he who does not punish him, does 
not do what he ought. But if you say that the punishment is duo 
on the part of the wise man, that is, that ho ought by all means to 
require it, we deny that that is always the case, and therefore say 
that the punishment in that sense is not due, but only lawful. And 
that may be true, both before and after the penal law. 

XXII. 1 Before the penal law is instituted, it is not doubtful 
that punishment may have place ; because by Natural Law he who 
has transgressed is in that state in which he may be lawfully punished; 
but it does not follow that punishment ought to be exacted : because 
this depends upon the connexion of the ends for which punishment 
is instituted with punishment itself. Wherefore if those ends are, in 
moral estimation, not necessary, or if there are, opposed to those. 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 235 

other ends not less useful or necessary, or if the necessary ends of 
punishment can be obtained in another way, it follows that there 
IS nothing which precisely obliges to exact punishment. We may 
take an example of the first case in a sin known to few, and of which 
the public notice is not necessary, or is eren hurtful. As Cicero says 
of a certain Zeuxis, BHng brought to trial perhaps lie ought not to 
he dismissed^ but it tuas not necessary to bring him to trial An 
example of the second case is one who puts forward his own merits 
or those of his parents, as a set-off against his fault ; so Seneca : an 
example of the third case, we hare in him who is reformed by remon- 
strance, or who has satisfied the injured person by a rerbal acknow- 
ledgment, so that punishment is not necessary for those ends. 

2 And this is one part of the clemency which liberates the 
offender from punishment, of which the Hebrew wise man says. 
Clemency becomes the just man. For since all punishment has in 
it something opposed not to justice, but to charity, reason easily 
permits us to abstain from it, except some greater and juster charity 
oppose insurmountable obstacles. So Sopatcr, Cicero, Dio Prusse- 
ensis, Farorinus. 

XXin. These cases may occur: that punishment may require 
absolutely to be exacted, as in crimes of very bad example ; — or may 
bo fit not to be exacted, as if the public good require it to be omit- 
ted ; — or either course may be allowable : when, as Seneca says, CZd- 
mency has free tmll. Then, say the Stoics, the wise man spares, but 
does not pardon : as if we might not, with common usage, call that par- 
don, which, they call sparing. In fact, here and elsewhere, as Cicero, 
Galon and others have noted, a great part of the disputations of the 
Stoics is about words, which a philosopher ought carefully to ayoid. 
So the writer to Herennius, and Aristotle say. 

XXIV. 1 There seems to be a greater difficulty, after the 
penal law is instituted ; because the author of the law is, in a certain 
way, obliged by his own law ; but this, as we have said, is true ; so 
far as the author of the law is considered as a part of tho State, but 
not, so far as he bears the character and authority of tho State. For 
in that capacity, he may rescind the whole law, because the nature of 
human law is, that it depends on human will, not only in its origin, 
but in its du^tion. But yet the author of the law ought not to 
abolish it, except for a probable cause, since otherwise he offends 
agiunst the rules of goremmental justice. 

2 But as he may take away the whole law, so may he remore 
its obligation with regard to a particular person or fact, the law for 
the rest remaining ; following the example of God himself, who, as 
Lactantius says, when he established the law did not derive himself of 
the poufer of pardon. So Augustine, and Seneca in the character of 
Nero. 

3 But this also is not to be done except there be a probable 
cause. What are probable causes, although it cannot be precisely 

\ 

236 OF PUNISHMENTS. [BookU. 

defined, yet we must hold by this, that they ought to be greater 
after the law, than wore regarded before the law; because the 
authority of the law, which it is important to presenre, has been 
added to the other causes of punishment. 

XXV. The causes of liberating any one from the punishment 
of the law, are commonly either intrinsic or extrinsic : an intrinsic 
cause is when the punishment, though not unjust, is seyere compared 
with the fact. 

XXVI. An extrinsic cause of remission of punishment is that 
which arises from some merit or other thing commending the 
offender to mercy ; or from a great hope of him in future ; which 
kind of cause will then be of most ayail, if the reason of the law, at 
least in a particular point, ceases as to the fact in question. For 
although to sustain the efficacy of the law, the uniyersal reason suffices, 
there being no repugnant contrary reason ; yet the cessation of the 
reason for the particular case, effects that the law may be more easily, 
and with less loss of authority, loosened. And this happens most in 
those offenses which are committed through ignorance, though not 
free from all fault; or through infirmity of mind, superable indeed, 
but yet difficultly superable. To these, the Christian ruler ought 
mainly to look, that he may imitate God, who in the Old Testament 
gi?e8 testimony by word and by deed that he is indulgent in foi^ir- 
ing such. [See the passages.] And that by those words of Christ, 
Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do, Theodosius was 
moyed to pardon the Antiochians, is noted by John Chrysostom. 

XXVII. And hence it appears how ill Vasquius said, that a just 
cause of dispensing with, that is of relaxing the law, was such alone 
as one about which, if the author of the law had been consulteci, ho 
would ha?e said that it was not in his mind to haye it obsenrcd. 
Here he has not distinguished between the equity which inter- 
prets the law, and a relaxation of it. And on this ground he else- 
where reproaches Thomas Aquinas and Sotus, for saying that 
the law obliges, eyen though the cause in particular ceases, as if they 
had thought that tho law was only the written word, which noyer 
came into their minds. For so far is it from being the case that 
any relaxation of the law, which may often be freely either giyen 
or omitted, is to be referred to equity, that eyen t)iat relaxation 
which is due to charity or to goyemmental justice is not to bo 
referred to that principle. For it is one thing to take away the law 
for a probable, or eyen for an urgent cause, and another to declare 
that the fact was from the beginning not comprehended in the 
mind of the law. 

We haye spoken hitherto of taking away punishments, let us now 
consider their apportionment. 

XXVni. From what has been said aboyc, it appears that two 
things are regarded in punishments ; for what, and on account of 
whom. For what, is a question of merit; on account of whom, is a 

Chap. XX.] OP PUNISHMENTS. 237 

qaestion of tho use of the punishment. No one is to he punished 
heyond his desert, as Horace and Cicero say : accordingly, Papinian 
calls punishment the raluation [of an offense]. Aristides says that 
it is suitable to nature that there should be some point beyond which 
punishment shall not proceed; Demosthenes says that equality of 
punishment [and crime] is not to be regarded nakedly as in weights 
and measures, but with estimation of the purpose and intention of 
the offender. Within the limit of this desert, crimes may be 
punished more or less, according to utility. 

XXIX. 1 In examining desert, these points come under conside- 
ration ; the cause which impelled, the cause which ought to have with- 
held, and the fitness of the person to each. [First, of the impelling 
cause.] Scarce any one is wicked for nothing: if there be any person 
whom wickedness delights on its own account, he has gone beyond the 
limits of humanity. The greater part of persons are led to sin by the 
affections : When desire hath conceived it bringeth forth ein^ James i. 15. 
Under the name of desire, I include also the impulse to shun eril, 
which is the most natural, and therefore the most decent of the appe- 
tites. Hence what is done wrongly to ayoid death, imprisonmenty 
pain, or extreme want, is commonly held most excusable. 

2 And so Demosthenes, Polybius, Aristotle, Porphyry. 

3 Other appetites tend to some good, either imaginary or reaL 
True good, is, besides the yirtues and their actions which do not tend 
to sin, either things which delight, or the cause of delight, which is 
called utility, as abundance of possessions. Imaginary goods, not 
real, are superiority over others, so far as it is separate from Tirtue and 
utility, and rerenge. These three appetites St John calls the Itut of 
the JUshf the lust of the et/es, and the pride of life. The first compre- 
hends the desire of pleasure, the second, cupidity of haring, the third, 
the pursuit of vain glory, and anger. Philo says that all eril comes 
of the desire of wealth, glory, or pleasure. So Lactantius. 

XXX. 1 [Second, of the withholding cause.] The general 
cause which ought to withhold men from offending is justice. [Hence 
injustice is a measure of punishment.] The injustice is the greater 
as the greater damage is done to any one. Therefore the first 
place belongs to consummated crimes ; the next, to those which hare 
proceeded to some acts, but not to the last ; and among these, erery- 
thing is tho more grierous in proportion as it has gone further. In 
each class, that injustice has an eminent place which disturbs the 
common order, and therefore hurts the greatest number; that comes 
after, which affects individuals. The greatest offense here is thai 
which affects life ; the next, family, of which the foundation is matri- 
mony ; the last, desirable objects, either directly by subtracting them, 
or by producing damage through wrong doing. 

2 These matters might be dirided more subtilly; but the order 
which we hare indicated is that which God has followed in the Deca- 
logue. [The fifth commandment includes duties to goremors] ; for by 

238 OP PUNISHMENTS. [Book U. 

the name of parents, ^ho are natural magistrates, other rulers also 
must be understood : then follows the interdiction of homicide ; then 
the sanction of matrimony by the prohibition of adultery ; then theft ; 
then false witness ; in the last place, sins unconsummated. 

Among the withholding causes, ought to be put, not only the cha- 
racter of that which is directly done, but of that which will probably 
follow : as in setting fire to a house, or breaking down a dam, great 
calamity, and eren deaths, are to be looked for. 

3 To the injustice which we put as the general cause, there is often 
added some other vice, as impiety towards parents, inhumanity to- 
wards neighbours, ingratitude towards benefactors ; which increases the 
offense. Also there appears a greater prarity, if any one has often 
offended : because bad habits are worse than bad acts. And hence 
it may be understood how far that was by nature equitable, which was 
practised among the Persians, that the anterior life was taken into 
account along with the offense. That may bo applied, where a per- 
son, not otherwise bad, has been overcome by some sudden tempta- 
tion : but not in those who hare changed their whole course of life^ 
in whom God says he will not regard the former life (Ezek. xriii. *). 
So Thucydides. 

4 The ancient Christians, in assigning punishment by the canons, 
rightly directed, not the naked delict to be regarded only, but at the 
same time the preceding and succeeding life. A law directed against 
a special sin, if riolated, adds a degree of deprarity to that whidi the 
sin by itself would not haro. So Augustine, Tacitus. 

XXXI. 1 [Third, as to the aptitude of the person.] The apti- 
tude of the person, either to consider the withholding causes, or to 
feel the power of the impelling affections, may be considered as to 
his constitution, age, sex, education, and the circumstances of the 
act. For children, women, persons of dull intellect, ill educated 
persons, are less able to perceive the differences of just and unjust, 
of lawful and unlawful : those in whom bile prevails are irascible ; 
those in whom blood, lustful ; and youth tends to one of these ways, 
age, the other. Andronicus speaks of such palliations. Then again 
fear is augmented by the thought of imminent danger; anger, by 
recent and still smarting vexation ; so that they scarce suffer reason to 
be heard : and transgressions which thus arise are deservedly less 
odious than those which spring out of the desire of pleasure, which is 
both slower in its impulses, and may more easily be put off and led 
to seek other matter. Aristotle discusses this question, Eth. Nieonu 
vn. 7. 

2 This also is to be held, that in proportion as the judgment of 
the person choosing his course is more impeded, and by mere natural 
causes, the offense is less. So Aristotle in the same place. Anti- 
phancs ; and old men in love, in comedies. And by these principles 

* The principal part of the passage rather refers (see v. 10) to the son being 
bad when the father has been a g^ood man. Vf, 

CnAP. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 239 

we must cstimato the limiting amount of puniBhmont according to 

desert. 

XXXn. 1 We must remark that the doctrine of the Pythago- 
reans, that justice is a reciprocal proportion, is not to be so understood 
as if he who has deliberately and without extenuating causes, injured 
another, should himself receive so much harm, and no more. That 
this is not so, the Hebrew law shows, when it directs thefts to be 
punished by forfeit to four or fire times the amount. By the Attic 
Law, the thief, besides a fine of the double, was kept in bonds some 
days. So Ambrose, Aristidcs, Seneca. 

2 Among the Indians, as Strabo notes, he who had maimed 
any one, besides retaliation, had his hand cut off. In Aristotle's 
Magna Moralia, If any one strike out the eye of another, it is jtut that 
he 9ufer not so much only, but more. For it is not just that tho danger 
of the guilty and of tho innocent should be the same, as Philo shews, 
in treating of the punishment of homicide. And this may be esti- 
mated also by considering that some delicts not consummated, and 
therefore less than if they were consummated, bring down, as punish- 
ment, an evil equal to that meditated : as wo read of the Hebrew law 
of false witness, and the Roman law against him who went about with 
a weapon to kill a man. From which it follows, that to tho crime when 
consummated, a heavier punishment will correspond : but because 
nothing is heavier than death, and that cannot be reiterated, as Philo 
notes, the punishment is necessarily confined within those limits^ 
sometimes adding tortures according to the desert. 

XXXIII. But the magnitude of the punishment is to be regarded, 
not nakedly only, but with respect to the patient. For the fine which 
will press down a poor man will sit lightly on a rich one : and to a 
disreputable person, ignominy as a punishment will bo a small evil, 
but a great one to a man in honour. Tho Roman law often uses this 
kind of diversity ; whence Bodin constructed his harmonic proportion : 
although in reality the proportion is simple, and resembles numerical 
equality : the punishment is to be equal to the desert, as, in contracts, 
the money to the goods: although the same goods are in one place 
worth more, in another less, and money in like manner. But it must 
be confessed that this, in the Roman law, is often not done without 
too much respect of persons and qualities not pertaining to the fact ; 
while the law of Moses is always quite free from this fault. And this, 
as we have said, is the intrinsic apportionment of punishment. 

XXXIV. But a tenderness for him who is punished, leads us to 
the minimum of punishment, except a juster tenderness for the greater 
number persuade us to some other course for an extrinsic cause ; which 
cause is, sometimes, great danger from him who has offended, but 
more frequently, the necessity of example. And this necessity usually 
arises from the general incitements to sin, which cannot be repressed 
without sharp remedies. The principal incitements are custom and 
facility. 

240 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

XXXV. Oa account of ihofacUUt/f the diyioe law giyen to the 
Hebrews punishes more heavily theft from the field than from the 
house ; Exod. xxii. I and 7. So Justin says the Scythians account theft 
a most heinous crime, in consequence of its facility among their unin- 
closed herds. So Aristotle. 

The custom of an act, though it subtracts something from the fault 
(so Pliny), yet on one side it demands severity, to meet the prevail- 
ing evil. But in particular judgments, we must more lean to leniency, 
in making laws, to severity ; taking account of the time when the laws 
or the judgments are delivered, because the utility of the punishment 
is most considered in the general case ; but the fault is greater or less 
in individual cases. 

XXXVI. I What we have said, that when great and urgent 
causes cease, we should be prompt rather to diminish the punishment, 
is the direction in which the other part of clemency is seated : the 
former part consisting in taking away the punishment altogether. So 
Seneca speaks of tempering punishment when we cannot pardon ; so 
Diodorus Siculus, Capitolinus, describing M. Antoninus, Isocratcs, 
speak of punishment below the requirement of the laws. 

2 Augustine admonishes Count Marcellinus of his duty, ui^ng 
clemency. 

XXXVII. We hope we have omitted nothing important in this 
obscure and difficult argument. We have taken account of the four 
things which Maimonides says are chiefly to be regarded in punish- 
ments ; the greatness of the sin, its frequency, the amount of desire, 
the facility of the deed ; and also the seven points which Saturninus 
very confusedly considers in punishments ; the person who did the 
deed, the person who suffers, the place, the time, the quality, the 
quantity, the event ; — all the seven belong to one or other of our 
heads. 

XXXVin. That wars are undertaken not unfrequently to demand 
punishment, we have shewn above, and history everywhere teaches: but 
mostly this cause is conjoined with that other, the reparation of the 
damage, when the same act was both vicious and produced damage: 
from which two qualities two different obligations arise. That wars 
are not to be undertaken for every fault, is obvious enough ; for even 
the laws do not apply their vindictive operation to all faults, though 
they only harm the guilty. This is right, as we have said. So Sopater. 

XXXIX. 1 What Cato said for the Rhodians, that it was not just 
that a person should be punished for the evil which he was alleged 
only to have wished to do, was not ill put in its own place, because 
no decree of the Rhodians [declaring war against the Romans,] could 
be adduced, but only conjectures of a fluctuating mind : but this is 
not universally to be received. For the will which has proceeded to 
external acts, is commonly obnoxious to punishment. So Seneca, 
senior and junior. Not the event of things, but the intent, are treated 
by the laws, says Cicero. So Periandor. So the Romans decreed the 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 241 

Bocond war against king Philip, except he gave Batisfaction concerning 
the designs he had entertained of making war against Rome; inasmuch 
as he had collected arms, soldiers, and a fleet. And this is noted in 
the oration of the Rhodians in Liry ; that neither is it established by 
the laws nor by the customs of any nation, that if any one wished 
his enemy to perish, but did nothing to bring such a result to pass, ho 
should be capitally condemned. 

2 But again, it is not every perrerse will, which comes to be indi- 
cated by a fact, that gives occasion for punishment. For if we do 
not punish all perpetrated crimes, much less shall we punish those 
only thought of and conceived. In several places we may say what 
Cicero says ; / do not know whether it is not enough that the person who 
has done wrong should repent The Hebrew law did not provide spe- 
cially against most offenses against piety merely preconceived, or even 
against the life of man (except by means of judicial proceedings); 
since error about divine things, which are obscure to us, is easily 
committed, and the impulse of anger may be pardoned. 

3 But in matrimony, where so many matches are to be had, to at- 
tempt to disturb the married life of another ; or in property, when the 
division is so equal, to contrive devices by which one may enrich himself 
at the expense of another, was not to be borne. That command, Thou 
shalt not covet, in the Decalogue, although if you look at the object of 
the law, that is, the spiritual object, it is of wide extent ; for the law 
desires all to be pure even in mind ; yet as to the external precept, the 
carnal commandment, it refers to the affections of the mind which 
are disclosed by deeds ; as appears by St Mark, who gives that same 
precept, D^raud not; having before given. Do not steal (Mark x. 19). 
And the Hebrew word and the Greek one corresponding are found in 
that sense in Micah ii. 2, And iliey covet fields, b^c. And elsewhere. 

4 Therefore inchoate delicts are not to be punished by arms, except 
either the matter be grave and have gone so far that, from such act, a 
certain evil, though not that which was intended, has ensued ; or at 
least, great danger ; so that the punishment be conjoined with protec- 
tion against future mischief, or be a dofenso of offended dignity, or a 
remedy to a pernicious example. 

XL. 1 It is to be understood also that kings, and they whose 
lights are of the nature of royal rights, havo the right of requiring 
punishment, not only for injuries committed against them and their 
subjects, but for those also which do not peculiarly touch them, but 
which enormously violate the law of nature and nations in any per- 
sons. For the liberty of providing for human society by punish- 
ment, which at first, as we have said, was in the hands of individuals, 
did, when states and tribunals were instituted, fall to the share of the 
supreme authorities, not properly as commanding others, but as being 
themselves subject to none. For subjection took away the right 
from others. Indeed it is more honourable to punish the injuries of 

II 

240 ^ [Book II. 

^ ''^ ^ntorovtiiU U to befoaroit 

Hcb' ^if^^i^oim pidiii rither exceed duo 

ft ■ j-^^jS^ **l*.«*^*l««** *■ praised by the ancionta for 

^ v* * ^^'^''^ ^'°'' iiixo^ Biuiri*, Diomedai, and siniil&r 

/""^ri "^ W '^rfi i«*«d through tl>e lAnd not in concu. 

_^iti>^|^^/*'*^^'j„n, and thus being tho author of great 

^J^' **, ,ii /"^^^Diodonu, Dio FruueenHiB, AriBtidoB. Tho- 

ii**'^L*» ■*' ^e oisniiei" for romoring tho robbers SdroDi 

f^^ft^^_^ Sm Euripideg, Valoriua hlaximus. 

^ *^ '*AB»* Joubt that war is juit against thoao irbo aro im. 

^^ft0 ^Ifr jW^nt* > 'ii*^ ■■ ^B Sogdiani vcro, before Aleiauder 

^0tt^j^ barbarity ; against those trho kill strangers ; against 

^^^^taj on human flesh, which usage Hercules compelled tho 

jfj "^JM npi " Diodorus narrates : and against those who prao< 

^**'''!^- ^^BOfx^ says, that though hi dot* not do any harm to 

fi^^M, gti wcA depravity cuts Aim off [from (Aa tit of Aumanity] : 

"fj^^i »JI that there are thitujt uihieh if any state on Mrth lutrn 

^^^nr ihouid deeree, that ttatt would require to be overthroum by a 

,^^lltt human race. Of such barbarians, and wild beasts, rather 

T*!. men, we may say what Aristidca proriously said of tho Per- 

^a^ (who wero roally no worse than tho Qroeks,) that war against 

^ga Is natural; and what Isocrates said, that war against bmte 

^^ts WM most just, and nest to that, war gainst men who are like 

biotos. 

4 And so far wo follow the opinion of Innoccntius, and of othere 
who say that war may be made against those who sin agalDSt 
nature; contrary to tho tonots of Victoria, Yasquios, Aiorius, Mo- 
linn, and others; who seem to require, in order to justify a war, 
that he wbo undertakes it should bo either injured in his own per- 
son, or in tho country to which ho belongs, or that ho should hare 
jurisdiction over him whom he attacks. For tfaoy hold that the 
power of punishing is tlio proper effect of Civil Jurisdiction; whila 
we concoiro that it comes also from Natural Law. If the opinion of 
those from whom we dissent be admitted, an enemy will not havo 
tho power of punishing an enemy, eren after war baa been justly 
begun, if it bo for anotlior cause than to inflict punishment : which 
right, howercr, most authors concede, and tho usage of all nations 
conflrms, not only after tho war has been finished, but oven while 
it is going on ; and this right is claimed, not from any ciTil juris- 
diction, but from that natural right which existed before states 
existed, and is still in force in places in which men liT<s distri- 
buted into families and not into states. 

XM. nut hero some cautions aro to bo applied ; first, we arc not 
to toko institutcil usages of states, though rocciTod among many 
nations, and not without reason, for the laws of nature ; of which kind 

Chap. XX.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 243 

mostly were those things in which the Persians differed from the 
Grecians ; to which we may refer what Plutarch says : thtU to profen 
to civilize barbarous nations, was a pi'ctejct to cover mere cupiditi/. 

XLIL In the second place, we must take care that we do not 
rashly reckon, among the things forbidden by nature, those, with re* 
gard to which this is not clear; and which are rather interdicted by 
the divine will : in which class we must place concubinage, and some 
of the offenses called incest, and usury. 

XLni. 1 In the third place, we must carefully distinguish be- 
tween general principles, — such as that we must liyo yirtuously, that is, 
according to reason, and some which approach to them and are so 
manifest that they admit of no doubt, as, for instance, that we are 
not to take by violence what belongs to another ; — and inferences from 
these ; Of which some are easy to know, for instance, that assuming 
matrimony, we are not to allow adultery ; but others not so easy, as 
that the revenge which has for its ultimate object the pain of others 
IS Ticious. We have hero nearly the same case as in mathematics, 
where there are certain primary notions, or truths immediately con- 
nected with these, [axioms], and some demonstrations which are forth- 
with understood and obtain assent; and again, certain propositions 
which are true but not apparent to all. 

2 As then, with regard to ciyil laws, we excuse those who did not 
know, or did not understand the law ; so also with regard to the law 
of nature, it is reasonable to excuse those who are embarrassed, either 
by weakness of reason or by a bad education. For ignorance of the 
law, as, when it is invincible, it takes away the sin, so too, even when 
mixed with some negligence, it diminishes the offense. And there- 
fore Aristotle compares barbarians who, being educated in a depraved 
manner, commit offenses in such cases, to those who have appetites 
corrupted by disease. Plutarch says : Tficre are certain diseases which 
throw tJie mind out of Us U9U€U balance, 

3 In the last place, that also is to be added, which I say once for 
all, that wars undertaken on the ground of punishment, must be very 
suspected, except the crimes are very atrocious and very manifest ; or 
except some other cause concur. Perhaps Mithridates was not very 
wrong when he said of the Romans, that they did not reMy attack the 
vices of kings, biU their power and majesty, 

XLIV. 1 Our order has led us to the offenses which are com- 
mitted against God. For it is made a question whether war may be 
undertaken to punish these ; and this is treated at suf&cient length by 
Covamivias. But he, following others, thinks that there is no puni- 
tive power without jurisdiction properly so called ; which opinion we 
have already rejected. Whence it follows, that as bishops are said, in 
a certain way, to have received the care of the catholic or universal 
Church, so kings, besides the care of their particular state, have in« 
combent upon them a general care for human society. The sounder 
fcason for the doctrine that such wars are not just, is this, that God is 

R 2 

244 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book U. 

sufficient to punish offonses against himself; whence it is commonly 
said, that wrongs against the gods are the business of the gods, and that, 
perjury has a sufficient avenger in God. 

2 But it is to be recollected that this may be said of other offenses 
also. For God is no doubt sufficient to punish these also ; and yet 
they are rightly punished by men, no one dissenting. Some pursue 
the argument, and say, that other offenses are punished by men, so far 
as men are by them hurt or injured. But it is to be noted, on the 
other hand, that offenses are punished which not only hurt others 
directly, but those also which do so by consequence, as self-murder, 
and bestiality, and others. 

3 For though religion of itself is efficacious in conciliating the 
fiiTOur of God, yet it has in human society its especial effects, and 
those yery important ones. For Plato, with great reason, called 
religion the bulwark of virtue, and the bond of the laws and of honest 
discipline ; and Plutarch similarly, the cement of society, and the 
foundation of laws. So Philo calls it the most potent loTe-charm, and 
indissoluble bond of beneTolence. And the rererse of all this is said 
of impiety. All false persuasion concerning divine things is pernicious^ 
and if passions are combined with it, is most pernicious. In Jamblichus 
we hare a dictum of Pythagoras: The knowledge o/ God is virtue and 
vfisdom and perfect happiness. Hence Chrysippus called Law the Queen 
of divine and human things, and Aristotle held, that among public 
cares, the first was that of divine things ; and the Roman jurispru- 
dence was described as the knowledge of things human and divine: 
and in Philo, the royal art is the care of things private^ public cmd 
sacred, 

4 All these things are to be considered, not only in one state, as 
when Xonophon makes Cyrus say, that his subjects would be more 
attached to him in proportion as they feared God more ; but also, in 
the common society of the human race. If we take away piety, says 
Cicero, good faith and the fellow-feeling of mankind and justice are taken 
away. And again : We learn what justice is when we know the au- 
thority of the supreme Governor and Lord, what is his design, what 
his will. And an evident proof of this is, that Epicurus, when he had 
taken away divine providence, left nothing but the empty name of 
justice, saying that it arose from convention only, and lasts so long 
only as the common utility continues; that we must abstain from 
every thing which would turn others, solely from the fear of pu- 
nishment. See his words in Diogenes Laertius. 

5 Aristotle also saw this connexion, as where he says of a king, that 
the people wiU the less fear to be unjustly treated by the prince, if they 
believe him to be rdigums. And Galen says that many discussions are 
carried on, about the world and the divine nature, without any moral 
use ; but he acknowledges the question concerning providence to be of 
the greatest use, both in its bearing upon private and upon public 
Tirtues. So Homer opposes, to wild and unjust men, those who have a 

Chap. XX.] OP PUNISHMENTS. 245 

religious mind. So Justin praises, in the ancient Jews, their justice 
mixed with religion : and so Strabo. So Lactantius says that ho who 
is not religious does not know what justice is. 

6 And religion is even more useful in that larger society [of the 
human race] than in civil society ; since in the latter, its place is sup- 
plied by laws, and the easy execution of laws ; while on the contrary, 
in that wider community, the execution of law is very difficult, since 
it can only be carried into effect by arms, and the laws are rery few. 
And these too have their sanction mainly from the fear of the divine 
power : and hence, they who transgress the Laws of Nations, are every- 
where said to violate the divine laws. And hence the Emperors 
have rightly said that the infraction of religion is a wrong against all. 

XLV. 1 To examine the whole matter, we must remark that true 
religion, common to all ages, rests mainly on four principles ; of which 
the first is, that God exists, and is one : the second, that God is not any 
visible object, but something higher: the third, that God cares for 
human affairs, and judges them with perfect justice : the fourth, that 
God is the creator of all other things. These four points are delivered 
in the first four commandments of the Decalogue. 

2 For in the first, the unity of God is plainly delivered : in the 
second, his nature, as invisible ; for on this account it is forbidden to 
make any image of him. So Antisthenes ; Philo ; Diodorus, speaking 
concerning Moses ; Tacitus, of the Jews ; Plutarch, of Numa. 

By the third commandment is indicated God's knowledge and care 
of human things, even of human thoughts ; for that is the foundation 
of oaths. For God is a witness even of the heart ; and if any one 
swear falsely, Ho is invoked as the punisher : and by this is declared 
both the justice and the power of God. 

By the fourth, the origin of the whole world in the act of God, in 
memory of which the sabbath was instituted, and hallowed with a 
peculiar sanction above other rites. For if any one transgressed other 
rites, the penalty of the law was arbitrary, as concerning forbidden 
meats : but for the violation of the sabbath, it was death ; because the 
violation of the sabbath implied the denial of the creation of the 
world by God. And the world, as created by God, contains a tacit 
indication of his goodness, wisdom, eternity, and power. 

3 From these contemplative notions follow active precepts ; as that 
God is to be honoured, loved, worshipped, and obeyed. Hence Aris- 
totle says that he who denies that God is to be honoured, or parents 
to be loved, is to be brought to reason, not by arguments, but by 
punishment. And elsewhere he says that other things are reckoned 
right in one place or another, but to honour God, in all places. 

The truth of those contemplative notions, as we have called them« 
may doubtless be demonstrated by arguments taken from the nature 
of things; among which arguments, that is the strongest; that our 
senses shew us that some things are made; and that the things 
which are made lead us to something not made* But because all 

24?6 OP PUNISHMENTS. [Book II. 

cannot take in this reason and similar ones, it is sufficient that all 
ages, and all countries, with very few exceptions, have given their 
consent to these notions: and those, some too dull to intend to 
deceire, and others too wise to be deceived. And this consent, in so 
great a variety of other laws and other opinions, shews sufficiently 
a tradition propagated from the first race of men to us, and never 
solidly refuted ; which of itself is suffident to produce belief. 

4 The points which we here mention concerning God are 
brought together by Dio Pruseeensis, when he says that our conception 
of God is partly internal, partly acquired by tradition. So Plutarch 
speaks of the ancient faiths than which no more evident proof can be 
/bund, the common foundation and bans of piety. So Aristotle and 
Phito. 

XLVI. 1 Wherefore they are not blameless who, although 
they are too dull either to discover or to understand the solid argu- 
ments for these points of belief, reject them ; since there exist, for 
them, guides to the right way, and the opposite opinion has no 
aiguments to rest upon. But since we are speaking of punishments, 
and of human punishments, a difference is to be taken between the 
notions themselves, and the mode of departing from them. These 
notions, that there is a deity (I do not here say whether one or 
many), and that he cares for human affairs, are most uuiversal, and 
absolutely necessary to constitute all religion, true or false. He 
that Cometh to God (that is he who is to be religious) mutt believe 
that he 19, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. xi. 6. 

2 So Cicero ; Epictetus ; Elian ; Plutarch ; Lactantius. To deny 
that God exists, and to deny that he attends to human affairs, comes 
to the same thing, as to its moral effect 

3 Wherefore these two points of belief have been preserved, as 
if by necessity, among almost all nations of which we know any- 
thing. Hence Pomponius describes religion towards God as a part 
of the law of nations ; and Socrates in Xenophon says that to worship 
the gods, is a rule among all men. So Cicero; Dio Prusreensis; 
Xenophon in the Symposium. 

4 Therefore those who first begin to take away these convictions, 
as they may, in well constituted states, be coerced by punishment, 
as was done to Diagoras Melius, and to the Epicureans, who were 
ejected from well-governed states; so may they be coerced, as I 
conceive, in the name of human society, which they violate without 
probable reason. So Himerius pleading against Epicurus : Do you 
then demand that mere doctrines be punished f By no means, but that 
impiety should. Men may deliver doctrines; they may not oppose piety. 

XL VII. 1 Other points of religion are not so evident ; as, that 
there are not more gods than one: that God is not any visible 
object ; not the world, not the sky, not the sun, not the air ; that the 
world does not exist from eternity ; not even matter, of which it is 
made, but that matter was created by God. Therefore, as to these 

Chap. XX] OP PUNISHMENTS. 247 

points, the knowledge has been, among many peoples, obliterated by 
the lapse of time, and as it were extinct; and the more easily because 
the laws gare less attention to this point, as being that without 
which at least some religion might subsist. 

2 Efou the law of God, giren to the Jewish people, who were 
imbued with a knowledge of these things, neither obscure nor uncer- 
tain, by the prophets, and by miracles, partly seen by themselyes 
and partly dellTored by clear tradition, still does not punish with 
death all who are convicted of this offense ; but only those in whom 
there is some particular circumstance to aggravate the fact, or who 
hare seduced others ; as Deut. xiii. 1, 6 ; or itxe city which begins to 
worship strange gods, ver. 12, 13 ; or that worships the sun, or the 
moon, or the host of heaven, Deut. xvii. 3; (which St Paul calls 
serving the ertaturt^ and not the Creator^ Rom. i. 25 ; and which also 
was at one time punished among the posterity of Esau, Job zzxl. 
26, 27, \If I beheld the »un when it ehined, or the moon walking in bright^ 
ness, and my heart hath been secretly enticed^ or my mouth hath kissed 
my handi]^ or that gave his children to Moloch, Lev. zz. 2; that is, 
to Saturn. 

3 The Canaanites and the neighbouring peoples, who fell away 
to depraved superstitions, God did not straightway pimish, but only 
at last, when they had accumulated great wickedness upon this trans- 
gression. Gen. XV. 16. [God says to Abraham, In the fourth generation 
they shall come again; for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.} 
So in other nations also, God winked at the times of this ignorance. 
Acts xvii. 30. Philo says truly, that each one thinks his own religion 
the best, judging mostly, not by reason, but by affection ; as Cicero 
says of philosophical doctrines. He adds, that most are involved in 
their religious belief, before they can use their judgment. 

4 As, then, those are excusable, and certainly not to be punished 
by men, who, not having received any law delivered by God, worship 
the influenoes or spirits of the stars, or of any other natural bodies, 
either in images, or In animals, or in other things ; or even the souls 
of those who have excelled in virtue, and in benefits bestowed on the 
human race ; or some incorporeal minds ; especially if they have not 
themselves invented this worship, and therefore have not deserted for 
it the worship of the supreme God ; so, on the other hand, they are 
to be reckoned impious rather than erroneous, who appoint divine 
honour and worship for evil demons, whom they know to be such, or 
for names of vices, or for men whose life was marked by wicked 
deeds. 

5 Nor are they less to be reckoned impious, who worship gods with 
the blood of innocent men ; which custom Darius of Persia and Gelo 
of Syracuse compelled the Carthaginians to discontinue, and are there- 
fore praised. Plutarch relates that some barbarians, who worshipped 
the gods with human victims, were on the point of being punished by 
the Romans ; but, having excused themselves by the antiquity of the 

248 OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book IL 

custom, no harm was done them ; but they wore commanded not to 
do the like in future. 

XLVni. 1 What shall wo say of making war on certain peoples 
because they will not embrace the Christian religion when offered to 
them ? I will not now enquire whether it be proposed to them such 
as it ought to bo, and in such manner as it ought to be. Suppose 
this : we hare then two remarks to make. The first is, that the truth 
of the Christian religion, in so far as it adds not a few points to natural 
and primitiFO religion, cannot be proFod by mere natural arguments, 
but rests both on the history of the resurrection of Christ, and on that 
of the miracles done by him and the apostles ; which is a matter of 
fact, proved of old by irrefragable testimonies, but only of old ; so that 
this also [the ancient testimony] is a nuitter of fact, and of very old 
fact. Hence this doctrine cannot be receired by those who now hear 
it for the first time, without the assistance of secret help from God ; 
and as this, when given, is not given as the reward of any work, so if 
it be denied, or given less largely, this is done for causes, not unjust 
indeed, but mostly unknown to us, and hence not punishable by 
human judgment. To this the canon of Toledo has respect. The 
Synod enjoins that henceforth no one suffer violence, to make him 
believe : For God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and 
whom he will he hardeneth. It is the manner of the scriptures, to 
ascribe to the divine will the things of which the causes are hid 
from us. 

2 Another remark is, that it was the will of Christ, the author of 
the new law, that none should be urged to receive his law by the 
punishments of this life, or by their fear. [See the passages, Rom. 
viii. 16, Ye iMve not received the spirit of bondage again to fear. So 
Heb. ii. 15, subject to bondage, John vi. 67, WiU ye also go away t 
Luke ix. 55, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. Matt. ziii. 
29, Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, &c.] In this sense, that saying 
of Tertullian is most true. The new law does not assert its rights with the 
sword. So in the Clementine Constitutions : Athanasius. Chrysos-* 
tom, on the passage, John vi. 67, says that it removes all compulsion. 

3 The parable of the wedding, Luke xlv. 23, Compel them to come 
in, is not against this. For in that parable, the expression signifies 
the urgency of the invitation ; and in like manner, in the interpre* 
tation, in which sense words of the like signification are used, Luke 
xxiv. 29, Hiey constrained him. So Matt. xiv. 22, Jesus constrained his 
disciples, &c., and in the parallel passage, Mark vi. 45. So Gal. ii. 14, 
Why compellest thou the Gentiles, &c. Procopius says, that Justinian 
was blamed by wise men for compelling the Samaritans by force to 
become Christians : and adds the inconveniences which resulted, which 
you may find in his book. 

XLIX. 1 They who teaching or professing Christianity, add 
punishments on that account, doubtless act against reason ; for there 
is nothing in the scheme of Christianity (considered by itself, and not 

Chap. XX.] OP PUNISHMENTS. 249 

with impure mixtures,) which can hurt human society; indeed nothing 
which does not profit society. The thing itself speaks, and strangers 
are compelled to acknowledge it. Pliny says, that the Christians 
hound themselFOS hy a common sacrament not to commit theft, roh-* 
bery, or fraud. Ammianus Aays, that nothing is taught in that reli- 
gion except justice and mercy. And it was a common saying, Caius 
Sejus is a good marij only he is a Christian. [Therefore persecution is 
inconsistent with Christianity*.] 

Nor can we admit the excuses for persecution, that all noFelties 
are dangerous, and especially assemblies ; for doctrines, although new, 
are not dangerous, if they lead to all yirtue, and to obedience towards 
superiors: nor are assemblies of yirtuous men to be feared, who do 
not seek to meet in secret, except they are compelled. I may hero 
adopt what Augustus said, as recorded by Philo, respecting the assem- 
blies of the Jews ; that they were not bacchanalian meetings, or asscm* 
blies for disturbing the peace, but schools of yirtue. 

2 Those who persecute such, are themselyes justly punishable, as 
also Thomas Aquinas holds. And on that account, Constantino made 
war on Licinius, and other emjperors upon the Persians ; though these 
wars belong rather to the defense of the innocent, of which we shall 
hereafter speak, than to the exaction of punishment. 

L. 1 But those act most unjustly, who persecute and punish 
those who, while they hold the law of Christ as true, only doubt or 
err concerning some things which are either extraneous to the law, 
or being in the law, seem to haye an ambiguous sense, and are not 
always expounded by tho ancient Christians in the same way. And 
this appears both by what wo haye said, and by the ancient example 
of the Jews. For they, though they had a law which was sanctioned 
by the punishments of this life, neycr penally assailed the Sadducees, 
who rejected the doctrine of the resurrection ; a doctrine most true, 
but not deliyered in the old law, except obscurely and in images. 

2 But what are we to say, if the error be more grayc, and one 
which may easily be refuted before an impartial tribunal, by sacred 
authority, or the consent of the ancients ? Here also we are to reflect 
how great is the force of inyeterate opinions, and how much the 
party-feeling of each sect impairs their judgment ; a disease, as Galen 
says, worse than the itch. So Origen. Add that the amount of this 
fault depends upon the manner in which a person is enlightened, 
and other dispositions of tho mind, which it is not giyen to man to 
know. 

3 He, and he only, is a heretic, according to Augustine, who either 
deyjses or follows false and new opinions, for tho sake of his own 
adyantage, and especially of his own glory and power. 

* This is the thesis which smts the argument : but some of the examples rather 
seem to imply that Grotins was thinking of the thesis: ''Therefore those act un- 
reasonably who persecute Christians." W. 

250 OP PUNISHMENTS. [Book IL 

Salvian urges the dutj of toleration towards the Arians, on the 
ground of their sincerity. [See the passage.] 

4 Augustine argues for toleration of the Manicheansy in whose 
errors he had long shared. 

5 Athanasius inyeighs against the Arians, because they first called 
in the judicial power against their adFersaries ; This shews, he says, 
that their way is not pious; referring, I think, to GaL It. 29: As 
then, he that was bom after the fiesh j>ersecuit/ed hvn that was bom after 
the spirit^ even so it is now. In Gaul, the bishops were condemned who 
used the sword against the Priscillianists; and in the east, the Synod 
which agreed to the burning of Bagomilus. (Plato says wisely, that 
the proper punishment of him who is wrong*, is to be taught 
right). 

LI. 1 Those may be more justly punished who are irrererent and 
irreligious towards Uiose whom they belioTe to be gods. This cause 
among others was adduced for the Peloponnesian war between the 
Athenians and Lacedamonians, and by Philip of Maoedon against the 
Fhodans : of whose sacrilege Justin says, that it required to be expi- 
ated by the arms of the whole world. Jerome says, on Daniel t. As 
long as the sacred vessels [of the Hebrews] were in the idol-temple at 
Babylon, God was not angry, (for they stiU seemed to be devoted to divine 
%ioorsMp, though aecompamed with perverted opinions;) but after thaJt 
they were polluted by human uses, the punishmeKt straightway foUows 
the sacrilege. 

Augustine thinks that the Roman Empire was fayoured by God, 
because, though their religion was false, they were in earnest about 
itf; and as Lactantius says, they held to the main duty of man, 
though not in truth, yet in purpose {. 

2 We hare already said that eren imaginary deities when appealed 
to by perjured persons, hare their cause taken up by the true God. 
He is punished, says Seneca, because he did it, as to Gk>d ; his own 
opinion binds him to punishment. And so I take that other passage 
of Seneca: The punishment of riolating religion is different in different 
places, but some punishment there eyerywhere is. So Plato condemns 
those who do not beliere in the existence of the gods, to imprisonment 
or death (Laws, b. x. end). 

* Plato says, of ignorance, J. B. 

■f- Angustioe says that the Boman Empire was faroured by dirine Providence 
on account of their ciril yirtnes, De CivU, Dei, Lib. v. c. 12. J. B. 

j: Lactantios is speaking of idolatry in general : Instit. Div. Lib. ii. c. 3. The 
passage from Seneca is not appropriate. J. B. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Of the Communication of Punishments. 

Sect. L 

PunUhment of Partners of 

XL 

Crime as Occasion and as 

Crime. 

Cause. 

IL 

Community hound by Delict 

xn. 

No one punished for aHen 

€f Subject, 

Delict. 

III. 

By harbouring Delinquents. 

XIII. 

Not Children for Parents. 

IV. 

Except they punish or give 

XIV. 

Answer to objection from 

them up. 

Divine Words. 

V. 

Rights of suppliants. 

XV. 

Still less other relations. 

VI. 

Provisional Defense of Sup' 

XVL 

Children may be losers by 

pliants. 

Parents* Crime. 

VII. 

Subjects bound by Delict of 

XVIL 

Subjects not to be punished 

Rulers, 

for Rulers. 

Vllf. 

Right of punishing the 

XVIII. 

Nor dissentients, for the 

whole body, how long it en- 

Body. 

dures. 

XIX. 

Heirs do not inherit Pu- 

IX. 

Is Punishment transferred 

nishment. 

without eommunieation of 

XX. 

But if the Punishment be* 

DeHctf 

come a Debt. 

X. 

Direct and consequent effect. 

1. I TTTHEN we speak of the extenBion of punishment from one per- 
V Y son to others, we speak either of those who are partakers in 
the delict, or of others. Those who are partakers in the delict are not 
punished so much for another^s delict as for their own. Who these 
are, maj be miderstood from what has been said above concerning 
damage wrongfiillj inflicted. For generally, a person comes to be a 
sharer in the delict, in the same way in which he comes to be a sharer 
in the damage done ; yet it is not always true that when a person is 
bound for the damage, he is also liable to punishment; but only 
when there has been, besides, some notable malice ; whereas to make 
a person bound for the damage, any fault whatever often suffices. 

2 Therefore they who command a yicious ^ct, they who giro the 
consent which is requsite, they who assist, who receive the things, or in 
any other way participate in the crime itself; they who give their coun- 
sel towards it, who praise it, who assent to it ; those who being bound 
by their special rights to forbid it, do not forbid it ; or being bound 
by similar rights to give aid to the person who suffers wrong, do not 
do so ; those who do not dissuade when they ought to dissuade ; who 
keep silence with regard to a fact which they were bound by some 
right to make known ; all these may be punished, if there be in them 
such malice as suffices for penal desert, according to what has already 
been said. 

252 OP THE COMMUNICATION [Book 11. 

II. 1 The thing will be made clearer by example. A Ciril Com- 
munity, like any other Community, is not bound by the act of an 
indiyidual member thereof, without some act of its own, or some omis- 
sion. Augustine says well, There is a difference between t?ie fauU thai, 
in a people, each person has of his own ; and a fault common to all, 
which is committed with one mind and one wilL And accordingly, in 
Treaties the formula is, [Lir. i. 24,] If he violate this 6y public 
act. The Locrians in Liyy plead to the Roman Senate that their de- 
fection was by no means a public act So agdn Zeno, pleading for 
the Magnesians, begged with tears that they would not ascribe to the 
whole city the insanity of one man : that each onis madness must be at 
his own risk. And the Bhodians, before the Senate, separate the public 
cause from that of priyate persons, saying that there is no city which 
has not often wicked citizens, and always a senseless mob. So the 
father is not bound by the delict of the son, nor the master by that 
of the serrant, except there be some cause of blame in themselyes. 

2 But of the ways in which rulers come to share in the crime of 
others, there are two which are most common, and require diligent 
consideration : their allowing and their receiying. 

With regard to allowing, it is to be held that he who knows of 
the commission of the offense, who can, and is bound to preyent it, 
and who does not, does himself offend. So Cicero against Piso; 
Brutus, in a letter to Cicero ; Agapetus to Justinian ; Amobius ; Sal- 
Tian; Augustine. 

3 So he who allows his slaye to be prostituted when he could pre- 
rent her, is held by the Roman Law to haye prostituted her. If a 
slaye commit homicide with the knowledge of his master, the master 
is equally liable, for ho is considered as guilty of the homicide. And 
by the Fabian law, the master is punished if his servant, with his 
knowledge, has drawn away and secreted another seryant. 

4 But as we haye said, there is required, to produce this liability, 
hot only knowledge, but the power of preyention. And this is what 
the Laws say ; that knowing, when it is directed to be punished, is taken 
for allowing ; so that he who could haye preyented, is held bound if ho 
did not do so ; and that the knowing here spoken of is considered as 
combined with willing ; and that knowledge is taken along with purpose ; 
and therefore, that the master is not bound if the slaye has asserted 
and appealed to the laws for his liberty ; or, if he haye disregarded 
his master ; for he is blameless who knows, but cannot preyent. 

5 When Hesiod says. 

Often the whole of the city is punished for one man^s injustice, 
Proclus says well, As Jtaving had it in their power to prevent him, and 
not having done so. So Horace of Agamemnon, 

Though 'tis the kings that are mad, the Achaians suffer the evil. 

For they might haye compelled him to restore the priest his daughter. 
And so after the Greek fleet was burnt, 

All for the fault of one, for the madness of Ajax O'lleus. 

CiiAP. XXL] OP PUNISHMENTS. 253 

Ab Orid says on the samo subject. 

One coostrained the maid, but the penalty spread to the many * 
because the others did not prerent the sacred virgin from suffering 
Tiolence. So Livy about the Laurentian ambassadors, repelled by 
TatiuB. So Salyian speaks of kings. And Tbucydides says, 270 
w?u> could prevent it does it. So in Livy, the Veiontes and Rutulians 
excuse themselves to the Romans, in that their subjects had assisted 
the enemies of the Romans, they having no knowledge of the fact. 
And on the other hand, the excuse of Touta, the queen of the Illy- 
rians, is not accepted, when she said that piracy was not practised by 
her, but by her subjects ; for she did not prevent it. And in ancient 
times the Scyrians were condemned by the Amphictyons because they 
allowed some of their people to practise piracy. 

6 It 18 easy to know, so far as presumption goes, acts which are 
conspicuous and which are frequent. What is done by many, can bo 
Ignored by none, as Dio Prusseensis says. Polybius heavily blames 
the Etolians, because, when they wore desirous of not being deemed 
the enemies of Philip, they allowed their people to commit hostile 
acts, and gave distinguished honours to those who had been prominent 
in such proceedings. 

III. 1 Let us come to the other question, of receiving, as a sub- 
ject of punuhment. Punishment, as we have said, according to Natural 
Law, may be inflicted by any one who is not open to a like charge ; 
though no doubt it is in conformity with civil institutions, that the 
delicts of individuals, which regard their own community, should be 
left to that community, and to its rulers, to be punished or passed 
over as they choose. 

2 But there is not the same full power left to them in delicts 
which in any way pertain to human society in general : for these, 
other states and their rulers may prosecute, as in particular states 
there Is a prosecutor of certain offenses which any one may put in 
motion : and much less have they such a power in offenses by which 
another state or its ruler are especially assailed ; and in which, con- 
sequently, the state or the ruler have, on account of their dignity or 
security, a right of exacting punishment, as we have said. This right 
is not to be impeded by the state in which the offender lives, or its 
ruler. 

IV. 1 But since states are not accustomed to permit another 
state to enter their territory armed for the sake of exacting punishment, 
nor is that expedient ; it follows that the city, where he abides who is 
found to have committed the offense, ought to do one of two things : 
either itself, being called upon, it should punish the guilty man, or it 
should leave him to be dealt with by the party who makes the de- 
mand : for this is what is meant by giving him up, so often spoken of 
in history. 

2- Thus the Israelites demand of the Benjamites, that they give up 

254 OF THE COMMUNICATION [BookIL 

those who have committed the crimes ; Judges xx. The Phillstinei 
require from the Hebrews that they give up Samson as an eTil-doer; 
Judges XY. 80 the Lacedsemonians made war upon the Messenians 
because they did not gire up a man who had killed Lacedsemonians : 
and, at another time, because those were not giren up who had done 
Tiolence to rirgins sent to perform a sacred office. So Cato advised 
that Cesar should be giren up to the Germans, for wrongfully making 
war upon them. So the Gauls demanded that the Fabii should be 
given up to them, because they had fought against them. The Romans 
required those who had plundered their land to be given up to them 
by the Hemici ; and Amilcar, by the Carthaginians, not the celebrated 
general, but another, who stimulated the Ckuils : they afterwards de* 
manded Annibal ; and Jugurtha from Bocchus, that, as Sallust puts it, 
ycu may rdieve u$ from the painful necessity of punishing ai the eame 
time^ you who art in error, and him who is most criminal. The Romans 
themselves gave up those who had done violence to the ambassadors of 
the Carthaginians ; and again, of the ApoUoniates. The Achoeans re- 
quired the Lacedemonians to give up those who had attacked the 
town of Las, adding, that if they did not do so, the league was vio- 
lated. So the Athenians proclaimed by a herald, that if any one 
practised secretly against Philip, and then fled to Athens, he would 
be liable to be given up. The Beotians required of the HippotianS 
that those who had slain Phocus should be given up. 

3 All which passages, however, are so to be understood that the 
people or the king are not strictly bound to give up the person, but, 
as we have said, to punish him. For thus we road that the Eleans 
made war on the Lacedsemonians, bocauso they had not punished 
those who had done injury to the Eleans ; that is, they neither punished 
them nor gave them up. It is a disjunctive obligation. 

4 Sometimes the option is given to those who demand the guilty, 
that the satisfaction may be more complete. The Cserians, in Livy, 
signify to the Romans that the Tarquinians passing through their 
land with a small force, though they had asked for nothing but a 
passage, had drawn along with them somo of the country people to 
join them in the marauding practices of which they were accused : 
that if it were wished that they ehould be given up, they were ready 
to give them up ; if it were wished that they should be punished, 
they were ready to punish them. 

5 In the second league of the Carthaginians and Romans, which 
is extant in Polybius, there is this passage (if rightly read) : If not, 
let each pursue his own right by private proceedings : if this does not 
succeed, let it be considered a public delict, Eschines, in his answer to 
the accusation of Demosthenes respecting his embassy to Philip, re- 
lates that when they discoursed with Philip on the peace of Greece, 
he said, among other things, that it was just that the punishment o£ 
the crimes which were committed should fSdll, not on the cities, but on 

V 

CiiAP. XXI.] OP PUNISHMENTS. 255 

the offenders : and that the cities who should bring to judgment the 
persons accused, ought not to be harmed. (Qumtilian says, TAom are 
next door to deeerten who harbour desertere*.) 

6 Among the evils which arise from the discords of states, Dio 
Chrysostom puts this : It ispoesible that those who have injured one eUy, 
to fiy to another, 

7 There occurs the question, of persons given up, if they are given 
up by one state, and not accepted by the other, do they remain 
citizens ? 

P. M. ScsoYola held that they did not : since when the people 
had given up a person, it was as if they had expelled him from the 
city, as if they had interdicted him from fire and water. Brutus, and 
after him Cicero, defend the opposite opinion. And this is the 
sounder opmion ; not, however, properly for the reason which Cicero 
gives, that a surrender, like a donation, cannot be understood without 
acceptance. For the act of donation is not complete without the con- 
sent of two : but the giving up or surrender of which we have spoken 
is nothing more than leaving a citizen of ours to the power of another 
people, so that they may determine about him what they will. But 
this permission does not give or take away any right: it may take 
away an impediment to the execution of punishment. Therefore if 
the other people do not use the right which is conceded to it, the 
person so surrendered will be in a condition to be punished by his own 
nation, (as happened in the case of Clodius, surrendered to tho Cor- 
sicans and not accepted by them;) or he may not be punished, as there 
are many delicts in which the one or the other may take place. And 
the rights of a citizen, like many other rights and possessions, are not 
lost by a mere &ct, but by some decree or sentence ; except there be 
some law which directs the fact to be considered as a Judicial act, 
which cannot be said in this case. And in the same way, if goods are 
surrendered but not accepted, they remain whose they were. But if 
the surrender of a person is accepted, and afterwards he who had 
been surrendered happens to return, he is no longer a citizen, except 
by some new concession of citizenship to him : and in this sense the 
opinion which Modestinus gave respecting a person surrendered, ii 
true. 

8 What we have said of surrendering or punishing criminals, ap* 
plies not only to those who have always been the subjects of him 
under whose rule they are now found; but also to those, who, after 
committing a crime, have fled to any place. 

V. 1 Nor is this doctrine impeached by the rights of suppliants, 
and the cases of asylum, which are so much spoken of. These arrange- 
ments are for the advantage of those who are persecuted without 
deserving to be so ; not of those who have committed what is inju- 
rious to human society or to other men. So Gylippus says of tiiis 
right of suppliants. [See.] Menander very properly distinguishes 

* This pnnage Is not quite to the purpose. W. 

266 OP THE COMMUNICATION [BookIL 

misdeed from misfortune ; the former, he says, happens by will, the 
latter by chance. 80 Demosthenes, and Cicero after him, say that 
the proper objects of p\iy are those who are in distress ihi*ough fortune^ 
noi through malice. And so that of Antiphon*, and that of Lysias. [See.] 
So in the Hebrew law, ho who had killed a man by chance, might take 
to the city of refuge : but they who had deliberately killed an innocent 
man, or disturbed the state of the city, were not to be protected, oren 
by the altar of God. So Philo. And the more ancient Greeks had tho 
same rule. The Chalcidians would not giro up Nauplius to the 
Achaians ; but the cause is added, because he had sufficiently cleared 
himself from the accusations of the Achaians. 

2 There was at Athens an Altar of Mercy, mentioned by Cicero f, 
Pausanias, Senrius, Theophilus, and described at length by Statins 
in his Thebaid. But to whom was it accessible ? The poet says. Hie 
miserable made it sacred : and adds, that those who came together there, 
were those conquered in war, those driven /rom their country, those who 
had no state to which they belonged. 60 Aristides, in praise of the Athe- 
nians, says that Athens was the refuge for the wretched. In Xeno* 
phon, Patrocles the Phliarian says the same. So Demosthenes ; and 
Sophocles in the (Edipus Coloneus; and Demophon, [rather the 
Chorus, in Euripid. Heradeid. 7. 330, &c. J.B.] And this is the point 
for which Callisthenos especially praised the Athenians. 

3 On the other hand, in the same tragedy j:, one of the characters 
says that he knows no piety which withholds him from dragging guilty 
men from the altar to tho tribunal. And tho same author, in tho J(m, 
says, that guilty men should not go to the gods for refuge, but that 
the temples should be open to the pious to protect them from injury. 
Lycurgus the orator relates that a certain Callistratus, who had com- 
mitted a capital offense, haying consulted the oracle, receiyed for answer 
that if he went to Athens, he would have the benefit of the law : that ac- 
cordingly, he took refuge at the most sacred altar at Athens, depending 
upon impunity ; but that he was neyertheless put to death by the 
city, strictly careful of its religious obseryances ; and thus the oracle 
was fulfilled. Tacitus blames the custom which was in his time pre- 
valent, of protecting, in the Greek cities, the crimes of men as the 
ceremonies of the gods. Tho same writer says, that Princes are indeed 
lihe gods ; but that even the gods hear only the just prayers of suppli- 
ants. 

4 Such persons, therefore, are either to be punished, or surren- 
dered, or at least, remoyod. So the Cymeans, not being willing either 
to giye up Pactyas the Persian, or to retain him, allowed him to go 
to Mitylone. Demetrius of Pharos, who, when defeated, had fled to 

* Orat. xiy. xy. p. 134. Ed. Wech. not Antiphanea. J. B. 

-f- Quoted by the Scholiast on Statins, Theb, xii. 481, where he refers it to the 
Tuscnlans : but in that \irork there is nothing about such an altar. J.B. 

X Not the same, but an uncertain tragedy of Eoripides in StobaBui : Qerm. 
ziy. Tit. 46. J. B. 

Chap. XXI.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 257 

Philip, kiDg of MacedoD, the Romans demanded from the king. Per- 
66118, king of Macedon, in defending himself to Martius, and speaking 
of those who were said to hare laid wait for Eumenes, said that he 
had commanded them to depart from his kingdom, and nerer to 
retmm. The Samothracians denounced to Erander, who had practised 
secretl J against Eumenes, the necessity of freeing their temples from 
pollution. 

5 But this right of demanding, for the sake of punishing, those 
who hayo fled out of the territory, is, in this and the last preced- 
ing ages, in most parts of Europe, used only with regard to those 
crimes which affect the public good, or have some peculiar features of 
atrocity. It has become the custom to overlook on both sides smaller 
offenses, except there be a treaty with some especial proyisions on this 
subject. It is to be remarked, howeyer, that robbers and pirates who 
haye made themselyes strong and formidable, may be rcceiyed and 
defended [on condition of desisting from their eril practices, G.] so 
far as punishment goes ; because it is the interest of the human race, 
that if they cannot be reformed in any other way, they may be so by 
the assurance of impunity for the past ; and any people or any ruler 
may negotiate such a matter. 

YI. 1 It is to be remarked that it sometimes happens that sup- 
pliants are defended [proyisorily], till their case can be fairly judged. 
So Demophon says to the messenger of Eurystheus, that if he has any 
charge against the refugees, he will obtain justice, but that till then, 
they will not bo giyen up. And in another tragedy [the (Edipus Ca^ 
loneus of Sophocles, y. 904]. Theseus says to Creon that it is against 
the practice of Athens to giye up refugees. Your attempt, he says, 
is an act unworthy of Thebes and of you*. 

2 And then, if that of which the refugees are accused is not a 
matter against the law of nature or of nations, it must be judged by 
the ciyil law of the people from whom they come; as ^schylus 
assumes in his Suppliants^ where Danaus addresses the persons who 
came from Egypt to that effect. 

Vn. 1 We haye seen how the fault passes to the rulers from 
the subjects, either ancient or recently acquired ; in like manner the 
fault will pass from the rulers to the subjects, if these haye consented 
to the crime, or if they haye done anything by the command or the 
suasion of their superiors, which they could not do without guilt : on 
which point it will be more correct to treat hereafter, when we haye to 
speak of the duties of subjects. There is eyen a participation of pun- 
ishment by communication between the general body and indiyiduals ; 
for, as Augustine says, The general body consists of individuals, &c. 

2 But the fiEiult lies at the door of the indiyiduals who haye con- 
sented to the act, not of those who were outyoted by the others. For 
the punishments of indiyiduals and of the general body arc different. 

* In the Greek, ifiov, but Grotiiii translatea it te, both here and in his extracts 
from the Greek Tragedies and Comedies. J. B. 

S 

258 OF THE COMMUNICATION [Book II. 

Ab the paiuBhment of indindoalB is Bometimes death, 80 it is the 
puniBhment of a city to be destroyed, which is done when the ciyil 
body is dissolyed ; of which case we have spoken elsewhere. And if 
a city or state cease to exist in this manner, Modestinus rightly said, 
that the life-interest which any persons have in it ceases. Individuals 
are reduced to slavery in the way of punishment, as the Thebans 
under Alexander of Macedon : excepting those who had yoted against 
the proposal of making the alliance [with the Macedonians, G.] So 
also a city or state undergoes civil slavery, by being reduced into the 
oondition of a province. Individuals lose their goods by confiscation. 
But [in punishing a city] the things which are taken from the city are 
the public property; as walls, arsenals, fleets, arms, elephants, its trea- 
sury, and its public lands. 

3 But that individuals should lose what is their own property, on 
account of a delict of the general body, committed without their con- 
sent, is unjust : as Libanius rightly shews on the sedition of Antioch. 
The same writer approves an act of Theodosius, who punished a public 
offense by interdicting the theatre, the public baths, and the title of 
metropolis, 

VUI. 1 This important question occurs, whether punishment 
may always be exacted for the delicts of the general body. So long 
as the constitution of the body continues, it would seem that it can, 
because the same body remains, though preserved by a succession of 
different particles, as we have elsewhere shewn. But, on the con- 
trary side, it is to be observed that some things are asserted of the 
body primarily and per m, as to have a treasury, laws, and the like ; 
others only derivatively from its members. Thus we call a body 
learned and brave, which has many learned and brave members. And 
desert [of punishment, G.] is of this kind ; for, in the first place, it 
belongs to individuals, as having a spirit and intelligence which the 
body by itself has not Therefore if these persons be extinct, from 
whom desert was deduced and carried to the account of the body, the 
desert is extinct, and also the desert of punishment; which, as we 
have said, cannot exist without desert. So Libanius says : It must 
eufice you <u to punishment, that no one is Uft of those who ojf ended, 

2 We must therefore approve the opinion of Arrian, when he con- 
demns* the revenge of Alexander upon the Persians, since those who 
had wronged the Greeks were long ago dead. Concerning the de- 
struction of the Branchidffi by the same Alexander, the judgment of 
Curtius is similar, that it was not justice, biU erueUy, to punish those 
who could not betray Xerxes, and had never seen Miletus. And of the 
same kind is the judgment of Arrian respecting the burning of Perse- 
polis, that there was no true punishment in it, since the offending 
Persians had long ceased to be. 

* Arrian, Lib. ii. o. 14, does not condemn this plea of Alexander : the author 
was thinking of Airian's judgment on the burning of Persepolis, which occurs 
immediate] J alter in the text, hot was not mentioned in the first edition. J. B. 

Chap. XXL] OF PUNISHMENTS. 259 

3 Eyory one sees the absurdity of Agathocles' answer to the com- 
plaints of the Ithacans, of damage done by the Sicilians ; that the Si- 
cilians had receiyed more damage from Ulysses. And Plutarch, in his 
book against Herodotus, says, that it is very unlikely that the Corinthians 
should have wished to ayenge an injury received from the Samians 
after three generations. Nor is the defense of such cases satisfactory, 
which we find in Plutarch On the delayed punishments of the gods. For 
the justice administered by God is one thing, that by men, another, aa 
we shall shew hereafter. Nor again can wo argue that, because de« 
scendants receive honours and rewards for the merit of their ancestors, 
therefore it is just that they should be punished for their crimes. For 
benefits are of such nature, by their matter, that they may be be- 
stowed upon any without injury, but punishments are not. 

IX. We have spoken of the ways in which a participation in the 
punishment takes place in consequence of a participation in the crime. 
It remains that we consider whether, when there is not a participation 
in the ofiense, there may bo in the punishment ; and here, that we 
may not be misled by the similarity of words when the things are 
difierenty we must make a few remarks. 

X. 1 First, that a damage directly caused is one thing, and 
a damage caused by consequence, another. I call that a damage 
directly caused, by which any one is deprived of a proper right which 
he has ; a damage by consequence, that by which any one has not 
that which he would have had : namely, by the cessation of the con- 
dition, without which his right cannot subsist. Wo have an example 
in Ulpian : K in my ground I have opened a well, by which the 
springs which would have come to you are cut off: he denies that, 
by the effect of my operations, a wrongful damage is done to you, 
since I was using my own right in my own property. And in another 
place, he says it makes a great difference, whether any one suffer a 
loss, or be prevented in a gain which he was going on to enjoy. And 
so Paulus says, that it is preposterous that we should be supposed to 
have possessions before we have acquired them. 

2 So when the goods of the parents are confiscated, the children 
feel the loss ; but that is not properly a punishment, because those 
goods were not to become theirs, except their parents kept possession 
of them till their last breath. Which is rightly noted by Alphenus, 
when ho says that by the punishment of the parent, the children lose 
that which from him would have come to them ; but that which was 
given them by the nature of things, or from any other source, they do 
not lose. So Cicero says, that the children of Thcmistocles were in 
absolute want, and he does not think it unjust that the children of 
Lepidus should bear the same lot. And this, he says, was the ancient 
custom, and common to all cities; though this custom was much 
limited and tempered by the later laws of Rome. So when by the 
delict of the general body, which, as we have siud, stands for the whole 
body, the whole body is in fault, and on that ground loses, as we have 

s 2 

260 OF THE COMMUNICATION [Book II. 

■aidy cml liberty, city walls, and other adTantages, innoeent indi- 
riduals also feol tho inconTeniences ; but they feel it in those things 
which only belonged to them through the general body. 

XI. 1 It is further to be remarked, that sometimes a person has 
harm imposed upon him, or loses good, by the occasion indeed of 
another's fault, yet not so that the fault is the proximate cause of the 
action, so far as pertains to the right of acting. Thus he who has 
promised something on occasion of another's debt, suffers damage, as 
the old proverb says. Suretyship is next door to mischief; but the 
proximate cause of the obligation is his promise. For as he who is 
surety for a buyor, is not properly bound by the sale, but by his pro- 
mise ; so he who is bound for a delinquent, is not bound by the delict* 
but by his own engagement. And hence the loss which he has to 
bear is measured, not by the other's delict, but by the power which 
he had in promising. 

2 From which it follows, that according to the opinion which we 
hold for the sounder, no body can be put to death in yirtue of surety- 
ship ; because wo hold that no one has such right over his own life, 
that he can himself take it from himself, or bind himself to have it 
taken : though the ancient Romans and Greeks thought otherwise on 
this point : and therefore held sureties to be bound to undei^ capital 
punishment for their principal, as it is in the verse of Ausonius: [Who 
takes death as a stibsliiute for another f The Surety, Quis subit in 
poenam capitali judicio f Vas. GronoT.], and as appears in the well 
known story of Damon and Pythias* : and hostages have often been 
put to death, as we have elsewhere stated. What we have said of life, 
may also be said of limb : for man has no right to sacrifice that, ex- 
cept for the sake of preserving the whole body. 

3 But if tho promise included the expatriation of the promisor, or 
the payment of a sum of money, and the condition be not fulfilled by 
the fault of another, the person who gives such security must bear 
the loss; which, however, properly speaking, is not a punishment. 
Something similar occurs in any right which a person has in such a 
way that it depends on the will of another; such as a right granted to 
be hold during the pleasure of tho grantor, and even the right of pri- 
vate property, which is liable to be interfered with by the dominium 
eminens, which the state has for public purposes. If any thing of this 
kind is taken away from any one on account of the fault of another, it 
is not properly a punishment, but the execution of a pre-existing right, 
which was in the hands of him who takes the precarious right away. 
And inasmuch as brutes are not capable of punishment, when a beast 
is put to death, as in the case provided for in the law of Moses, this 
is not really punishment, but the exercise of human dominion over 
the boast, 

XII. Having premised these distinctions, we say that no one inno- 
cent of delict can be punished for the delict of another. Bnt the 

* The right name is Phintias, Cic. Offi iii. la Oronov, 

CiiAP. XXI.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 261 

trne reason of this, is not that which is given by Paulus, that punish- 
ment is instituted for the amendment of men : for it would seem that 
an example may be made even extraneously to a man's own person, 
in a person whose welfare affects him, as we shall soon have to shew : 
but because liability to punishment arises from desert : and desert is 
a personal quality, since it must have its origin in the will, than which 
nothing is more peculiarly ours : it is, as we may say, self -causing. 

XIIL 1 Neither the virtties iwr the vices of parents, says Jerome, 
are imptUed to the children : and Augustine, Ood would be unjust if he 
condemned an innocent person, Dio Chrjsostom says of the law of 
God, speaking on the occasion of Solon's law, by which the chil- 
dren were stigmatised ; this law does not, like that, punish the children of 
criminals; in this, every one is his own cause of suffering. And hence the 
rule, Noxa caput nquitur. Punishment is personal. So the Christian 
Emperors direct. 

2 It is just, says Philo, that those should have the penalty who had 
the sin: reprehending the manner of some nations which punished 
with death the children of traitors or tyrants. The same custom is 
blamed* also by Dionysius, who shews that the reason sometimes 
given is fiiUacious, that the children will probably be like their parents; 
since that is uncertain, and an uncertain fear ought not to cause any 
one's death. Some Christian did venture to advise the emperor Ar- 
cadius, that those ought to suffer the same punishment as their parents, 
in whom the repetition of their parents' crime was feared : and Am. 
mianus relates that a family was put to death, even at an early age, 
that they might not grow up to be like their parents. Nor is fear of 
reyengo a more just cause of such proceeding, notwithstanding the 
Greek proverb. Who kills the sire and spares tJie son is mad. 

3 Seneca on the other hand says, Nothing is more unjust than to 
make a man the heir of his father's odium. When Attagincs was the 
means of the Thebans deserting to the Medcs, Pausanias did not 
harm his children : they had had nothing to do with Medizing, he said. 
M. Antoninus, in an epistle to the senate, wrote, You will pardon the wife 
and the son-^nrlaw of Avidius Cassius (who had conspired against him). 
But why do I say pardon, when they have committed no offense f 

XIV. 1 God indeed, in the law which he gave the Hebrews, 
threatens that he will visit the impiety of the fathers upon their pos- 
terity. But God has the most plenary right of dominion, as over 
our goods, so over our lives, as his gift ; which he may take away 
from any one, whenever he will, and without any cause. If, there- 
fore, he takes away, by an untimely and violent death, the children 
of Achan, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, he uses towards them his right of 
dominion, not of punishment; but by the act, he more grievously 
punishes the parents. For if they outlive their children, which is the 
case that the divine law principally regards ; (and therefore the law 

* No, lajs Barbeyrac: Dionjsius leaves the matter undecided. See the place, 
Lib. VIII. c. 80. 

262 OF THE COMMUNICATION [BooKn. 

doeA not extend its threatenings beyond great grandchildren, Exod. 
XX. 6 : because the common age of man allows him to see them ;) it is 
certain that then they are punished by such a spectacle ; for that is 
more grievous to them than what they themselves suffer, as Chrysos- 
tom says ; or if they do not live so long, still, to die with such a 
fear hanging over them, is a great punishment. The peapU^s hard- 
ne8$ of heart, as TertuUian says, M to such remedies, that they might 
obey the divine law, even out of regard /or their posterity, 

2 But it is to be noted, at the same time, that God does not make 
use of this heayier kind of punishment, except towards offenses especi- 
ally tending to his dishonour, as false worship, perjury, sacrilege. Nor 
did the Greeks judge otherwise ; for the crimes which were supposed to 
entail a curse on posterity, are all of this kind ; as Plutarch learnedly 
shews in his book On the procrastinated anger of the gods. In Elian, 
we have an oracle which says that the guilty cannot escape, but that ven- 
geance follows them and their posterity. But there, sacrilege was in 
question, as is proved by the history of the Tholosan gold. We have 
above adduced similar opinions concerning perjury. Moreover, though 
God has threatened this, he does not always use his power, especially if 
the children turn out eminently virtuous ; as see Ezek. xviii., and as 
Plutarch proves by examples. 

3 And since, in the New Testament, the punishments are declared 
more clearly than before, which await the wicked after this life; 
therefore in that law there is no threatening of punishment which 
goes beyond the persons of the offenders : to which especially, though 
less openly, as the manner of the prophets is, that prophecy of Eze- 
kiel looks. But this fact on the part of God is not to be imitated by 
men ; nor is the reason alike : because, as wo have said, God has a 
right over men's lives without regarding their faults: but men have 
such a right only on the ground of a graver fault, and one which 
belongs especially to the person. 

4 Wherefore the same divine law, as it forbids parents to be capi- 
tally punished for their children, so does it forbid children to be so 
punished for their parents. And this law pious kings have observed, 
even with regard to their open enemies; and the rule is greatly 
praised by Josephus and Philo, as also a similar law of Egypt by Iso- 
crates, and one of Rome by Dionysius*. And it is one of Plato's Laws, 
that the ignominy and punishment of the father are not to fall upon 
the children. So Calllstratus the Jurist, adding the reason, that a man 
does not succeed to the crimes of another. Would any city, asks 
Cicero, have a law condemning the son or grandson for the delinquencies 
of the father or grandfather f Hence to put to death a pregnant 
woman was held inadmissible by the laws of the Egyptians, Greeks, 
and Romans. 

XV. But if those human laws are unjust which put to death chil- 
dren for the offenses of their fathers, still more unjust was the law of 

* See Barbejrae's corrections of these references. 

Chap. XXI.] OF PUNISHMENTS. 263 

the Medes and PeniaDg, which devoted to destrootion the lives of the 
relatives of the criminal, in order that death might be more bitter to 
those who had offended against the king, as Gurtius speaks ; a law 
which surpasses all others in cruelty, as Ammianus Marcellinus' says. 

XVI. This, however, is to be noted, that if the children of ene- 
mies have anything which is not their own, but of which the right 
belongs to the people or the king, that may be taken from them by 
the right of dominion, the exorcise of that right operating collaterally 
to the punishment of the criminal. To this we may refer the case 
of the children of Antiphon, who, as the children of a traitor, were 
excluded from honours; as at Rome were the children of those pro- 
scribed by Sulla. So in the law of Arcadius, that rule concerning 
children is not intolerable: Let them be admitted to no honours nor 
public offices. How far slavery may pass to children without wrong, 
we have treated elsewhere. 

XVIL 1 What we have said of evil inflicted upon children for 
the delicts of fathers, may be applied also to a people really subject 
to their ruler : (for he who is not subject may be punished for his own 
fault, as we have said, that is, for neglecting to control the offender:) 
if it be asked whether such a people may be eviltreated on account of 
tlie crimes of the ruler or king. We do not now inquire if the Peo- 
ple's consent has been obtained, or if they have done anything which 
is by itself worthy of punishment ; but we inquire concerning the con- 
nexion which naturally arises between that body of which the king is 
the head, and of which others are the members. God, on account of 
the sin of Darid, wasted the people with a pestilence; the people 
being innocent, as David judged : but God had a plenary right over 
their lives. 

2 In the niean time, this was not the punishment of the people, 
but of David ; for as a Christian writer says ; The sharpest punish" 
ment of offending kings is the punishment of their people. It is, as the 
same writer says, as if one who has sinned with his hand were to be 
punished with strokes on his back : as Plutarch says, it is no otherwiBe 
than when a physician cauterizes the thumb to cure the hip. Why 
men may not lawfully do the same, we have already said. 

XVIIL The same may be said of the evil inflicted through their 
property, or the like, upon individuals who have not consented to the 
crime, on account of the delict of the general body. 

XIX. If we ask why, since the heir is bound to the other debts 
of the deceased, he is not bound to his punishment, as Paul us says the 
commentators* have decided, this is the true cause ; that the heir 

♦ CammenHtio jure] Difficile satis est definire, quid intelligat PauUus, dam 
illud jitf eommentitium Tocat. Vide A. Fabbum, Jurispr. Papinian. Tit, i. Princip, 
II. Illat 6, Mabc. Ltcrijimam, Membran, i. 9. Jac. Gotiiofbed. in X. 1. 
Dt Regg. Jur. pag. 6. CI. ScnuLTiNO. Jurisprud. Ante- Justin, pag. 675. col. 1. 
init. Expend! etiam potest norm interpretatio, quae legitur in Actis Erudiiorum 
LipsieruUfus, ann. 1714. pag. 555. ubi Tult Aactor Clar. Waciitlebus, jus com- 
mentitiMm esse, quod ex notione quadam communi oritur. J, B. 

264 OF THE OOlOiUNIOATION OF PUNISHMENTS. [Book U. 

represents the person of the deoeased, not in his deserts, which are 
matters merely personal, but in his possessions ; and with them are 
inseparably connected his debts ; and accordingly this rule came in as 
soon as ownership came in. So Dio Prusieensis. 

xy. And hence it follows that if, besides desert, some new cause 
of obligation should arise, that which was a part of the punishment 
may become debt, though not as a punishment of the heir. Thus, 
after the sentence of a court, or after the decision of a lawsuit, to which 
erents the power of a contract is given, the pecuniary penalty will be 
due from the heir, as also matters which were agreed to be so decided. 
For these events are a new cause of a debt being due. 

CHAPTER XXn. 

Of Unjust Causes of War. 

Sect. I. 

Jusiificaiary and snasory 

X. 

causes. 

XI. 

IL 

Wars ufith neither are sa- 

vage. 

XII. 

III. 

tVars wiihoui just\fieatory 

causes are Piracy, 

XIIL 

IV. 

Causes with false shew of 

justice. 

XIV. 

V. 

As Uncertain Fear : 

XV. 

VI. 

Utility without Necessity : 

VII. 

Denial of Marriage : 

XVI. 

VIII. 

Desire of a better Land : 

xvu. 

IX. 

Previous Discovery, 

I. 

Folly of former Occupiers ? 
Desire of Liberty is not a 
just cause: 

Nor desire to govern others 
for their good : 
Nor the claim to universal 
Empire for the Emperor : 
Nor for the Church : 
Nor the wish to fulfil Pro- 
phecy: 

Nor Rights not strict. 
Unjust cause and other vices 
in a war compared, 

1 TTT^ iMfe said above, when we began to treat of the causes of 
\ Y war, that some are justificatory or justifymg, some suasory 

or impelling. Polybius, who first noted this difierence, calls the former 
pretexts, the latter, causes ; Livy sometimes calls the former titulus *. 

2 Thus in the war of Alexander against Darius, the pretext was 
revenge for the injuries which the Persians had done to the Greeks ; 
the cause was the desire of glory, empire, wealth, added to a great 
hope of the facility of the conquest, proved from the expeditions of 
Xenophon and Agesilaus. So the pretext of the second Punic war 
was the controversy concerning Saguntum, the cause was the indig- 
nation of the Carthaginians excited by the terms which the Romans 
had imposed upon them in their evil times, and their courage exalted 
by their successes in Spain; as Polybius notes. In the same way 
Thucydides judges that the true cause of the Peloponnesian war was 
the strength of the Athenians, increasing and drawing the suspicion 
of the Lacedeemonians ; the pretext, the controversy of the Gorcy- 
reans, of the Potideans, and others things : where however he uses 
the terms pretext and cause (irp6<fHiais and alrla) indiscriminately. [See 
Lib. V. c. 53. Gron.] The same distinction occurs in the oration of 
the Gampanians to the Romans, when they say that they fought 
agunst the Samnites, nominally for the Sidicini, really, for them- 
selves ; because they saw that when the Sidicini were consumed, the 
conflagration would spread to them. So Livy says that Antiochus 
made war upon the Romans, having, as a pretence^ the death of 
fiarcillas, and other matters, but really, because he had conceived 
great hope from the relaxed discipline of the Romans. So Plutarch 
notes that it was not truly objected to Antony by Cicero that he was 

* For example, Lib. xzxtii. c. 54. num. 13. J. B. 

266 OF UNJUST CAUSES OF WAR. [Book H. 

the cause of the civil war; since Cassar was akeady resolred upon 
war, and only took his pretext from Antony. 

U. Some there are who rush into war not actuated by either of 
these kinds of cause, being, as Tacitus says, greedy of danger for its 
own sake*. These men are of a temper which does not lie within 
the proper limits of humanity, of a ferine nature. So Seneca, On 
Clemency, says, it is not mere cruelty but a ferine disposition, which 
delights in human blood and butchery. So Aristotle says that that 
is a sanguinary character, which makes a man break with his friends 
for the sake of fighting and shedding blood; and Dio Pnisseensis 
sskys it is mere madness. So Seneca, Epist. xiv. 

III. 1 However, most parties, when they go to war, hare impelling 
causes, either with or without justifying causes. There are some who 
frankly do not trouble themselves about justificatory causes; to 
whom we may apply the maxim of the Roman jurists, that he who, 
when he is asked by what claim he possesses a thing, can assign no 
other than that he docs possess it, is a robber. Aristotle speaks of 
those who gi^e no caro to the question whether it is just to enslave 
unoffending neighbours. 

2 Such a man was Brennus, who said that everything belonged 
to the stronger : such is Annibal in Silius, whose sword is the mea- 
sure of right and justice : such Attila ; and those who say, as in Seneca, 
Our thought the fortune not the cause of war ; or as in Lucan, This 
day will make the conquered part the guilty; or as in Tacitus, that 
In the highest fortune what is strongest is most just. Yet as Augustine 
says. To mcJce war on unqfending neighbours and to harass and subju-^ 
gate them out of mere lov$ of honour, what name does it deserve, except 
that of a huge robbery f Of such wars, Velleius says they are wars 
not entered into for justice, but for gain. So Cicero says that Courage 
without justice not only is not a part of virtue, but is an inhuman 
extravagance. And Andronicus Rhodius speaks to the same effect. 

IV. Other parties, in going to war, allege justificatory causes, 
which, when brought to the standard of right reason, turn out unjust ; 
and then it appears, as Livy says, that what is aimed at is, not a trial 
of right, but of strength. Most kings, says Plutarch, use the two 
names, peace and war, only as coins, to procure, not what is just, but 
what is expedient. What are unjust causes, may be known in somo 
measure from the just causes which we have been explaining : the 
straight line is the index of what is oblique. But for the sake of 
perspicuity we shall make some general remarks. 

y. 1 That fear from a neighbouring power is not a sufficient 
cause, we have said above. For, that defense may be just, it must 
be necessary ; and it cannot be this, except there be clear evidence, 

* Ab Barbeyrac shews, Grotios has put together two phrases of Tacitus: 
Pericularum avidi, Hist, iii. 41, and v. 19 ; and Non tarn pramiis periculurum, 
quam ipns periculis l€eius, Hist. ii. 86. 

Chap. XXH.] OP UNJUST CAUSES OP WAR. 267 

not only of the power, but of the animus of the party ; and such 
evidence as amounts to moral certainty. 

2 Hence we can by no means approre the opinion of those 
who hold it to be a just cause of war, if a neighbour, being prerented 
therefrom by no pact, establish a fortress on his own ground, or 
any other munition of war, which may possibly at some time be mis- 
chierous to us. For the proper remedies against such fears are 
opposing munitions, and the like, not force of arms. Therefore 
unjust were the wars of the Romans against Philip of Macedon, and 
of Lysinuu^us against Demetrius, except there were some other 
reason. I am much pleased with what Tacitus says of the Chauci : 
The most fwbU people among the Oermanst and a people that prefers 
to secure its greatness hy its justice ; not greedy^ not passionate, but 
quiet and retired. They provoke no wars, they practise no robbery 
or plunder of their neighbours ; and the great proof of their virtue and 
their strength is, that it is not by wrong-doing that they preserve their 
superiority. Yet they can promptly use arms, and if need be, raise 
armies : they are numerotis in infantry^and cavalry, and retain their 
reputation even in inaction. 

VL Nor does utility generate a right, in the way in which 
necessity does. 

YII. Thus when there is no want of opportunity of marriage, 
any marriage denied cannot supply a cause for war ; though Hercules 
formerly took occasion to make war on Eurytus on such grounds, 
and Darius on the Scythians. 

Yin. Neither is the desire of migrating from one place to ano- 
ther a just ground of war; that a nation leaving marshes and deserts, 
may become possessed of a more fertile soil ; which Tacitus mentions 
as the reason of making war among the old Germans. 

IX. It is no less unjust to claim lands on the ground of haying 
discorered them, when they are occupied by another, even though the 
possessors be bad men, with wrong notions of God, and dull intellects. 
For those lands only can be discovered which belong to nobody. 

X. 1 Nor is there required for ownership [to exclude such claim] 
either moral yirtue, or religion, or perfection of intellect: except 
that this may, it would seem, be defended; that if there be any 
people altogether destitute of the use of reason, such may not have 
ownership, but out of charity those things ought to be given them 
only which are necessary to life. For what we have said above, con- 
cerning the sustentation of ownership, which the law of nations per- 
forms for infants, and persons out of their mind, pertains to those 
peoples with whom others have an intercourse of pacts ; and if there 
be any people altogether irrational, they are not such : but I much 
doubt (ho fact. 

2 Therefore it was unjust on the part of the Greeks to say, that 
the Barbarians were their natural enemies, merely on account of the 
diversity of manners, or because they seemed to be inferior in Intel- 

268 OF UNJUST CAUSES OF WAR. [Book U. 

lect How iu dominion may be taken away from a people on acoonnt 
of graye offensesy impugning nature or human society, is another 
question, and must soon be treated by us, when we speak of the right 
of punishing. 

XL Nor again can we say of the liberty, either of individuals, or 
of cities, or states, (that is, auUmomy or self-government,) that it is 
either by natural law, and at all times, an attribute of all, or that in 
the cases in which it is, it ftimishes just ground for war. For when 
we say that liberty by nature belongs to men or to peoples, we are to 
understand that, of a natural right preceding all human pacts ; and of 
liberty by negation of slavery, not of liberty in opposition to slavery ; 
so that man is not a slave by nature, but he is not by nature a crea- 
ture that cannot be a slave. For in this latter sense, no one is 
free. And to this view pertains what is said by Albutius, that No 
one i$ bom free, and no one is bom a slave; these names came 
afterwards to belong to men by their fortune. So Aristotle says, 
that it is a result of law that one man is free, another a slave. 
Therefore they who have, by a legitimate course, come into slavery, 
either personal or civil, ought to be content with their condition; as 
St Paul teaches, Art thou called being a servant f Care not for it, 
1 Cor. vii. 21. 

Xn. Nor is it less unjust to wish to subjugate any by arms, as 
being worthy to be slaves, or as philosophers sometimes speak, natu- 
rally slaves. For even if there be anything which is fit for me, it 
does not follow that any one has a right to impose it on me by 
force. For those who have the use of reason, ought to have a free 
election left them of what is useful to them and what is not, except 
another have a right over them. The case is plainly different with 
infants, the government of whom, since they themselves have not the 
right of independent action and self-direction, nature gives to those 
who have a claim to it, and can exorcise it. 

XIII. 1 It would hardly be necessary to notice that the title 
given by some to the Ronuui Emperor is absurd, as if he had the right 
of ruling oyer the most remote and hitherto unknown peoples ; ex- 
cept Bartolus, who was long held the prince of jurists, had ventured 
to pronounce every one a heretic who denies it ; namely, because ho 
sometimes calls himself the Lord of the World ; and also, because in 
scripture, the empire is called the empire of the whole inhabited earth, 
an oecumenical empire, according to the Greek word ; Romania in some 
later writers. And so Petronius speaks of the victor Roman having 
orbem totum^ the whole globe. And many the like things are said, when 
we use comprehensive, or excessive, or emphatic expressions : as when in 
the same scripture, Judsea is called the inJiahited earth : in which sense 
we are to understand the saying of the old Jews, that Jerusalem is in 
the middle of the earth, that is, in the midst of Judsea ; as Delphi was 
called the navel of the world. Nor should any one be moved by the 
argument of Dante, in which he trios to prove that such a right be- 

Chap. XXn.] OP UNJUST CAUSES OP WAB. 269 

longs to the emperor, because it is for the adrantage of the human 
race. Por the adrantages which he adduces are outbalanced by disad- 
yantages. Por as a ship may be so large that it cannot be steered, so 
the number of subjects and the distance of places may be so great 
that they cannot subsist imder one government. 

2 But eren if we grant that such a government is expedient, there 
docs not follow any right of empire, for that can arise only from con- 
sent or from punishment. The Roman emperor has not now any 
right over even all those places which were formerly under the Roman 
people ; for many of those, as they were won by war, so have they 
been lost by war ; some have passed by compacts, and some by dere- 
liction, under the authority of other nations or kings. Again, some 
cities, formerly entirely subject, have since become subject in part 
only, or have become merely federate parts of the empire. For all 
these ways either of losing, or of changing the rights of rulers, aro 
valid against the Roman Emperor, as against any other party. 

XIV. 1 There have also been persons who have asserted the right 
of the Church, even over the peoples who occupy the hitherto unknown 
parts of the earth. And yet St Paul plainly says, that he does not 
judge those who are outside the boundary of Christianity. What have 
I to do to judge them thoU are without f 1 Cor. v. 12. And the right of 
judging which pertained to the Apostles, though in its own way it 
pertained to the things of earth, yet was, as I may say, of a heavenly 
not of an earthly character; it was to be exercised, not by arms or by 
scourges, but by the word of God generally set forth, and adapted to 
peculiar circumstances ; by the exhibition or denial of the seals of 
di^e grace [communion and excommunication, G.] according to each 
one's case : and in short, by a mode of punishment not natural, but 
super-natural, and proceeding from God ; as appeared in the cases of 
Ananias, Elymas, Hymenseus, and others. 

2 Christ himself, from whom all Ecclesiastical power flowed, and 
whose life is proposed as the pattern of the Church, so far as it is the 
Church of Christ, said that his kingdom was not of this world ; that is, of 
the same nature as other kingdoms ; adding, that if it had been, it 
would, like other kingdoms, have been defended by its fighting men. 
But no : if he had aaked for legions, they would have been legions of 
angels. And what he did on the part of his authority, he did, not by 
human, but by divine agency, even when he drove the money-changers 
out of the temple. Por the scourge which he then used was a sign, 
not an instrument, of divine wrath ; as in other cases, the oil and the 
spittle was not the remedy, but the sign of cure. And to this pur- 
pose Augustine speaks on that passage of St John. 

3 A bishop is required by St Paul, among other things, not to be 
a striker. So Chrysostom says, that to rule by force, that is human 
force, belongs to kings, not to bishops. And elsewhere, such power is 
not given to us that we can constrain men from offending by the 

270 OP UNJUST CAUSES OP WAR. [BookIL 

authority of our judgments, (such, that is,) as include a right ofezecu* 
iton of the judgment by the hands of kings, or soldiers, or by the 
depriral of any human right : and he says also, that a bishop dis- 
charges his office, not hy coercing^ but by pertuading. Prom this it 
appears sufficiently, that bishops, as such, have no right of ruling men 
in a human manner. So Jerome, comparing a king and a bishop, 
says, that the king rtde$ untuiUing subjects, the bishop^ willing ones, 

4 Whether Christian kings may make war on kings who reject 
Christianity, on that ground, as a punishment, we hare sufficiently dis- 
cussed above. 

XV. I will also give a warning not superfluous, but because, com- 
paring old speculations with new, I foresee a groat evil if it be not 
averted. A just cause of war cannot be derived from any explanation 
of the divine prophecies. For besides that unfulfilled prophecies can 
hardly be interpreted with certainty without the spirit of prophecy, 
even if the events are certain, we may bo wrong as to the time. And 
lastly, the prediction, except there be an absolute conunand of God, 
gives no right, since the events which are predicted by God are often 
brought to pass by wicked men or wicked actions. 

XVI. This also must be observed ; that if any one has a claim 
upon him, which is not a claim of justice, but of some other vir- 
tue, as liberality, kindness, mercy, charity; as this claim cannot be 
prosecuted in a court of justice, so also it cannot be asserted by arms. 
For neither the one nor the other of these can be resorted to, in 
order that what is demanded may be done for a moral reason: it is 
requisite besides, that there be in us some right to that very thing : 
which right sometimes divine and human laws give with respect to 
the claims which rest upon other virtues [than justice]; and when this 
happens, then there is introduced a new reason of obligation, and the 
matter belongs to justice. When that is wanting, the war is unjust 
for that reason : as was, for instance, the war of the Romans against 
the king of Cyprus, because he was ungrateful. For he who has 
bestowed a benefit has no right to require a return: if he had, it 
would be a contract, not a benefit. 

XVn. 1 We must remark also that this often happens ; that there 
is a just cause really existing for the war, but that the putting it in 
action becomes vicious from the intention of the agent : either because 
something else, not in itself unlawful, incites him more than the right, 
as for instance, the desire of honour, or some advantage, public or 
private, which is expected from the war, distinct from the justificatory 
cause; or because there is introduced some affection plainly unlaw- 
ful, as a pleasure in doing mischief to another without respect of good. 
So Aristides says that the Phoceans were deservedly destroyed ; but 
that Philip was not in the right when he destroyed them, as not 
being really in earnest in defense of religion, but seeking to increase 
his empire. 

Chap. XXU.] OP UNJUST CAUSES OF WAR. 271 

2 An eminent and ancient cause of war, says Sallust, is a deep^ 
seated desire of empire and of wealth. So Tacitus, Oold and riches, a 
principal- cause of war. And so in Seneca's tragedy of the Hippolytus, 
And so Augustine. 

3 But these causes, in which a justifying cause of the war is not 
wantiif^, do indeed imply a fault in him who makes the war; but 
yet the war itself is not thereby unjust : and, therefore, for such a 
war, no restitution is due. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Of Doubtful Causes of War. 

Sect. I. 

Whence are Doubts 9 

VII. 

hV ar avoided by Conference : 

11. 

Nothing to be done against 

VIII. 

Or Arbitration : 

Conscience. 

IX. 

Or Lot. 

III. 

Judgment drawn by argu^ 

X. 

Single Combat. 

ments ; 

XI. 

Possession an adtraniage. 

IV. 

Or authorilff. 

XII. 

In doubt, divide the thing. 

V. 

In doubts, the safe side to 

XIII. 

May war be just, on both 

be taken. 

sidesf 

VI. 

Thai is, Peace, 

L TTTHAT Aristotle wrote is most true, that certainty is not to be 
Y Y found in morals as it is in mathematics : of which the reason 
is ihisy that mathematics separate the forms of things altogether from 
matter: and that the forms are of such a nature that there is 
nothing intermediate between two of them; as between a straight 
line and a curve there is no medium. But in moral nuttters, circum- 
stances, even the least, often yary the nuttter ; and the forms that are 
treated have often intermediate degrees, of such latitude that the case 
sometimes approaches nearer to the one extreme, sometimes to the 
other. Thus between that which ought to bo done, and that which 
is entirely unlawful, there is a medium which is allowable, nearer 
sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other : whence an ambi- 
guity often takes place, like twilight between day and night, or cold 
water gradually heated. And this is what Aristotle says, that it is 
often difficult to decide which of two things is to be preferred : and 
BO AndronicuB Rhodius. 

II. 1 In the first place, this is certfun [as a point of morality], 
that if an3rthing be just in itself, yet if it be done by him who, haying 
deliberately weighed, thinks it unjust, the act is yicious : as St Paul 
says, that whatsooyer is not of faith is sin ; in which place faith signi- 
fies the judgment of the mind concerning the act For God has giyen 
us the power of judging, as the guide of human actions ; and if this 
be despised, the mind is brutified. 

2 It often happens that the judgment does not pronounce a cer- 
tain decision, but hesitates : and if this hesitation cannot be cleared 
off by an attentiye consideration, Cicero's rule must be followed; 
those adyise well who direct you not to do anything of which you 
doubt whether it is just or unjust: and so the Hebrew masters say. 
Abstain from doubtful things. But this does not apply in cases where 
we absolutely must do one of two things: in that case we must choose 
the part that seems least unjust. For in all cases in which the elec- 

Chap. XXIIL] OF DOUBTFUL CAUSES OF WAR. 273 

lion cannot be aToidod, the less unjust assumes the character of 
good. The least of evils is to be chosen. So Aristotle, Cicero, Quin- 
tilian. 

III. But in most cases, in dubious matters, the mind after somo 
examination, does not remain undecided, but is drawn this way or that, 
by arguments derived from the subject, or by the opinion which it 
has of other men who deliver their sentiments on the subject. For 
what Hesiod says is true, that the best thing is to bo wise one's self, 
the next best, to be guided by others. Arguments from the subject 
are taken from the causes, effects, and other adjuncts of it. 

IV. 1 But to know them well, a certain practice and skill is neces« 
sary: and those who have not this, in order rightly to frame their 
active judgment, are bound to listen to the counsels of wise men. For 
the probable opinion, as Aristotle says, is that which is held by all, 
or by the greater part, or the most eminent And this is the way of 
judging which kings mostly use, who have not leisure to peruse or to 
weigh the technical descriptions of such matters. TJie king is wise hy 
the multitude of wise counsellors^ as an old proverb says*. So Aris- 
tides. And so the ancient Romans undertook wars only after they 
had consulted the College of Feeiales, instituted for that purpose, and 
the Christian Emperors rarely without consulting the bishops ; that if 
there were any impediment which religion interposed, they might be 
warned thereof. 

V. 1 It may happen, in many controversies, that probable argu- 
ments are adduced on both sides, cither intrinsic to the subject, or 
derived ^m the authority of others. When that happens, if the things 
in question are of moderate importance, the choice, it would seem, is 
free from blame, on whichever side it falls. But if there is question 
of a matter of great moment, as of a capital punishment, then, on 
account of the great difference between the two sides of the choice, 
the safer part is to be preferred. It is better to acquit a guilty man 
than to condemn an innocent. 

2 The writer of the Problems which go under the name of Aris- 
totle's, says this : and adds the reason just given. So Antipho. 

VI. War is a very weighty matter, being a thing from which 
great calamities fall upon the innocent. Therefore when opinions 
are balanced, peace must have the preference. So Silius Italicus 
praises Fabius. 

But there are three ways in which controversies may be prevented 
from breaking out into war. 

VII. 1 The first is. Conference. There are two ways of settling 
disputed questions, says Cicero ; one by discussion, the other by force : 
and tJie first being tJie character of man, the second of brutes, we are to 
have recourse to the latter, only if the former fails. So Terence, Apol- 
lonius Rhodius, Euripides in several places; and Plueneas in Livy 

" Quoted by Aulas Gellios, Nod. Attic, xiii. 18. J. B. 

274 OF DOUBTFUL CAUSES OF WAR. [Book U. 

goes further ; saying, In order to avoid war we are to yield many things 
which cannot be gained by war. And Mardoniua in Herodotus blames the 
Greeks for not trying negociation before war, being of the same lan- 
guage. 

2 Coriolanus in Dionysius says, If a man asks only for his oum, 
and betakes himself to war only when Tie cannot get thcU, aU aUow thai 
it is just. And in the same writer, Tullus says, that what cannot be 
settled by discussion must be decided by arms. So the Yologeses in 
Tacitus : and so king Theodoric. 

VIII. 1 Another way is Compromise, or Arbitration, between parties 
who have no common judge. As Thucydides says, It is wicked to pro- 
ceed against him as a wrong doer, who is ready to refer the question to 
an arbitrator. So Adrastus and Amphiaraus referred the question con- 
cerning the kingdom of Argos to the judgment of Eriphyle. So to decide 
the question concerning Salamis between the Athenians and the Me- 
gareans, fire Lacodoemonian judges were chosen. So the Corcyreana 
signify to the Corinthians that they are ready to discuss their respeo- 
Hyq claims before the cities of Peloponnesus which they might agree 
to appoint. And Aristides praises Pericles, because to avoid war, he 
was willing to appoint arbiters. And so ^schines praises Philip for 
being willing to submit his controversies with the Athenians to any city 
equally just to both parties. 

2 So the Ardeates and the Aretians in old time, and the Neapoli- 
tans and the Nolans later, referred their controversies to the decision 
of the Roman people. And the Samnites in controversy with the Ro- 
mans appeal to common friends. So do the Carthaginians in their con- 
troversies with Masinissa to avoid war : and the Romans themselves 
concerning their controversy with the Samnites, refer to their common 
allies. Philip of Macedon in his controversy with the Greeks, says 
that he will take the judgment of Peoples who are at peace with 
both. At the request of the Parthians and Armenians, Pompey gave 
arbiters to settle their boundaries. Plutarch says that this was tho 
main office of the Roman Feciales, not to allow recourse to be had to 
arms till all hope of a peaceable decision was gone. And Strabo says 
of the Druids of the Gauls, that formerly they were arbiters between 
hostile parties, and often made them part without fighting, who were 
drawn up in warlike array against each other. The same writer testi- 
fies that the priests in Iberia had the same office. 

3 But especially are Christian kings and states bound to try this 
way of avoiding war. For if, in order to avoid being subject to the 
judgments of persons who were not of the true religion, certain arbiters 
were appointed both by the Jews and by the Christians, and the practice 
is commanded by Paul ; how much more is this to be done, in order 
to avoid a much greater inconvenience, namely, war. So in one place 
Tertullian argues that a Christian must not go as a soldier, since he 
may not even go to law ; which latter, however, as we have already 
shewn, is to bo takon with a certain limitation* 

Chap. XXHI.] OF DOUBTFUL CAUSES OF WAE. 275 

4 And both for this reason and for others, it would bo useful, and 
indeed it is almost necessary, that certain Congresses of Christian Powers 
should be held, in which the controyersies which arise among some of 
them may be decided by others who are not interested ; and in which 
measures may bo taken to compel the parties to accept peace on equi- 
table terms. This was the office of the Druids of old among the 
Gauls, as Diodorus and Strabo tell us : and we read that the Frank- 
ish kings left to their nobles the judgment of questions concerning 
the division of the kingdom. 

IX. The third way is by Lot ; which method is commended for 
this purpose by Dio Chrysostom, and much earlier by Solomon, 
ProY. XTiii. 18. [The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between 
the mighty.^ 

X. 1 Closely related to the practice of casting Lots, is tho prac- 
tice of Single Combat : of which the use docs not appear to dcsenro 
altogether to be repudiated, if two persons whoso controyersies would 
otherwise inyolye two peoples in great evils are prepared to decide 
tho question by arms, as formerly Hylius and Echenms fought for 
Peloponnesus ; Hyperochus and Phcmius for the region on the Ina- 
chus ; Pynechma the Etolian and Degmcnus the Ep(>an for Elis ; Cor- 
bis and Orsua for Ibas. For we may grant that if that bo not dono 
by the parties without blame on their part, yet that it may bo 
accepted by the states in question as tho lesser evil. So in Liyy 
Metius says to Tullus, Let us take a course by which we may decide with" 
out great bloodshed in each people which shall govern the other. Strabo 
says that this was an ancient custom of the Greeks, and in Virgil, 
Eneas says it was right that the question between him and Tumus 
should be so decided. 

2 Among the other customs of the Franks, this is especially the 
object of Agathias's praibo. He says that if their kings have any 
quarrel, the armies on each side are assembled and brought face to 
face, and then the kings are told to fight the matter out between 
themsclyeSy and tho two armies lay down their arms and mix like 
friends. 

XI. But though in a doubtful case, both parties are bound to 
seek for conditions of compromise by which war may be avoided, the 
party which makes a claim is more bound than tho party which lb in 
possession. For that in parity of case, possession is a presumption, to 
be accepted as fayourable, is a matter which agrees not only with 
civil but with natural law : of which we have given the reason from 
tho Problems ascribed to Aristotle, [cap. v. § 12.] And we may hero 
add, that he who knows himself to have a good cause, but has not 
sufficient documents to conyinco the possessor of tho injustice of his 
possession, cannot lawfully mako war ; because ho has not tho right 
of compelling tho other to give up possession. 

T 2 

276 OP DOUBTFUL CAUSES OP WAR. [Book H. 

Xir. But when the right is ambiguous, and ndther is in posses- 
sion, or each is equally so, then if one of the parties refuse to diyido 
the matter in question, he is to be reckoned unjust. 

XIII. 1 From what we hare said, we may decide the question 
moTod by many writers, whether a war, regarded in reference to those 
who are the principal moTors of it, can be just on both sides. We 
must distinguish yarious acceptations of the word jtut, A thing is 
called just from its cause, or from its effect. And agiun, from its 
cause, cither in the special acceptation of justice, or in that general 
acceptation in which all rectitude or lightness comes under that 
name. Again, the special acceptation is divided into that which be- 
longs to the act itself, and that which belongs to the agent ; of which 
the former may be called positiye, the latter negatiye. For the agent 
is sometimes said to act justly, when he does not act unjustly, although 
what he does be not just ; as Aristotle rightly distinguishes, to act 
unjustly, and to do an unjtut thing. 

2 In the special acceptance of justice, as bearing upon the thing 
itself, a war cannot be just on both sides, as a lawsuit cannot. Because 
a moral claim to two contrary things, to act and to preyent the action, 
by the nature of the subject, cannot exist. But it may be that nei- 
ther of the belligerent parties act unjustly : for no one acts unjustly 
except he who knows that he is doing an unjust thing : and many 
persons do not know this when it is so. Thus persons may carry 
on a lawsuit justly, that is, bona fide on both sides. For many points 
both of law, and of the facts from which the law arise, escape the 
notice of the parties concerned. 

3 In a general acceptation, that is called just which is free from 
all fault of the agent. Many things are done without right, or done 
without fault, on account of ineyitable ignorance ; of which we haye an 
example in those who do not observe the law, being ignorant of it 
without any fault of theirs, though it has been promulgated, and a 
sufficent time for their becoming acquainted with it has elapsed. So 
in litigation it may happen that both parties are free not only from 
injustice, but from all other yiccs ; especially when both parties, or at 
least one, litigates not on his own account, but on that of another ; as 
for instance, in consequence of the office of guardian or trustee, whose 
business it is not to desert a right which is only doubtful. So Aris- 
totle says that in a doubtful question of law, neither side is bad ; and 
Quintilian, that there are cases in which a good man may speak 
as an advocate on either side. Aristotle says too, that there are 
two senses in which we may say the judge judges rightly ; the one, 
in which he judges as he ought according to the case, not making 
allowance for ignorance; the other, in which he judges sincerely 
OS ho thinks. To do this, as he says in another place, is not to judge 
unjustly. 

4 But in war it cannot easily happen that there is not, on one side 

Chap. XXm.] OF DOUBTFUL CAUSES OF WAR. 277 

at least temerity and a lack of charity, the matter being so grave, that 
we ought not to be content with probabilities, but should require evi- 
dent causes. 

6 If we take ju»t as to some legal effects, it is certain that in 
this sense a war may be just on both sides ; as will appear by what 
wo shall have to say hereafter of a penal public war. So a sentence of 
a judge, though given not according to law, and possession without right, 
have certain legal effects. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Waminffs not to go to War rashly, even for just causes. 

Sect. I. Rights often to be remitted, VIT. Punishments not to be de- 
ll. Especially the Bight to Pu- manded but by one much the 

nishment, stronger. 

III. Particularly by a king of* VIII. War not to be undertaken 

fended against. except from Necessity : 

lY. War to be avoided for sub- IX. Or great cause trith great 

jects^ sake. opportunity. 

V. Rules of Prudence. X. The evils of War. 

VI. Choice of Liberty or Peace. 

I. I 4 LTHOUGH it might seem that we who profess to write about 
XJL the Rights of War, that is, its justice, have nothing to do 
with the consideration of what other virtues besides justice commend or 
recommend; yet we must try to obriate the error which would be com- 
mitted if any one were to think that when the right was once esta- 
blished, it is forthwith either proper that war should be undertaken, 
or even that it is always lawful to undertake it. For on the contrary, 
it is mostly more right and more pious to give up one's rights. For 
as we have already said, we may even sacrifice our life in order to 
further, as much as is in us, the life and eternal salvation of another. 
And this is especially suitable to a Christian's character ; who in doing 
this, imitates the perfect example of Christ, who was willing to die for 
us when we were yet ungodly and hostile. Which is a reason why 
we should not prosecute our rights or our dues to the inconvenience 
of others, to so great an extent as war occasions. 

2 That war is not to be undertaken for every such cause, both 
Aristotle and Polybius teach us. Hercules is not praised* by the 
ancients for that he took away the arms of Laomedon and Augias, 
because they did not pay him for his labour. Dio Pruss&ensis says 
that the question is to be asked, not only whether an injury has been 
received from those with whom we think of going to war, but also at 
what amount it is to be estimated. 

II. 1 To pass over offenses without punishment, is a course to 
which many reasons exhort us. See how many things parents overlook 
in children : on which Cicero in Dio Cassius treats ; so Seneca ; and 
Phineus in Diodorus ; and Andronicus Rhodius. 

2 Now whoever undertakes to punish another, assumes in a certain 
degree the character of a governor, that is, of a parent ; as Augustine 
says to Count Marcellinus, Christian judge, fulfil the office of a pious 
parent. The Emperor Julian praises a speech of Pittacus; who 

* But neither is he blamed, at least in the passage of Pansaniat quoted. J. B. 

Chap. XXIV.] WARNINGS NOT TO GO TO WAR, &c. 279 

prefers pardon to punishment. So Libanius says, that ho who wishes 
to be like God, rejoices more in forgivencES than in punishing. 

3 Sometimes the circumstances of the case are such, that to ab- 
stain from exercising one's right is not only laudable, but a duty; taking 
account of the kindness which we owe even to enemies, cither con- 
sidered in itself, or in the way in which the holy law of the Gospel 
requires it of us. And thus, wo have said that tlicre are some cases 
in which, eyen when we are attacked, we ought to prefer the salration 
of the assailant, even to our own life, because wo know him to be 
either necessary or extremely useful to the general interests of hu- 
manity. If Christ enjoins that some things are to be given up only 
to avoid strife, we must still more believe that he would hare us giro 
up greater things rather than go to war, since war is so much more 
hurtful than mere strife. 

4 So Ambrose says, that /or a good man to relax somewhat of his 
rights f is not only a point of liberality ^ hut often of convenience. So 
Aristides persuades cities to pardon and concede, if it be any moderate 
matter ; adding the reason, that even in private persons this is laudable. 
So Xenophon, and Apollonius in Philostratus. 

in. 1 With regard to punishments, it is, in the first place, our 
duty, if not as men, at least as Christians, to forgive willingly and 
freely offenses against us, as God in Christ forgives our offenses. 
Eph. It. 32. So Joscphus. 

2 So Seneca characterizes a prince, that he forgives his own injuries 
more easily than those of others; so Quintilian ; and Cicero of 
Caesar, that he forgot nothing but injuries. So Livia in her address 
to Augustus in Dio : Antoninus the philosopher : Ambrose to Theodo- 
sius ; Themistius in praise of the same Theodosius. 

3 Aristotle makes it a character of the magnanimous man, not to 
remember evil done to him ; which Cicero copies. The Scripture gives 
us great examples of this virtue in Moses and David. [See.] This 
holds especially when we are ourselves conscious of some wrong ; or 
when the wrong done us proceeds from some human and excusable 
infirmity; or when it is evident that ho who has done the wrong is 
penitent* So Cicero, and Seneca. And so fur, of the causes of ab- 
staining from war, which arise from the kindness which wc either owe 
to enemies, or rightly bestow upon them. 

IV. 1 Often also it is a duty which we owe to ourselves, and 
those who depend upon us, not to recur to arms. Plutarch, in the 
life of Numa, says that when the Fecialcs had decided that war might 
be undertaken justly, ho consulted the Senate whether it was advan- 
tageous to enter upon it. In one of Christ's parables, we are told that 
when a king, going to make war, finds that his forces are inferior to 
those of his enemy, he desires conditions of peace. Luke xiv. 31. 

2 So the Tusculans, bearing everything and refusing nothing, 
obtained, by their merit, peace from the Romans. So Tacitus says of 
tho Eduans, that a cause of war against them was sought in rain, for 

280 WARNINGS NOT TO GO TO WAE RASHLY, [Book IL 

thoy did more than was demanded of them. So queen Amalasuntha 
told the ambassadors of Justinian that she would not contend with 
blm in arms. 

3 Thero may be also a moderation exercised in such cases, as 
Strabo relates of Syrmus king of the Triballi, who forbad Alexander 
of Maccdon to enter the island of Peuce, and at tlie same time sent 
presents to him; shewing that what he did was done from a rea- 
sonable fear of the consequences, not from disliko or contempt of 
him. What Euripides said of the Greek cities, you may apply to 
any other parties ; that if men could foresee the evils which war pro- 
duces to themselves, they would avoid such a course. So Livy, and 
Thucydides. 

V. 1 Those who deliberate in such cases, deliberate partly 
concerning tho ends, not the ultimate, but the intermediate ones, 
and partly, concerning tho means which lead to the ends. The end 
is always somo good, or at least tho avoidance of evil, which may 
stand in the place of good. The means which lead to ends are not 
sought on their own account, but as they lead to the end. There- 
fore in our deliberations we must compare ends with one another, 
and the efficacy of tho means to produce the end: as Aristotle says 
of the motions of animals. 

Thero are three rules for such compansons. 

2 Tho first rule is, if the thing in question seems, in moral esti- 
mation, to have an efficacy both for good and for evil; it is to be 
chosen only if thero is more of good in the good consequences than 
of evil in tho evil. So Aristides and Andronicus Rhodius. 

3 The second rulo is, if tho good and tho evil which may pro- 
ceed from the thing bo equal ; it is to be chosen if the efficacy bo 
greater for the good than for the evil. 

The third rule is, if the good and tho evil be unequal, and tho 
efficacy to tho one and the other also unequal ; the thing is to bo 
chosen, if the efficacy to good compared with the efficacy to evil 
bo greater than the evil is compared with the good ; or if tho good 
compared with the evil be greater than tho efficacy of tho moans for 
evil compared with its efficacy for good. 

4 Wo havo stated this somewhat formally. Cicero comes to 
the same result by a plainer way, when he says, that we aro to 
avoid incurring danger without cause, than which nothing can bo 
more foolish ; wherefore, in incurring dangers, we aro to imitate the 
practice of physicians, who, when men have a slight disease, cure 
them by slight means ; but in more grave diseases, are compelled to 
apply dangerous and doubtful remedies. Whence, he says, tho wise 
man must watch tho occasion, and tho more so, if you gain moro 
good by the plain way than you can avoid evil by the doubtful way. 

5 So Cicero in an Epistlo to Atticus, Dio Prussensis, Aristides. 
VI. 1 Let us take an example from a deliberation which, as 

Tacitus relates, was held among tho cities of Gaul, whetlier theif would 

Chap. XXIV.] EVEN FOR JUST CAUSES. 281 

try for Liberty or for Peace: where, by Liberty, wo arc to understand 
Civil Liberty, that is, the right of gOYcrning themselves : which right 
is plenary in a popular state, limited in an aristocracy, especially in 
one in which no one of the citizens is excluded from honours ; and 
by Peace, wo are to understand such a one as is the altematlTO of 
on internecine war, or as Cicero says, quoting Greek, where the 
question is about endangering the whole fortunes of the State ; where 
nothing less than the destruction of the whole people is portended ; 
as was the condition of Jerusalem besieged by Titus. In such a 
case, what Cato would hare said, who chose to die rather than submit 
to the rule of one man, every ono knows : as Lucan says in that 
case, // is an easy exercite of virtue to escape slavery by our own hand; 
and many other things in the same strain. 

2 But right reason dictates another course; namely, that life, 
which is the foundation of all temporal and the occasion of eternal 
good, is of more value than liberty ; whether you take the alternative 
in a single man or in a people. And so God himself speaks of it as 
a benefit, that he does not destroy men, but delivers them into 
slavery ; 2 Chron. viii. 7, 8, [of the remnant of the Canaanites spared 
by Solomon.] And In another place he, by the Prophet, ])cr8uadc8 
the Jews to submit to servitude under the Babylonians, that they 
may not die of famine and pestilence, Jer. xxvii. 11. And therefore 
the act of the Saguntines [who destroyed themselves in their city 
ratlier than yield it], though praised by the ancients, is not to be 
praised by us ; nor the courses which lead to it. 

3 For the destruction of a people, in questions of this kind, is 
to be held as the greatest of evils. Cicero puts this as an example 
of necessity, that it was necessary for the Casilinenscs to surrender to 
Annibal ; although they had the alternative of perishing by hunger. 
Wo hare this judgment of Diodorus, concerning the Thebans of the 
time of Alexander of Macedon, that they were more bravo than 
prudent, in bringing destruction upon their country. 

4 Concerning Cato, of whom we have spoken, and Scipio, who 
after the victory of Pharsalia would not yield to Ctcsar, we have 
Plutarch's judgment, that they were to be blamed for having caused 
the destruction of many brave and excellent men in Egypt, for no 
valuable purpose. 

6 What I have said of liberty, I would have understood also of 
other desirable objects, if the expectation of a greater opposite evil 
be more just, or be equal. As Aristides said, men are accustomed to 
save the ship by throwing overboard, not the passengers, but the cargo. 

VII. Again, in exacting punishment, that is especially to be 
observed ; that we are never on such ground to engage in war with 
ono who is as strong as ourselves. For as a civil judge ought to bo 
much more powerful than the criminal, so must he be who undertakes 
to punish crimes by arms. And not only does prudence and charity 
for those who arc dependent upon us require us to abstain from a 

282 WARNINGS NOT TO GO TO WAR RASHLY, [Book II. 

perilouB war, but often justice also, that is, rectorial justice ; which, 
from the very nature of goyemment, binds the superior to care for 
the inferiors, no loss than the inferiors to obey the superior. . From 
which it follows, as theologians have observed, that a king who under- 
takes wars for light causes, or for the purpose of exacting punish- 
ments which are not necessary, and which bring great danger with 
them, is bound to his subjects for reparation of the loss thence 
arising to them ; for if he do no injury to the enemy, he does one to 
his own subjects, when, for such causes, he implicates them in so great 
evils. As Livy says, war is just, when it is necessary ; their arms are 
pious, who have no hope left except in arms. This is what Ovid 

wishes: 

No arms be borne lave those which put down arms. 

Ylll. Thus the cases are rare, in which war either may not or 
ought not to be avoided ; in cases only when, as Floms speaks, the 
enforcement of rights is worse than arms. Seneca says. We may 
run into danger, when %ve have cu much to fear if we sit still : so Axis- 
tides. This Tacitus puts, by saying that A mieerahle peace is well 
changed for war ; where, as he also says, Liberty may crown the attempt^ 
and defeat will leave them no worse. So Livy : but not when the pre- 
tence is as Cicero describes it ; If you are conquered you are pro* 
scribed ; if you are victorious you are a slave. 

IX. Then only is the time for war, when we have right on our 
side, and, what is of the greatest consequence, strength also. This is 
what Augustus said, that war was not to bo undertaken except when 
there could be shewn more hope of gain than fear of loss. What 
Scipio Africanus and Emilius Paulus said of a battle, may be ap- 
plied to war in general ; that We ought never to fight exc^t there were 
either the greatest necessity or the greatest occasion. And this is espe- 
cially true, when there is a hope that the matter may be brought to 
an issue merely by terror and by the reputation of strength, with 
little or no danger. Pliny says. He gained the most brilliant kind of 
victory, conquering by terror, 

X. 1 War, says Plutarch, is a dire business, and brings with it 
an accumulation of injuries and cruelty. And Augustine says wisely, 
that this being so, the wise man will not bo satisfied merely if the 
war is just ; he will grieve that there should be a necessity for just 
wars ; since, except they were just, he would not go to war ; and in 
this very way, there would be no wars. The iniquity of men may 
make wars just, and even necessary ; but this iniquity is a thing to 
be lamented, even if it did not lead to war. Whoever considers the 
evils of war, must confess the miseries of the case ; who suffers it 
without grief, is more miserable in his joy, because he has lost the 
sense of humanity. And in another place, The bad thiiik war a 
pleasure, the good, a necessity. So Maximus Tyrius. 

2 To which we must add what Seneca says, that man is not io 
use man prodigally. Philiscus admonished Alexander, that he might 

Chap. XXIV.] EVEN FOR JUST CAUSES. 283 

consult his glory, but on condition that he did not make himself a 
pestilence or a plague : meaning that he must not bring about the 
destruction of populations and the desolation of cities, such as a 
pestilence produces: while nothing more becomes a king, than to 
proTide for the safety of all, as peace does proyida 

3 When we consider that by the Hebrew law he who had slain 
a man, OTen without intending it, was obliged to fly ; that God for- 
bade his temple to be built by David, who is related to have carried 
on pious wars, because he had shed much blood ; that even among 
the ancient Greeks, those who had stained their hands with man- 
slaughter, eren without fault, had need of expiation ; how can any 
one fail to see, especially any Christian, what an unhappy and dis- 
astrous thing, and how strenuously to be avoided, is a war, even 
when not unjust? Certainly among the Greeks who professed 
Christianity, the Canon was long observed, by which those who had 
killed an enemy in any war whatever, were for a time excluded from 
participation in sacred offices. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Of the Causes of going to War for others. 

Sect. L War for subjects is jutt, VIL But may be HameUuly 

IL But notcUways to be under- omitted. 

taken. YIIL Is war just for the subjects 

IIL May we surrender an inno- of another f 

cent subject 9 IX. A mercenary soldiery with 

IT. War is just for confede- no distinction of cause is un- 

rates, equal or unequal, just, 

V. And for friends, X. And even to fight mainly for 

YI. And even for any persons ; pay or booty, 

L 1 TTTHEN we abore spoke of those who make war, it was said 
W and proTod by us that, by Natural Law, not only each 
person has an executire power to assert his own right, but also the 
rights of others. Whence it follows, that the causes which justify him 
whose interest is concerned, do also justify those who help him. 

2 The first and closest of such relations is, the care which we are 
bound to exercise for those who are under us, whether as members 
of a family or of our civil community ; for these are, in a way, a 
part of him who is at the head of the body, as we there said. Thus 
the Gibeonitcs having put themselves under the Jewish people, that 
people took up arms for them, with Joshua for their leader. Our 
ancestors^ says Cicero, often undertook war, because merchants and 
sailors belonging to them were treated with injury. And elsewhere. 
How many wars did our ancestors undertake because Roman citizens 
were injured^ their navigators detained, their merchants despoiled! The 
same Romans, though they woidd not take up arms for their allies, 
yet when the same peoples had become their subjects, thought it 
necessary to do so. The Campanians say to the Romans, Since you 
vnU not allow us to defend our property against force and injury by 
our own just force, you will certainly defend it by yours. Flonis, 
as ambassador of the Campanians, says that the league which existed 
before had become more sacred by the surrender of all his country- 
men. It was considered a point of good faith, says Livy, not to desert 
those who had surrendered to us. 

II. But yet it is not always, oven if the cause of a subject be 
just, that it obliges the rulers to enter upon a war ; but then only, if 
it can be done without the damage of all, or the greater part, of 
the subjects. For the office of the ruler is concerned more with the 
whole than with the parts ; and in proportion as the part is greater, 
it approaches nearer to the nature of the whole. 

III. 1 Therefore if one citizen, though innocent, bo demanded by 
the many, in order to be put to death, it is not doubtful that he may 

Ciup. XXV.] OF THE CAUSES OF GOING TO WAR, &c. 286 

bo gircn up*, if it appear that tho stato of which tho cloinand is 
made is much too weak to contend. Vasquius disputes against this 
opinion ; but if wo look, not so much at his words, as at his purport, 
he seems to como to this, that such a citizen is not lightly to bo 
deserted, when there is a hope that he may be defended. For he 
adduces the history of the Italic infantry, which deserted Pompcy 
when his cause was not yet desperate, being assured of their safety 
by Grosar ; which he blames, and deserredly. 

2 Whether an innocent citizen may be delivered into the hands 
of tho enemy to avoid the otherwise imminent destruction of the city, 
tho learned dispute, and tho dispute existed also in ancient times; 
as when Demosthenes narrated the clever fablo of tho wolves 
requiring tho sheep to give up their dogs for the sake of peace. 
That it js not lawful to do so, is maintained not by Vasquius only, 
but Sotus also, whose opinion Vasquius condemns as approaching to 
perfidy. Yet Sotus holds that such a citizen is bound to surrender 
himself to the enemy: this Vasquius denies, because tho nature of 
civil society which every one enters into for his own advantage, docs 
not require such a step. 

3 But from this, nothing follows but that a citizen is not bound 
to this step, by any law properly so called ; but it does not follow 
that charity allows him to do otherwise. For there are many duties, 
not of justice properly so called, but of good will, which it is not 
only laudable to perform, but which it is blameable to omit. And 
of such nature appears this to be, that each person should prefer tho 
life of an innocent multitude to his own. So Eunpides. And so 
Phocion exhorted Demosthenes and others that they should rather 
submit to death, after the example of tho daughters of Leos and the 
Hyacinthids, than bring an irreparable calamity on their country. 
Cicero, pleading for Soxtius, says, that if he wero in a ship attacked 
by pirates who demanded him in particular, and would destroy tho 
ship if ho wore not given up, ho would rather throw himself into 
the sea than bring upon all tho rest, not only certain death, but even 
extreme danger of death. And again, he says that a wise and good 
man will rather consult the safety of all than of any one in parti-* 
cular, even of himself. In Livy wo read: I have often heard of 
men who would die for their country, but I never heard of any who 
thought it reasonable that their country should perish for them. 

4 But, this being assumed, there remains this doubt, whether, 

* This is an example of the evil of laying down rales for cases of necessity. If 
a city under the terror of destruction from a crael enemy, should give up an inno« 
cent person to death, we might excuse them when the thing was done ; but we 
can hardly look upon it as a speculative opinion which they may morally hold 
beforehand, that men are right in doing so. Tho certainty of saving themselvea 
by such means must be doubtful, as Barbeyrac says : and no protest could bo 
itrong enough to express the horror which the Bulcrs of a State ought to feel 
towards such a step. W. W. 

286 OF THE CAUSES OF GOING [BooKn. 

what they are thus bound to do, they can be compelled to do. Sotna 
denies this, adducing the example of a rich man who is bound to gire 
alms to a needy man by the rule of mercy, but cannot be compelled 
to do so. But it is to be remarked that the relation of such parties 
is different from that of superiors compared with subjects. For an 
equal cannot compel an equal, except to that which he has a right to, 
speaking strictly. But a superior can compel him to other things also 
which any virtue prescribes ; because in the peculiar right of a supe- 
rior as superior, this is comprehended. Thus in a great scarcity of 
com, the citizens may be compelled to contribute to the common 
stock what each one has ; and thus, in this question before us, it seems 
to bo sound doctrine that the citizen may be compelled to do that 
which charity requires*. And thus Phocion, whom I have already 
mentioned, pointed out a very intimate friend of his, Nicocles by 
name, and said that matters were come to such a miserable condition 
that if Alexander demanded him, ho would be of opinion that he 
ought to be given up. 

lY. As parties whom we are bound to defend, next to our sub- 
jects, come our allies. This is comprehended in our engagement 
with them, whether they have put themselves under the authority 
and protection of others, or have contracted for mutual aid. He who 
does not repel an vnjwryfor an ally, if he can, is in the wrong as much 
as he who does the injury, says Ambrose. That such contracts are 
not to be extended to wars, where there is no just cause for the war, 
we have elsewhere said. And this is the reason why the Lacedsemo- 
nians, before they began their war with the Athenians, put the mat* 
ter to the judgment of all their allies ; as also the Romans did with 
regard to the Greeks, respecting the war with Nabis. We will further 
add, that even in such a case, the ally is not bound, if there be no 
hope of a good result. For such idliances are contracted, not for 
the sake of evil results, but of good. An ally however is to be 
defended even against another confederate, except there be some 
special stipulation to the contrary in some previous convention. 
Thus the Gorcyrcans, if their cause was good, might have received 
defensive aid from the Athenians, even against the Corinthians, who 
were their old allies. 

v. The third cause [in which wo may undertake war on account 
of others, subjects and allies being the first two cases,] is the cause 
of friends, to whom we havo not promised aid, but to whom it is in a 
manner due on the ground of friendship, if it can be given easily and 
without inconvenience. Thus Abraham took arms for Lot, his relative; 
the Romans commanded the Antiates not to exercise piracy against 

* It is quite extravagant to place the sacrifice of one*8 own life on a level with 
other offices of charity. As Grotius himself has jast said, (chap. xxiv. 6,) life is 
the foundation of all enjoyment in this world, and the occasion of all the happi- 
BeH of another : and it must be only under peculiar circumstances that a maa 
can diipose of these possessions, as if they resembled other possessions. W. 

Chap. XXV.] TO WAE FOR OTHERS. 287 

the Greeks, as being related to the Italians. The Romans too, often 
took up arms for their allies, not only when they were bound to do so 
by treaty, but also for their friends ; or threatened to take up arms in 
such cases. 

VI. The last and widest reason for taking up arms, is the con- 
nexion of men with men as such, which alone is often sufficient to 
induce them to girc their aid. Men are made for inuixMl help^ says 
Seneca, and the like ; so Euripides and Ambrose. 

VII. 1 Here the question is raised, whether man be bound to 
defend man, and people to defend people, from wrong. Plato thinks 
that ?ie ought to be punished who docs not repel force offered to 
another ; and this was also provided by the laws of the Egyptians. 
But, in the first place, if the danger be manifest, it is certain that he 
18 not so bound ; for he may reasonably prefer his own life and pos- 
sessions to those of others. And in this sense, as I conceive, wo are 
to interpret what Cicero says, that ?ie who does not repel arid resist an 
injury when he can^ is as much in fault as if he were to desert his 
parents, or his country, or his allies : when he can, we are to understand, 
with conrenience to himself: for the same writer elsewhere says, Per- 
haps we cannot defend men without incurring hlanie. So Sallust 
says that when we are ashed to assist allies, it is to he considered whether 
we may abstain from war; and tJien, whether what is required is siuffir 
ciently pious, safe, glorious ; or on the other hand, unbecoming, 

2 And the warning of Seneca is not to be despised : / am willing 
to help a man who is perishing, but so tJiat J myself do not perish ; 
except I am to he the ransom of a great maji or a great cause. And 
even then, ho will not be boimd, if the person oppressed cannot be 
extricated inthout the death of the assailant. For if he may in some 
cases prefer the life of the assailant to his own, when he is attacked, as 
we have elsewhere said, he will not bo wrong who either thinks or 
desires that another person so attacked has the same preference: 
especially when there is a greater danger of irreparable and eternal 
loss on the part of the iuTader. 

VIII. 1 There is also another question. Whether a war for tho 
lubjects of another be just, for the purpose of defending them from 
injuries inflicted by their ruler. Certainly it is undoubted that ever 
since ciTil societies were formed, the rulers of each claimed some espe- 
cial right oyer his own subjects. Euripides makes his chaiactcrs say 
that they are sufficient to right wrongs in their own city. And Thu- 
cydides puts among the marks of empire, the supreme authority in 
judicial proceedings. And so Virgil, Orid, and Euripides in the Hip' 
polytus. This is, as Ambrose says, that peoples may not run into wars 
hy usurping the care for those who do not belong to them. The Corin- 
thians in Thucydides say that it is right that each state should punish 
its own subjects. And Perseus says that he will not plead in defense 
of what he did against the Dolopians, since they were under his au- 
thority aod he had acted upon his right. But all this applies when 

288 OP THE CAUSES OF GOING [BookH. 

the subjects have really yiolatcd their duty; and wo may add, when 
the case is doubtful. For that distribution of power was introduced 
for that case. 

2 But the case is different if the wrong bo manifest. If a tyrant 
liko Busiris, Phalaris, Diomede of Thrace, practises atrocities towards 
his subjects, which no just man can approve, the right of human social 
connexion is not cut off in such a case. So Constantino took arms 
against Maxentius and Licinius ; and several of the Roman emperors 
took or threatened to take arms against the Persians, except they pro- 
vented the Christians being persecuted on account of their religion. 

3 But if wo should grant that subjects cannot rightly take up arms 
even in extreme necessity, (which, we have seen, has been doubted even 
by those whose purpose was to defend the royal power,) it would not 
follow that others may not take up arms for them. For when the impe- 
diment which exists to an action is in the person, not in the thing 
itself; in such cases, what is not lawful to one person may bo lawful 
to another for him, if it be a case in which one can help another. 
Thus for a ward or minor, who is not capable of legal acts, the guar- 
dian or trustee sustains the suit ; and for an absent person, an agent 
even without a special commission. Now the impediment which for- 
bids the subject to resist, does not arise from the cause, which is tho 
same in the subject and the non-subject ; but from the quality of the 
person, which does not pass over to others. 

4 Thus Seneca thinks that I may attack in war him who, though 
he is a stranger to my nation, persecutes his own ; as we said when 
wo spoke of exacting punishment: and this is often joined with tho 
defense of innocent subjects. Wo know indeed, both from ancient and 
from modem histories, that tho desire to appropriate another's posses- 
sions often uses such a pretext as this: but that which is used by bad 
men does not necessarily therefore cease to be right. Pirates uso 
navigation, but na?igation is not therefore unlawful. Robbers uso 
weapons, but weapons are not therefore unlawful*. 

IX. 1 But, as we have said, that leagues made with a view to 
mutual help in all wars alike, without distinction of the cause, are un- 
lawful ; so no kind of life is more disreputable than that of those wha 
act as soldiers for pay merely, without regard to the cause ; whose 
motto is, tJie right is where the beat pay is : as Plato proves from Tyr- 
tficus. This is tho reproach which Philip cast upon tho Etolians, and 
Dionysius of Miletus upon the Arcadians ; saying, that there wcu a 
market where the Arcadians made a profit of the mis/ortunes of the 
Greeks. As Antiphancs says, It is a wretched life to be ready to die 
in order to live. So Dio Pruscconsis. 

2 But that they sell their own lives is little, if it wore not that 
they sell too tho lives of other innocent men : and in this way they are 
worse than the hangman, in proportion as it is worse to kill men with- 
out a cause than for a cause : as Antisthenes says that executioners 
* See Barbeymc^t happy verification of these and the following quotation! • 

Chap. XXV.] TO WAR FOR OTHERS. 289 

are more respectable than tyrants, for thoy kill guilty, these, innocent 
men. Philip of Macedon (the greater) said that for those whose gain 
was in a soldier's life, peace was war, and war, peace. 

3 War is not one of the arts of life. On the contrary, it is a thing 
so horrible, that nothing but the highest necessity or the deepest 
charity can make it be right: as may be understood from what we 
hare said in the last chapter but one. Augustine says, to be a soldier 
ia not a ttn, but to be a soldier for plunder^ is. 

X. And not for plunder only, but for pay, if that bo regarded 
solely or principally; though in the other case, it is allowable to 
receive pay. St Paul says, Who goeth to warfare at his own charge f 

V 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Of just Causes for War in those who are under another^s 

jurisdiction. 

SiOT.I. Wh9 are under anoOier^w lY. Whai\fihe^doubi$ 

juriidieium, V. li it pUnu in tuck ease to 

II. JVhai U tohe done if he be spare and to tax them, 
admitted to deliberation $ TI. IVhen is the warfare of 

III. If commanded, believing the subjects Just in an unjust 
« cause unjust, they may not cause 9 

war. 

L TT7B l^^e treated of those who are their own masters. There 
YY aire others who by their condition are under anthority, as 
sons of fiunilies, servantSy subjectSy e^en indiridual citizens, as com- 
pared with the whole body of their city. 

U. These, if they are either called to coimsd, or if a fi«e option 
is giren them of war or peace, ought to follow the same rules as they 
who by their own decision undertake wars for themselres or others. 

in. 1 But if they are commanded to join in a war, as often hap- 
pens, if they are quite clear that the war is unlawful, they ought to 
abstain. That God is to be obeyed rather than men, not only the 
Apostles hare said, but Socrates also : and the masters among the 
Hebrews hare a saying indicating that eren the king, if he command 
anything against the law of God, is not to be obeyed. That our obe- 
dience is to be Umited by our duty to Gk>d, is declared by Polycarp at 
the point of death ; Jerome on St Paul, Eph. yi. 1 ; Tertullian ; Syl- 
ranus the martyr ; Antigone in Euripides ; Musonios. 

2 That a father or master is not to be obeyed if he command a 
crime, as treason, the murder of his mother, false sentence, and the 
like, is asserted by Gellius, Quintilian, Seneca, Sopater. Stratocles 
was laughed at in Athens for proposing a law that whaterer was 
thought good by Demetrius, should be reckoned right and pious. 
Pliny somewhere says that he had laboured to prove that to be minis- 
terial in a crime was a crime. 

3 Eren the Ciril Law, which is fisdle in giving pardon to excusable 
offenses, is favourable to those who are under the necessity of obeying, 
but not to all. It excepts cases of great atrocity, crimes which are 
naturally abominable, not condemned by the opinion of lawyen only, 
but by natural feeling. 

4 Josephus relates that the Jews, under Alexander the Great, would 
perform other military works, but could not be compelled to pile up 
earth to restore the temple of Belus. But we haye a doeer exception 

Chap. XXVI.] OF JUST CAUSES FOR WAB, &c. 291 

in the Theban legion under Julian, who were willing, as Ambrose says, 
to use their arms for the State, but not against Christians ; when 
required to do this, they obeyed the King of hearen, not the emperor 
of earth. So we read that, of the soldiers whose office it was to exe- 
cute the condemned, those who had been conrerted died rather than 
lay their hands on the Christians. 

5 The rule is the same, if any one be falsely persuaded that what 
is commanded is unjust. The thing is unlawful for him, as long as 
he retains that opinion, as appears by what is said above. 

IV. 1 But if the subject doubts whether the matter be lawful or 
not, must he remain quiet or obey [and assist in war ?] Most writers 
think that ho ought to obey. And they hold that the rule does not 
apply, Jf ycu doubt do not do it. Because he who doubts speculatirely, 
may not be in doubt in his practical judgment. He may belioTe that 
in a doubtful matter he ought to obey his superior. And certainly, that 
this distinction of a twofold judgment, a speculatire and a practical, 
holds in numy actions, cannot be denied. Ciril Laws, not those of the 
Romans only, but of other nations also, in such circumstances, not 
only grant impunity to those who obey, but also refuse a ciril action 
against them. They say, he does the damage who orders it to be 
done ; he is in no fault who is obliged to obey ; the necessity imposed 
by authority excuses ; and the b'ke. 

2 So Aristotle enumerates, among those who do an unjust thing, 
but do not act unjustly, the servant of the master who commands it ; 
he says that he who in such case acts unjustly, is he in whom the 
origin of the action is. For in the servant, the power of deliberation 
is not complete. As in the proverb, and in Homer, The day that makes 
man a ilave takee half his worth away. And so Philo, You are a davCf 
wh€U have you to do with reason f So Tacitus. And the same writer 
narrates that Tiberius forgave the crime of Piso's son, who engaged in 
the dvil war : because his father commanded, and the son could not 
refuse. So Seneca says. The slave is not the critic, but ths minister of 
ths commanA 

3 And especially in this question of acting as a soldier, Augustine 
80 thought He says, A just man acting as soldier^ even under a sacri- 
Uffious kinfff may rightly take a part in ufor at his eommandj if he he 
certain thai what is commanded is not against the precepts of God, or 
if he be not certain that it is so; the iniquity of the command may make 
iks king guilty, but the rule of obedience may make the soldier innooent. 
And elsewhere, A soldier, when he kills a man, obeying legitimate power, 
is not guilty of homicide. If he had done so without command, he would 
be lialde to punishment; ifhe^do not so under command, he is also liable 
to punishment. And hence the opinion is everywhere received, that so 
fSeur as subjects are concerned, there may be ware which are just on 
both sides, that is, free from injustice. So Lucan. 

4 But this matter is not without difficulties of its own. Adrian 

U2 

292 OP JUST CAUSES FOR WAR IN THOSE [Book IL 

our countryman, who was the last Cisalpino Pope, defends the con- 
trary opinion. And it may be supported, not precisely on that ground 
which he adduces, but on this, which is more satisfactory, that he who 
doubts speculatlToly ought in practice to choose the safer side. And 
the safer side is, to abstain from war'*'. The Essenes are praised for 
swearing that thei^ would not Juirm any one, even if they tuere commanded. 
And so are their imitators the Pythagoreans, who abstained from war, 
as Jamblichus says, adding for cause tJuU war producee bloodshed. 

6 Nor is it a sufficient objection to this, that on the other side 
there is the danger of disobedience. For when the right and wrong 
is uncertain (for if the war be unjust, there is no [moral] disobedi- 
ence in declining it,) then disobedience is free from sin, and this is 
the less of two ctUs. Disobedience in such a case is a less eril than 
homicide, and especially, than the homicide of many innocent persons. 
So the ancients say that the gods would not absolre Mercury for the 
death of Argus, though done by the command of Jupiterf . And so 
Martial condemns Pothinus the attendant of Ptolemy, who put him to 
death, as worse than Antony who commanded the act. Nor is that of 
much weight which is alleged on the other side ; that if such a rule 
were adopted, the state would often be damaged, since generally it is 
not expedient to publish to the people the grounds of public acts. For 
howeyer true this may be of the impelling causes of war, it is not true 
of the justificatory causes, which should be clear, and such as both may 
and ought to be openly expounded. 

6 What Tertullian says, somewhat indistinctly, of laws in general, 
is yery just with regard to laws or edicts for making war : A citizen 
does not obey the laws faithfuUy if he be ignorant at what crime the pun^ 
ishment of the law is aimed. The law may not be content with its own 
conscience; it owes a justification to those for whom it claims obedience, A 
law is suspected, which does not seek moral approbation ;itis bad, if, being 
examined, it is not approved. So in the Achilla of Statins, Achilles 
requires Ulysses to instruct him of the justice of the Greek cause. 
And in his I%eba'is, Theseus bids his followers to go forwards, con- 
fiding in their just cause. So Propertius had said that the soldier's 
courage rises and falls with his cause ; and that if that be not just, his 
arms are blunted. And so that Panegyrist says, that conscience has 
so great a power in arms, that victory depends more upon integrity 
than upon courage. And so some learned men interpret what is said 
of Abraham's arming his senrants, to imply that ho instructed them of 
the justice of his cause. Gen. xir. 14. 

7 And in fact, declarations of war used to be made, as we shall 
hare to say hereafter, accompanied by a declaration of the cause of 
the war; that the whole human race, as it were, might judge of its 

* Barbejrac Bays the safer side may be to obey : but Grotias is speaking of 
the danger of being morally wrong, not of danger to outward fortunes. W. 
i* Barbejrao remarks, that the example is not pertinent. 

Chap. XXVI.J UNDER ANOTHER'S JURISDICTION. 298 

justice. And as Aristotle says, prudence is properly the Tirtue of a 
ruler, but justice is a virtue which belongs to man as man. 

8 But undoubtedly the opinion of Adrian which we have men- 
tioned seems fit to be followed, if the subject not only doubts of the 
justice of the cause, but, induced by probable arguments, rather 
inclines to belicye the war unjust : especially if the question be of 
attacking others, not of defense. 

9 It is also a probable opinion that an executioner who is to put 
a man to death, ought to know that there is a cause in his deserts 
for doing so ; cither as having been aware of the trial and proofs, or 
by the confession of the criminal. And this is observed in some 
places; and to this the laws of the Hebrews seem to have regard, 
when, in the stoning of a condemned person, it directs the witnesses 
to begin the execution. 

v. 1 But if the minds of the subjects cannot be satisfied by the 
exposition of the cause, it will by all means be the part of a good 
magistrate rather to impose extraordinary contributions upon them, 
than military service ; especially as it is to be supposed that persons 
willing to serve as soldiers will not be wanting ; whose acts, not only 
if they are morally good, but even if they are bad, a just king may 
use ; even as God makes use of the spontaneous acts of the devil and 
of impious men ; and as ho is free from fault, who being in pecu- 
niary distress, takes money from a wicked usurer. 

2 And even if there can be no doubt as to the justice of the war, it 
does not seem at all equitable that Christians who are unwilling should 
be compelled to act as soldiers ; when wo consider that to abstain 
from military service, even when such service is lawful, is the course 
directed by especial holiness, such as was long exacted of ecclesias- 
tical persons and penitents, and strongly recommended to all others 
in many ways. Origen, answering the objection of Celsus to the 
Christians, that they declined military service, says : Those who 
require this, we remind of the priests of the heathens, who were bound to 
keep themselves pure from the shedding of human blood ; and this ought 
still to be the ride for those who are all priests of Ood, They in their 
prayers to Ood unrestUfor them who fight justly, and for him who reigns 
justly : where he calls all Christians priests, following the Scriptures, 
Rev. i. 6 ; 1 Pet. ii. 5. 

VI. 1 I think however that it may happen, that in a war not 
doubtful, but even manifestly unjust, there may be a just defense of 
the subjects who take a part in it. For since the enemy, though 
carrying on a just war, has not a true and intrinsic right to kill 
innocent subjects, who have nothing to do with the fault of the wars, 
except either for necessary defense, or by consequence and extrinsi- 
cally to his purpose ; (for they are not liable to punishment ;) it fol- 
lows that if it be clear that the enemy comes with such a purpose 
that though he could save the lives of the subjects of his adversary, 

294 OF JUST CAUSES FOR WAB, kc. [Book H. 

he will not; those subjects may defend themseWes hj the law of 
nature, which they are not dirested of by the law of nations. 

2 Nor shall we then say that the war is just on both sides ; for 
the question is not concerning the justice of the war, but concerning 
a certain and definite action of the enemy. And this action, though 
it be the action of a person haying in other respects a right of making 
war, is unjust, and therefore may be justly repelled. 

OF THE 

RIGHTS OF WAR AND PEACE. 

BOOK III. 

CHAPTER L 

General Rules as to what is lawful in War hy Natural 
Law; and herein of deceit and falsehood \in War]. 

An unlawful lie eonsUts in 
a repugnance unth another^ 
Right. 

Falsehood* to infante and 
insane. 

Deception of the bystander : 
Of one willing to be de* 
ceived : 
Of a Subject, 

Falsehood to save an in* 
nocent life. 

Falsehood towards enemiesp 
Does not include Promisee^ 
Nor Oaths. 

It is nobler to avoid Fake' 
hood even to enemies. 
It is not lawful to impel to 
an unlawful act. 
It is lawful to use help ef» 
fered. 

I. Tl /Jfi hare seen who may carry on war, and from what causes they 
V V may do it lawfully. It foUows that we consider what is lawful 
in war, and to what extent ; and this is to he considered either na- 
kedly, or as depending on antecedent promise : and nakedly, first hy 
Natural Law, and next hy the Law of Nations. Let us then see 
what is allowed hy Natural Law. 

II. 1 First, as we have already repeatedly said, the means which 
lead to an end in a moral matter receire their intrinsic value from 
the end : wherefore the steps that are necessary [to a lawful end], 
neeesiUy heing taken not in physical exactness hat morally, we 

Sect. I. 

. The Order of subjects. 

XI. 

II. 

First Rule : that is lawful 
which is necessary to tfie 

end. 

XII. 

III. 

Second : Rights from sub^ 

nascent causes. 

XIII. 

IV. 

Third: Things not allow^ 
able of purpose may be al- 

XIV. 

lowable of consequence. 

XV. 

V. 

What is lawful towards 
those who supply the enemy. 

XVI. 

VI. 

Is Deceit lawful? 

XVII. 

VIL 

Negative Deceit not unlaw- 

XVIII. 

ful per se. 

XIX. 

VIII. 

Positive Deceit is by acts 
freely or conventionally sig* 

XX. 

nifioant. 

XXL 

IX. 

Difficulty qfthe second ease. 

X. 

Not all use qf speech otherm 
wise understood is unlawful. 

xxn. 

296 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [BookIU. 

hare a right to use. By Right, I moan Right taken strictly, such as 
implies a competence to act in respect of society alone. Wherefore, 
if I cannot otherwise preserye my life, I may, by any force which I 
can use, repel him who assails it, eyon if he be without fault ; as we 
have elsewhere noted : because this right does not properly arise 
from the fault of another, but from the right which nature gives me 
for my own presorration. 

2 Further, I may take possession of a thing belonging to another, 
from which a certain danger impends over mo, without consideration 
of another's fault: not howoTor so as to become the owner of it, (for 
that is not a step suitable to the end,) but to keep it till sufficient 
proTision is made for my security : which question we have also else- 
where treated. So by Natural Law I hare a right to take from an- 
other a thing of mine which he detains ; and if that is too difficult, 
another thing of the same value : and the like I may do for the sake 
of recovering a debt : and in this case my ownership also is conse- 
quent, because the equality which has boon disturbed cannot be re- 
stored in any other way. 

3 So also when punishment is just, all force is just without 
which punishment cannot be attained : and every thing which is part 
of the punishment, as the destruction of property by burning or 
otherwise; that is, within just limits, corresponding to the offense. 

III. It is to be noted in the second place, that these rights are 
not only to be regarded with reference to the origin of the war, but 
also with reference to causes subnascent, that is, growing up during 
the progress of the war : as also in civil suits, after the point in dis- 
pute is doalt with, thero often arises a new right to the party. Thus 
those who join themselves to the party which attacks me, whether as 
allies or as subjects, give me a right of defending myself against 
them. So again those who mingle themselves in a war which is un- 
just, especially if they may know and ought to know that it is unjust, 
become bound to make good the expense and damage, because they 
occasion damage with fault. Thus too, those who join in a war un- 
dertaken without a plausible reason, incur the desert of punishment, 
in proportion to the injustice which belongs to their act. So Plato 
approves a war carried on till those who are guilty are compelled to 
undergo penalties to the satis/action of the innocent who suffer by it, 

IV. 1 It is to bo observed in the third place, that upon the 
right of thus acting, many consequences follow indirectly and ex- 
trancously to the intent of the actor, to which of themselves ho would 
not have a right. How this holds in self-defense we have elsewhere 
explained. Thus in order to recover what is ours, if we cannot take 
exactly so much, wo have a right to take more ; under the obligation 
however of restoring the excess of value. Thus a ship occupied 
by pirate?, or a house by robbers, may be battered to pieces, although 
there may be in the ship or in the house a few infants or women, 
or other innocent persons who may thus be put in danger. He ia not 

Chap. L] lawful IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c. 297 

guiUy of tJte death of anotJier, says Auguetine, wJio has walled round his 
own possessions^ if any one he injured or killed hy the wall falling. 

2 But as we hare ofton warned the reader, that which is agree- 
able to strict right is not always lawful in all respects: for often 
goodwill to our neighbour docs not permit us to use rigorous rights. 
Wherefore the ercnts which take place extraneously to our intent, 
and which we see to be likely, are to be provided against, except 
the good to which our action tends be much greater than the evil 
which is apprehended ; or except, the good and the evil being equal, 
the hope of the good ^is much greater than the fear of the evil ; a 
point which is to be left to the decision of prudence; with the 
caution that we are always, in a doubtful case, to regard the interest 
of others rather than our own, as the safer course. Let the tares grow^ 
sa3r8 the best of Teachers, lest you pull up the wheat tvith them. So 
Seneca says that to cause conflagration and ruin, is to destroy many 
without distinction. We learn from history, with how grave a remorse 
Theodosius, on Ambrose's admonition, expiated such an unmeasured 
course of punishment, [when ho had sacked Thessalonica for a sedi- 
tion, A.c. 390. Gronov.] 

3 And if God sometimes docs something of this kind, we are not 
to draw that into an example for us ; for he has unlimited dominion 
over us, but he has not given us such dominion over others, as wo 
have elsewhere explained. And even God himself, who is the supremo 
Lord of men, often spares the whole body, though large, for the sake 
of a few good men ; and thus manifests his equity as a judge ; as the 
dialogue of God with Abraham concerning Sodom plainly shows. 

From these general rules we may see what is lawful against an 
enemy by Natural Law. 

V. 1 But the question ofton arises, what is la^'ful against those 
who are not enemies, or will not allow themselves to be so called, but 
who provido our enemies with supplies of various kinds. This has 
been a point sharply contested, both anciently and recently; one 
party defending the rigorous rights of war, the other, the freedom of 
commerce. 

2 In the first place, we must make a distinction as to the things 
supplied. For there are some articles of supply which are useful in 
war only, as arms ; others which are of no use in war, but are only 
luxuries; others which are useful both in war, and out of war, as 
money, provisions, ships and their furniture. In matters of the 
first kind, that is true which Amalasuintha said to Justinian, that they 
are of the party of the enemy who supply him with what is neces- 
sary in war. The second class of objects is not a matter of com- 
plaint. So Seneca says that he would do kindnesses even to a tyrant, 
if the service so rendered neither gave him greater power for the 
common mischief, nor confirmed the power which he had, but jras 
only what might be given him without any public evil : / will not give 
him money to pay his satellites: but there is no reason why I shotUd 

298 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [Book lU. 

not furmth him with mairble$ and tapettries for hii hututy, I will 
not mpplff him with ioldion and armour; hut if Ae presiingfy tukg 
for itag&player$ who may tofien hu disposition, I wUl wiUmgly give 
Ikem, I would not send him ships of war, but I will send him shipt 
of pUasurSf barges, and other playthings of kings who amuse them- 
selves <U sea. So Ambrose judges, that to give money to him who 
is conspiring against his country is not a laudable liberality. [This 
last quotation belongs to the first, not to the second case.] 

3 In the third class, objects of ambiguous use, the state of the war 
is to be considered. For if I cannot defend myself except by inter- 
cepting what is sent, necessity, as elsewhere explained, gives us a right 
to intercept it, but under the obligation of restitution, except there 
be cause to the contrary. If the supplies sent impede the exaction 
of my rights, and if he who sends them may know this ; as if I were 
besieging a town, or blockading a port, and if surrender or peace ware 
expected; he will be bound to me for damages ; as a person would who 
liberates my debtor from prison, or assists his flight to my injury ; and 
to the extent of the damage, his property may be taken, and owner- 
ship thereof be assumed for the sake of recorering my debt. If he 
haTO not yet caused damage, but haye tried to cause it, I shall have a 
right, by the retention of his property, to compel him to give security 
for the future, by hostages, pledges, or in some other way. But if, 
besides, the injustice of my enemy to me be yery erident, and he con- 
firm him in a most unjust war, he will then be bound to me not only 
ciyilly, for the damage, but also criminally, as being one who protects 
a manifest criminal from the judge who is about to inflict punishment : 
and on that ground it will be lawful to take such measures against him 
as are suitable to the offense, according to the principles laid down 
in speaking of punishment; and therefore to that extent, he may be 
subjected to spoliation. 

4 On this account, belligerents* conmionly issue manifestos to other 

« There are examples of mles on this subject in the Roman Law. [See the 
quotations.] In modem times, the book Coruolato del Mare was published in 
Italian, and contains the constitutions of the Emperors of Greece and Germany, the 
kings of the Franks, of Spain, Cyprus, the Balearic Isles, of the Venetians, and of the 
Genoese. In Title 274 of this book, controversies of this kind are treated ; and the 
rule giren is this. That if the ships and the lading both belong to the enemy, the 
matter is plain, and they become the property of the captors. If the ship bdong 
to a neutral, the goods to an enemy, the belligerent may compel the ship to go into 
a port of his own, paying the navigators for the fMght. If, on the other hand, it 
is an enemy's ship, with the goods of a neutral, the ship is to be ransomed, and if 
the navigators refuse this, they may be taken into a port of the captors, and the 
captor must be paid for the use of the ship. 

In the year 1438, when the Hollanders were at war with Lubeck and other 
cities on the Baltic and the Elbe, they decided in full Senate, that goods of neutrals 
found in the enemy's ships were not good pxize, and that law was afterwards main- 
tained. So also in 1597, the king of Denmark judged, when he sent an embassy to 
the Hollanders, and their allies, asserting for his subjeoti the right of oanying 

Chap. L] LAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c 299 

nations, to make known both the justice of the cause, and also the 
probable hope of exacting their rights. 

goods into Spain, with which the HoUanden were then in fierce war. The French 
always permitted neutrals the right of carrying on commerce with those who were 
the enemies of France ; and so indiscreetly, that their enemies often covered their 
goods with neutral names; as appears by an edict of 1543, chap. 42, which was 
copied again in an edict of 1584, and the following year. In those edicts, it is 
pbdnly declared that the friends of the French shall be allowed to carry on com- 
merce during war, provided that they do it with their own ships and their own 
men; and that they may land where they please, provided the goods are not muni- 
tions of war ; but if these are carried, it is declared to be lawful for the French to 
take such goods, paying a fair price for them. Here we note two points, that even 
munitions of war were not declared prize; still less goods of a peaceful character. 

I do not deny that the northern nations asserted other rules, but variously, and 
rather for an occasional purpose than as a permanent rule of equity. For when 
the English, under pretence of their wars, had interfered with the Danish com- 
merce, a war arose between those two nations, of which the event was that the 
Danes imposed a tribute on England, which, under the name of the Danes* penny ^ 
remained, though the alleged reason was changed, to the time of William the Con- 
queror, the founder of the present dynasty in England, as Thuanus notes in the 
history of 1589. Again, Elizabeth, the sagacious queen of England, sent in 1575, 
Sir William Winter, and Robert Seal, secretary of state, to Holland to complain 
that the English could not allow the Dutch, in the heat of the war, to detain, as 
they had done, English ships bound to Spanish ports. So Reidan relates in his 
Batavian history, at the year 1575, and Camden, at the following year. But when 
the English had themselves gone to war with the Spanish, and interfered withthe 
right of the German cities to sail to Spain, how doubtful the right was by which 
they did this, appears from the adverse arguments of both nations, which deserve to 
be read for the purpose of understanding this controversy. And it may be noted 
that the English themselves acknowledge this ; since the two main arguments 
which they allege are, that what the Germans carried into Spain were munitions 
of war, and that there were old conventions which prohibited such an act. And 
conventions of this kind were made by the Hollanders and their allies, with the 
Lubeckers and their allies in the year 1613 ; to the effect that neither party should 
permit the subjects of an enemy to traffic in their country, nor should assist the 
enemy with soldiers, ships or provisions. And afterwards, in 1627, a convention 
was made between the kings of Sweden and of Denmark, to the effect that the 
Danes should prevent all commerce with the Dantzickers, the enemies of the 
Swedes ; and should not allow any merchandize to pass the Sound, to the other 
enemies of the Swedes ; for which terms the king of Denmark stipulated in turn 
certain advantagfss to himself. 

But these were special conventions, from which nothing can be inferred which 
is binding upon all. For what the Germans said in their declarations was, not 
that all merchandise was prohibited by this convention, but that only which was 
once carried to England or made in England. Nor were the Germans the only 
party who refused to acknowledge the doctrines of the English, forbidding com- 
merce with their enemy. For Poland complained by her ambassador that the 
Laws of Nations were infiringed, when, on account of the English war with Spain, 
they were deprived of the power of trafficking with the Spanish; as Camden and 
Reidan mention under the year 1597. And the French, after the peace of Vervins 
with Spain, when Elisabeth of England persisted in the war, being requested by 
the English to allow thehr ships going to Spain to be visited, that they might not 

300 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [Book HL 

[The note of Qrotios respecting the cases in which the rights of 
belligerents against neutrals had then been enforced is so important, 
that I will gi?e the substance of it below. I may obserre that the rules 
which he has here laid down agree with the Rules of International 
Law, as laid down by modem authors : namely (see E. M, 1087, 1088), 
That Neutrals hare no right of carrying Munitions of War, (Grotius's 
first class of supplies, called Contraband of War,) to one of the 
belligerents ; and that they hare no right of carrying anything to a 
place in a sUxte of Blockade,^ 

5 We haye referred this question to Natural Law because we hare 
not been able to find in history' anything on the subject as deter- 
privily carry mnnitions of war, would not permit this ; saying that the reqnest, if 
granted, woold be made a pretext for spoliation and disturbance of commerce. 

And in the league which the English made with the Hollanders and their allies 
in the year 1625, a convention was indeed made, that other nations, whose intorest 
it was that the power of Spain should be broken, should be requested to forbid 
commerce with Spain ; but if they would not agree to this, that their shi|M should 
be searched, to see whether they carried munitions of war; but that beyond this, 
neither the ships nor the cargo should be detained, nor that any damage should be 
done to neutrals on that ground. And in the same year it happened, that certain 
Hamburghers went to Spain in a ship laden for the most part with munitions of 
war ; and this part of the lading was claimed by the English ; but the rest of the 
lading was paid for. But the French, when French ships going to Spain were 
confiscated by the English, shewed that they would not tolerate this. Therefore 
we have rightly said that public declarations are required. And this the English 
themselves saw the necessity of. For they made such public declaration in 1591 
and 1598, as we see in Camden. 

Nor have such declarations always been obeyed, but times, causes, and places 
have been made grounds of distinctions. In 1458 the city of Lubeck refused to obey 
a notice given to them by the Dantzickers, that they were not to trade with the 
people of Malmoge and Meniel. Nor did the Hollanders in 1551 obey, when the 
Lubeckers gave them notice to abstain from traffic with the Danes with whom 
they were then at war. In the year 1522, when there was a war between Sweden 
and Denmark, when the Danes had asked the Hanseatic cities not to have com- 
merce with the Swedes, some of the cities who had need of their friendship con- 
formed to this, but others did not. The Hollanders, when war was raging 
between Sweden and Poland, never allowed their commerce with either nation to 
be interdicted. The French always restored the Dutch ships which they took 
either going to or coming from Spain, then at war with them. See the pleading 
of Louis Servinus, held in 1502, in the case of the Hamburghers. But the same 
Dutch did not allow the English to carry merchandize into Dunkirk, before which 
they bad a fleet; as the Dantzickers in 1455 did not allow the Dutch to carry any- 
thing into Konigsberg. [See the authorities. 

See also the subsequent views entertained on this subject, E, M, 1085 1091, 

and the authorities there quoted.] 

[Grotius*s note.] ^ There is much on this subject in Meursius*s Danish Hi*- 
toryj B. I. and ii. There you will see that the Lubeckers and the Emperor are 
for commerce, the Danes against it. Also see Crantzius, Thuanus, as quoted, 
Camden, besides the passages already quoted, on the years 1589 and 1595 ; wbers 
that controversy between the English and those Germans whom they call the 
Hause towns is trotted of. 

Chap. I.] LAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c. 301 

mined by Instituted Law. When the Romans carried provisions to 
the enemies of the Carthaginians, they were sometimes taken prisoners 
by the Carthaginians, and then given up by the Carthaginians to the 
Romans on being demanded. When Demetrius held Attica with an 
army, and had taken Eleusis and Rhamnus, neighbouring towns, in- 
tending to reduce Athens by famine, and when a ship attempted to 
introduce com into the city, he hung the captain and the pilot of the 
ship, and thus, deterring others, became master of the city. 

YI. 1 As to the mode of acting in war, force and terror are the 
appropriate means. Whether it is allowable to use stratagem also, is a 
common question. It is assumed that it is, by Homer, Pindai*, Yirgil, 
Solon, Silius. [See the passages quoted.] 

2 Ulysses in Homer, the example of a wise man, is full of strata- 
gems towards the enemy ; and Lucian praises those who deceive the 
enemy. Xenophon said that in war nothing was so useful as deceit ; 
so in Thucydides, Brasidas ; and in Plutarch, Agcsilaus. Polybius and 
Silius say that in war fraud is better than force ; so the severe Laco- 
dsemonians thought, as Plutarch says : and so he praises Lysander and 
Philopemen. So Ammianus. 

3 The Roman Jurists call it good deceit (bonus dolus) which a 
man practises against an enemy, and say that it makes no difTercnce 
whether any one elude the enemy by force or by fraud. So Eustathius. 
Among the Theologians, Augustine says the same ; and Chrysostom, 
that the generals who had conquered by deceit were most praised. 

4 But there are not wanting opinions which bear the other way, of 
which we will adduce some. The determination of this question 
depends on this, whether deceit in its kind bo always a bad thing : if 
so, we are not to do evil that good may come : or whether it be a thing 
of that kind which is not universally bad by its nature, but which may 
happen to be good. 

YIL It is to bo noted, therefore, that deceit may be of two kinds, 
as it consists in a negative or in a positive act. I extend the term 
deceit to acts of a negative kind, on the authority of Labeo, who 
refers the act to deceit not evil, when any one by dissimulation 
defends his own or another's goods. Undoubtedly Cicero spoke too 
generally, when he said that simulation and dissimulation are to be 
entirely removed from our scheme of life. For since we are not 
bound to disclose to others all that we know or all that we wish, it 
follows that we may dissemble, that is, conceal and keep secret, some 
things from some persons. As Augustine says. It is lawful to conceal 
in prudence the truth under a certain dissimulation. And Cicero himself 
repeatedly acknowledges that this is necessary and inevitable, especi« 
ally for those who have to administer public affairs. Wo have an 
example of this, Jetemiah, chap, xxxviii. 24, 26 ; where the prophet, 
having been consulted by the king as to the event of the siege of the 
city* gave to the princes another reason for the conference. And of 
the same kind was Abraham's dissembling that Sarah was his wife. 

302 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [Book UI. 

Yin. 1 Deceit which consistB in a positiye acty if it be perpe* 
trated by things, is called timulaUont if by words, a lis. Some lay 
down this distinction between these two, that they say that words are 
naturally the signs of notions, but that things are not so. But the 
contrary is true, that words, by nature, and eztraneously to the will of 
man, hare no signification; except inarticulate sounds, as of grief; 
which, however, may rather be called actions than words. But if it be 
said that this is the peculiar nature of man, that he can convey the con- 
ceptions of his mind to other men, and that words were inyented for 
that purpose ; this is truly siud ; but then it ought to be added, that 
such indications are not made by words alone, but also by nods, as 
among dumb persons, whether those nods have by their nature any- 
thing in common with the thing signified, or have their signification 
by institution. And of the same nature with these nods, are those 
written characters which do not express words as they are pronounced, 
but things ; whether in virtue of some agreement between the charac- 
ter and the thing, as in hieroglyphics, or by arbitrary i4>pointment, as 
among the Chinese. 

2 We must, therefore, have recourse to another distinction, of the 
kind of that which we adopted to get rid of the ambiguity in speaking 
of jus gentium. For we said that the term was applied both to that 
which had been established by separate nations without mutual con- 
nexion, and to that which contains a common mutual obligation. Words 
then, and nods, and the written characters which wo have mentioned, 
have been invented to signify a meaning with mutual obligation, or by 
convention ; but other things, not so. Hence we may use other things 
although we foresee that another person will therefrom form a false 
opinion. I speak of what is intrinsic, not of what may happen. 
Therefore we must take an example where no damage follows ; or 
where the damage, setting aside the consideration of deceit, is lawful. 

3 Of the former kind we have an example in Christ, who, hav- 
ing accompanied the disciples to Emmaus, mcide cu if he would go 
Juriher : he pretended to intend to do so : except we prefer to say 
that he did intend to go further except he were detained by uigency : 
as God is said to intend many things which do not come to pass. 
And in another place Christ, it is said, (Mark vi. 48) would have 
passed by the disciples: that is, if he had not been urgently en- 
treated to come into the ship. We may give another example in Paul, 
who circumcised Timothy, knowing that the Jews would take this as 
if the command of circumcision, though the necessity thereof was 
really abolished, still bound the Israelites, and as if Paid and Timothy 
so thought : while Paul's purpose was not this, but only to obtain for 
himself and Timothy the means of living on familiar terms with the 
Jews. The act of circumcision, when the divine law was taken away, 
no longer implied by institution such a necessity; and the evil whidi 
thence followed, of error for a time, which error was afterwards to be 
rectified, was not of so great moment, as the good to which St Paul 

I 

Chap. I.] LAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c 803 

tended ; that is, the communication of eyangelical truth. This simu- 
lation the Greek fathers often call Economy; and so Clemens Alex« 
andrinus says, that a good man wUl do for the advantage of his neigh- 
bours some things which Tie would not do of his own motion. Such an 
act was that of the Romans in war, who threw loaves from the capitol 
into the stations of the enemy, that they might not appear to he dis* 
tressed by famine. 

4 An example of the latter (where the damage to the other party 
is lawful) we hare in the feigned flight which Joshua advised his men 
to execute in order to take Ai ; and which other generals have often 
practised. For here the damage is approved to be lawful in virtue of 
the justice of the war. And the flight itself means nothing by insti* 
tution, though the enemy takes it as a sign of fear, which the other is 
not bound to prevent, using his liberty of going one way or another, 
quickly or slowly, with gestures and movements such or such. To 
the same head we must refer the cases in which soldiers have used the 
arms, standards, uniforms, rigging, of the enemy*. 

5 All these things are of such kind that they may be used by any 
at his own choice, even contrary to custom : because the custom was 
introduced by the arbitrary choice of individuals, not as it were by 
common consent, and is such a custom as binds no one. 

IX. 1 More grave is the question concerning those signs which 
belong to the usual intercourse of men, and to which, when used de- 
ceitfully, lies properly belong. There are many passages against lying 
in the Scriptures, Prov. xiii. 5 ; xxx. 8; Psalm v. 7 ; Coloss. iii. 9. And 
Augustine is rigid on this side, as are some of the philosophers and 
poets. So Homer, Sophocles, Gleobulus [rather Menandcr, J. B.], 
Aristotle. ■ 

2 There are, however, authorities on the other side ; first, exam- 
ples of persons in Scripture who told lies, and who are not blamed : 
and next, opinions of the old Christians, Origen, Clemens, Tertul- 
lian, Lactantius, Chrysostom, Jerome, Cassian; indeed almost all, 
as Augustine himself confesses. 

3 Among the philosophers, we have evidently on this side Socrates, 
and his disciples Plato and Xenophon; and in some places Cicero, 
and if we believe Plutarch and Quintilian, the Stoics, who, among the 
gifts of the wise man, place that, to know how and when to lie. Aris- 
totle in some places appears to be of the same opinion. Andro- 
nicns Rhodius, speaking of a physician who tells a lie to his patient, 
says, he deceives, hut is not a deceiver; and adds the reason, that his 
dyeet is not to deceive, biU to save the man, 

4 Many others defend lies for good purposes : Quintilian, Diphi- 
loBy Sophocles, Plsander, Euripides, Quintilian again, Eustathius, who 
brings testimonies from Herodotus and Isocrates. 

* Qaere: Whether the standards or colours of each party have not an insti- 
tuted meaning; and whether a party which deceiTes the enemy by simnlating 
them b not liable to a severity beyond the usual roles ? W. 

302 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IB^ [Book HI. 

Vm. 1 Deceit whioh ooiuiita in a poritiri^we may in Bomo 
trated by thinips is called nmtdalton, if hjz^^oeputlon of tilie term 
down this distinction between theie two^tjk^ as to apply where it is 
naturally the 8ig;n8 of notionSy but thaf^^^ and a lie. We mean that 
contrary is true, tliat wordii by luUjp^'^^ing which Ib at variance with 
man, hare no significations 0x9^ ^^ to what it understands or as to 
which, howerer, may rather Ik .^"'^ primarily and immediately indi. 
said that this is the peooliav ..y^ is the conception of the mind ; and 
ceptions of Ins mind to / ^.>^ gays a thing which is false, but which 
that purpose ; this ^""..-'//'jfj^e does lie who says a thing which is truo 
such indicationi 9 ; o^^. Therefore the falsity of the meaning is 
among dumb p .Xj^^^^oaimon notion of a lie. From which it follows 
thing in eon* ^'^^^^phTtae have sereral significations, either by com- 
by institn^' ^'^'^^^j^Iy» er flguratiyely, then if the conceptions of 
written '^/y^£^<>^^ ^^ these significationB, there is no lie, though 
but i^ ^y^H^^ '^^ ^^ another. 

tar j^yo^ it IB true that such a mode of speaking, lightly used, 

ar ^ ^ approred of ; although, from accidental causes, it may 

^'LfMer : as for instance, if it be used in instructing him who 

Spitted to our care, or to evade an unfair question. Of the 

0^flind Christ himself gave an example, when he siud, Our friend 

i^^Z^ deepeth : which the Apostles receiyed as if he had spoken 

^^dixisry sleep. And what he said of rebuilding the temple, in- 

^log his own body, he knew that the Jews would accept of the 

^ple, properly so called. So when he promised his disciples that 

0eiy should sit upon twelre thrones and judge the twelve tribes 

nf Israel ; and when he spoke of drinking new wine in his Father^s 

kingdom ; he appears to have known that they would take his words 

as implying some kingdom and authority to be given him in this 

life, of which hope they were full to the very moment of Christ's 

ascension. And in other places he teaches the people by fables and 

parables, that hearing they might not understand; that is, except 

they brought to the work of listening proper attention and docility. 

An example of the latter kind (to avoid unfair questions) we 
may take from profane history in the cose of L. Vitellius, whom 
Narcissus urged to explain the plot and tell the truth ; but only got 
him to use doubtful expressions which might be drawn either way. 
There is a Hebrew proverb, that if any one cannot talk without say- 
ing anything decided, he had better hold his peace. 

3 On the other hand, it may happen that to use such a mode of 
speech is not only unbecoming, but wicked ; for example, when the 
honour due to God or the love due to our neighbour, or the reve- 
rence due to a superior, or the nature of the matter, requires us to say 
what we have in our mind : as in contracts, we have said that all is 
to be disclosed which the nature of a contract is understood to 
require ; in which sense we very properly understand that of Cicero, 
that lying must altogether be tidceu away from contracts : in which 

Chap. I.] LAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c. 305 

lying is, it would seem, to be understood so laxly as to include 
obscure language; wbich howerer we bare excluded from our 
of a lie. 

1 To the common notion of a lie, then, it is required that 
said, written, conveyed by signs or gestures, cannot be un- 
^otherwise than in that sense which differs from the mind 
^rcr. But to this laxer notion of a lie in general, must be 
^ome stricter proper difference, to define a lie, as unlawful by 
wural Law : and this difference, if we examine the matter, can be 
no other, according to the common estimation of nations, than a dis- 
crepancy with some existing and permanent right of the person to 
whom the words or signs are addressed : for that no one lies to him- 
self, is sufficiently evident. By rights I do not here mean any right 
extrinsic to the matter, but something proper and cognate to the 
matter in hand. But this right is no other than the liberty of judg- 
ing of my future acts, which I, speaking with other men, am under- 
stood to owe to them. This is merely that mutual obligation which 
men wished to introduce when they instituted the use of speech and 
the like signs. For without such an obligation the invention of such 
means of communication would be useless. 

2 We desire then, that while speech is thus used, this right should 
subsist and remain: for it may be that the right may have existed, 
but may have been taken away, or may be taken away by some super- 
venient right, as a debt is taken away by an acknowledgment of 
payment, or by the cessation of the condition. It is also required 
that the right which is violated, bo a right of the person with whom 
we speak, not of another, (as in contracts, injustice docs not arise, ex- 
cept from the violation of the right of the contracting parties). To 
this view you may properly apply what Plato says, after Simonidcs, 
referring veracity to justice ; and also that lies, that is, forbidden lies, 
are often described in Scripture as false witness, or speaking against 
our neighbour ; and that Augustine makes the essential nature of a 
lie consist in the intention to deceive. Also Cicero wishes the ques- 
tion of speaking truth to be referred to justice as its principle. 

3 Now the right of which we have spoken, may be taken away, 
either by the express permission of him with whom wo deal ; as if 
any one have announced that he would tell falsehoods, and the other 
have permitted it ; or by tacit permission, or permission presumed on 
fiur reason; or by the opposition of another right, which, by the com- 
mon opinion of all, is of much more importance. 

These principles, rightly understood, will give us many conse- 
quences, which will be of great use in reconciling the dissentient opinions 
above mentioned. 

Xn. The first result is, that though any thing be said to an 
infant, or a person out of his mind, which has a false signification, 
it does not involve the guilt of a lie. The common sense of mankind 

X 

306 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [Book lU. 

permits tho thoughtless age of childhood to bo deluded. So Quin- 
tilian. The reason is, that they have no liberty of judgment, and 
therefore they cannot be wronged with regard to such liberty. 

XIII. 1 The second remark is, that so long as our speech is 
directed to him who is not deceiyed, it is no lie, although a third 
person should thereby imbibe a false persuasion. It is not a lie with 
regard to him whom we address, because his liberty of judging is not 
disturbed ; as in the case of those to whom a fable is told, which they 
know to be such, or to whom figurative language is used, or irony, or 
hyperbole ; which figure, as Seneca says, arrires at the truth by a lie» 
and which Quintilian calls an allowable exaggeration. Nor is it a 
lie with regard to him who accidentally hears it: because we hare 
nothing to do with him, and therefore have no obligation to him. If 
he form an opinion from what is said to another, and not to himself, 
he must take the responsibility of his opinion on himself, and not 
throw it on another. For properly speaking, the speech is, with re* 
gard to him, no speech, but a mere thing which may signify any 
thing. 

2 Therefore Cato the Censor was not guilty of a lie when he fitdsely 
promised assistance to his allies ; nor Flaccus, who related to others 
that the enemy's city was taken ; though the enemy was thus de- 
ceived; and Plutarch relates a similar act of Agesilaus. For in 
these cases nothing was said to the enemy : and the damage to them 
which followed is extrinsic to our act, and is in itself not unlawful to 
be wished or procured. To this head Chrysostom and others refer 
the discourse of Paul, in which at Antioch he reprehended Peter as 
judaizing too far: for they conceive that Peter sufficiently under- 
stood that that was not seriously done ; and in the mean time, that 
the infirmity of the bystanders was consulted. 

XIV. 1 A third case [in which there is no lie] is when it is cer- 
tain that he who is addressed will not be dissatisfied with the dis- 
turbance of his liberty in judging, but rather will be gratified at the 
course taken, on account of some advantage which follows therefrom. 
In this case there is not a lie strictly so called, that is, a wrongful lie ; 
just as he would not bo guilty of theft who, presuming the consent 
of the owner, should consume some small matter, and so procure him 
great gain. For in matters which are thus certain, a presumed will 
is held equivalent to an expressed will; and to a willing man, no 
wrong is done. So he is not guilty of lying who consoles a sick friend 
with a false persuasion ; as Arria did Paetus when his son was dead, 
which history we have in Pliny's Epistles ; nor he who, when the battle 
is wavering, gives courage to his party by false news, and so incites 
them to obtain the victory ; and thus catches them that they may not 
be caught, as Lucretius says. 

2 That we may deceive our friends for their good, is asserted by 
Domocritus, Xenophon, Clemens Alexandrinus, Maximus Tyrius, Pro- 

Chap. I.] LAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c. 307 

clu8. [See.] Sach cases are Xenophon's declaration that the allies 
were at hand : and that of Tullus Hostilius, that the Alban army was 
making a circuit by his order : and that of Quintius the consul, a 
wholesome lie, as the historians speak, that the other wing of the enemy 
was in flight; and numerous other passages in historians. And it 
may be remarked, that the disturbance of the power of judging is in 
this case of the less consequence, inasmuch as it is momentary only, 
and the truth very soon comes out. 

XY. 1 A fourth case of the same kind [in which a falsehood is 
not a lie] is when ho who has a supereminent right oyer the rights of 
another, uses that right either for his private good or for the public 
good. And this Plato seems to have had in yiew, when ho allows the 
goyemors of a state to deceiye. And when Plato sometimes seems to 
allow and sometimes to disallow this practice in physicians, it would 
seem that this difference is to be taken ; that in the former case he 
means physicians who are publicly called to this office of giving false 
hopes ; in the latter case, those who arrogate such an office to them- 
selyes. But God, though he have the supreme right oyor men, cannot 
use lies, as Plato rightly acknowledges ; because it is a mark of our 
weakness to take refuge in such means. 

2 We haye an example of falsehood, which even Philo praises, in 
Joseph ; who, acting with royal power in Egypt, accuses his brothers 
first of being spies, and then of stealing, knowing that it was not so. 
And again in Solomon, when he gave orders to slay the child, about 
which the mothers disputed, though he never intended this to be done. 
&o Quintilian. 

XYI. A fifth case may be, when the life of an innocent person, 
or something of like yalue, cannot otherwise be preserved, and when 
another person cannot otherwise be withheld from the perpetration 
of a wicked act: as in the case of Hypermnestra, nobli/ false. (Hor.) 

XVIL 1 What learned men commonly lay down, goes further 
than what we have said ; — namely, that we may utter falsehoods to 
an enemy. Thus to the rule not to lie, an exception, unless to an enemy^ 
is added by Plato, Xenophon, Philo among the Jews, Chrysostom 
among the Christians. And to this case you may refer the promise 
of the men of Jabesh (1 Sam. xi. 10), that they would come out on 
the morrow; and the act of Blisha when he misled his pursuers 
(2 Kings vi. 19); and the saying of Yalerius Laevinus who boasted 
that he had killed Pyrrhus. 

2 To the third, fourth and fifth of the preceding remarks belongs 
a passage of Eustratius on Aristotle's Ethics. And Quintilian says, 
that a lie to prevent a murder, or the destruction of one's country, 
though at other times a thing blameable in a slaye, is then commend, 
able in a free man. 

3 These doctrines are not approyed of by the school of Theo* 
logians of more recent times, who have followed Augustine almost 

X2 

308 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS [BookIH. 

exclusively in all points. But this same school allows of tacit inter- 
pretations, which are so repugnant to common usage, that we maj 
doubt whether it would not be better to admit &lse speaking towards 
some parties, in the cases of which wo hare spoken, or some of them, 
(for I do not here pretend to give accurate rules,) rather than thus 
make such indiscriminate exceptions as to what is false speaking: 
thus when they say, I do not know, they hold that it may mean, I do 
not know that I shall teU you; when they say, I have not, they hold 
that it may mean, I have not to give to you; and others of this 
kind, which the common sense of mankind repudiates ; and which, if 
they are admitted, there is no reason why he who affirms may not be 
held to deny, and he who denies to affirm. 

4 For it is undoubtedly true, that there is no word which does 
not admit of an ambiguous sense, since all words hare, besides 
their primary meaning, or signification of first notion, another mean« 
Sng, the signification of second notion, and that, various according to 
the various technical applications, and other meanings from metaphor 
or other figures. Nor do I more approve the device of those who, 
as if they were afraid of the word only and not the thing, call those 
expressions jests, which are uttered with the most serious counte- 
nance and manner of delivery. 

XVUI. But it is to be observed that what we have said of false 
speaking in assertory discourses, applied so that it can damage none 
except a public enemy, is not to be referred to promissory decla- 
rations. For from a promise, as wo have partly said, a new and 
sj^cial right is conferred on him to whom the promise is made ; 
and this holds pven between enemies, without any exception as to 
hostility existing at the moment; and not only in express promises, 
but also in tacit ones, as we shall shew in speaking of parley, 
when wo come to that part which concerns the keeping of faith in 
war. 

XIX. Further, wo must again apply what we have sdd in our 
former discussion concerning Oaths, whether assertory or promissory ; 
that they have force to exclude all exceptions which may be taken 
on account of the person with whom wo are dealing : since in thesev 
wo have to do, not with men only, but with God also, and are bound 
by our oath to Him, although thero should no right accrue to any 
man. And we havo there said also, that in an oath, it is not as in 
other discourse, that to excuse us from the guilt of a lie, unusual 
interpretations of words may bo admitted; but that by all means 
truth is required in that senso which the hearer is in good faith con- 
ceived to understand : so that we must detest the impiety of those 
who say that men are to be deceived with oaths as boys with toys. 

XX. 1 We know that some of the kinds of fraud which we 
havo said are allowed by Natural Law, havo been repudiated by some 
people, or some individuals. But that docs not proceed from an 

CHAP. I.] liAWFUL IN WAR BY NATURAL LAW, &c. 309 

opinion that sach frauds are iniquitous, but from a certain eminent 
loftiness of mind, and sometimes from a confidence in the strength 
of the speaker. In Elian we have a saying of Pythagoras, that 
men approach to the gods principally by two things; by always 
speaking the truth, and by doing good to others ; and in Jamblichua 
veracity is called the leader to all divine and human good things. 
So Aristotle says that the magnanimous man loves to speak truly and 
freely ; Plutarch, that to lie is slavish. So Arrian of Ptolemy and of 
Alexander; Mamertinus of Julian; so Plutarch of Aristides, and Pro* 
bus of Epaminondas, that they would not lie even in jest. 

2 And this is still more to be observed by Christians, to whom 
not only simplicity is commanded. Matt. x. 16, but also yain speak, 
ing interdicted. Matt. xii. 36 ; and He proposed as an example, in 
whose mouth was found no guile. So Lactantius says that we 
must not be content with telling truth to our friends, but also to 
strangers and enemies. So Neoptolemus is described in Sophocles, 
excellent in simplicity and noblemindedness ; as Dio Prusroensis notes. 
See his answer to Ulysses in the Philoctetes, and see Euripides in 
the Ehesus, 

3 So Alexander said that he would not steal a victory. And 
Polybius relates that the Achroans abhorred all fraud towards ene- 
mies ; thinking victory then only firm when, as Claudian says, it sub- 
jugates the minds of the enemy. Such were the Romans till the 
end of the second Punic war. It is their virtue, Elian says, not 
to seek victory by art and cunning. And accordingly when Per- 
seus was deceived with the hope of peace, the older senators said 
that they did not recognize the arts of Rome ; that their ancestors 
bad never in war boasted of cunning instead of courage; not of 
the tricks of the Carthaginians, not of the subtlety of the Greeks, 
among whom it was more glorious to deceive an enemy than to over- 
come him by force. And then they added that sometimes, for the 
present moment, success might be obtained by deceit more than by 
valour; but that his mind only was thoroughly conquered, who was 
compelled to confess that he was subdued, not by art or by chance, 
but in a close trial of strength in a just and pious war. So even 
later in Tacitus. Such too were the Tibarenians, who announced be- 
forehand the time and place of battle. And Mardonius in Herodotus 
says that the Greeks of his time did the same. 

XXI. As to what concerns the mode of acting, this is to be 
noted; that what it is not lawful for another to do, it is not law- 
ful for us to impel or solicit him to do. We may take such ex- 
amples as these : it is not lawful for a subject to kill his king, nor 
to give up towns without public authority, nor to despoil his fellow- 
citizens. Therefore it is not lawful to move a citizen, continuing in 
that character, to do such things. For in all cases, he who gives 
another cause to sin, docs himself sin. Nor is it enough to reply 

810 GENERAL RULES AS TO WHAT IS, &c. [Book III. 

that to him mho impels such a man to such a deed, say to kill 
an enemy, the deed is lawful. It is lawful* but not in that manner. 
Augustine says well, It mcUses no dijerenee whether you youredf eomr 
m\i a wickedness, or make another man commit it for you, 

XXII. The case is different, if any one use the help of a person 
who does wrong of his own accord, and not at his impulse ; which 
we have proved elsewhere, by the example of €k>d himself, not to 
be unjust. We receive a deserter by tJie laws of war, says Celsus ; 
that is, it is not agiunst the laws of war to recei?e him who leares 
the enemy and comes over to us. 

CHAPTER 11. 

How far by the Law of Nations the goods of Subjects are 
liable for tlie debt of the Rulers; and herein, of Re- 
prisals. 

Sect. L By Natural Law no one is V. This holds after redress de» 

bmind but the Heir, nied, S^c. 

II. Bjf the Law of Nations Sub'* V I. Ltfe is not so bound, 

jects are bound, VII. Distinction of Civil Law 

III. Example in seizure qfmen : and Law of Nations. 
TV, And goods, 

LIT £T U8 come to tho results which in war flow from the Law 
I A of Nations. These belong partly to any war, partly, to 
certain kinds of war. We begin with the general case. 

By the mere Law of Nature, no one is bound by tho act of another^ 
except he who is tho successor to his property : for tho rule that 
property passes with its burthens, was introduced when property 
was introduced. The emperor Zeno says that it is contrary to 
natural equity that one person should be molested for the debts of 
another. Hence the Roman Law proyides that the wife is not re- 
sponsible for the husband, the husband for the wife, tho son for tho 
father, the father or mother for the son. 

2 Nor do individuals owe what tho general body owes, as U1-* 
plan plainly says: that is, if the general body hayc property; for 
otherwise, they are bound, not as indiTiduals, but as parts of the 
general body. Seneca says. If omy one lends money to my country^ 
the debt ia not mine : but I will give my share towards tlie payment. 
He had before said. Individuals wiU owe, not as a part of their 
cum debtf but a part of tJts public. Hence it was specially pro- 
Tided by the Roman Law that the members of a Tillage should 
not be responsible for tho debts of others of the same village ; and 
elsewhere, no possession can be made responsible for other persona' 
debts, not eren public debts. And in a law of Justinian, securities 
for others are forbidden; it being stated as tho reason, that the 
debtor is one person, and the person distrained, another, which is 
stated to be unreasonablo and odious. And so king Theodorio calls 
this liberty of suretyship disgraceful. 

U. 1 But though this is so, a rule may be introduced by the 
instituted Law of Nations, and it appears, has been introduced, that 
for a debt due from any ciril society or its head, either on his own 
account or as bound for another, all the goods, corporeal and incorpo- 
real, of the members of the society, are bound and liable. And this 
rule has been established by a certain necessity, in that otherwise 

312 HOW FAR BY THE LAW OF NATIONS [Book IIL 

there would be great licence for the commi&sion of injury, since the 
goods of the rulers often cannot so easily be got at, as those of pri- 
yate persons, who are more numerous. And therefore this is one of 
the rights which, Justinian says, were instituted by nations on the 
exigency of usage and to meet human necessities. 

2 And this is not in any way so repugnant to nature that it may 
not be introduced by usage and tacit consent, since sureties become 
bound for debts without any cause, by consent alone. And it was to 
be hoped that the members of the same society would be able to ex- 
act rights from one another, and to consult their own indemnity, more 
easily than strangers, who in many cases are little attended to : and 
moreover there was, by such an obligation, an advantage to be gained 
by all peoples, so that they upon whom in one case it presses heaTily^ 
in another would find their relief in it. 

3 That this usage is received, appears not only from the wars on 
a large scale which one people carries on against another : for in these 
the rule that is followed appears in the formulie by which war is de- 
clared ; as in Livy, I declare war against the people of the Latina and 
against the Laiian men : and in the proposal, Whether they wished that 
war should be declared against Philip of Macedon and those who are 
under his rule: and in the decree itself. The Roman people order that 
war should he with the Hermundulan people^ and with the Hermundulan 
men; in Cincius on military affairs, and elsewhere. Let him be an enemy 
and those who are under his protection : but also, when war on this full 
scale has not yet taken place, but where some violent exaction of rights, 
that is, an imperfect war, has been found necessary, we see the same 
usage prevail. Agesilaus said to Phamabazus, When we were friends to 
the king we behaved in a friendly manner to his people: and now that we 
are enemies^ we shall behave hoeiilely to the same : and tliertfore as you 
choose to belong to the king, we shall attack him through you, 

IIL 1 A kind of the exaction of rights of which we speak was 
what the Athenians called androlepsy^ or man- taking; and the Attic 
law was, that if any one was violently killed, his neighbours and relatives 
had the right of taking men till either the murderer was punished, or the 
murderers given up; but three men only may be taken, and not more* 
Here we see that for a debt of the city which is under an obligation 
to punish those of its subjects who have injured others, a certain in* 
corporeal right of the subjects is held bound, namely, their personal 
liberty; so that they are enslaved till the city punishes the guilty. 
The Egyptians, as we learn from Diodorus, held that a man's body or 
liberty were not to be bound for a debt : but yet there is nothing in 
such a usage repugnant to nature : and the contrary practice has pre- 
vailed not only among the Greeks, but also other nations. 

2 Aristocrates, a contemporary of Demosthenes, had proposed a 
decree that if any one slew Charidcmus, he might be taken wherever 
he was, and if any one resisted he should be held as an enemy. In 
this, Demosthenes finds much to reprehend ; first, that Aristocrates had 

Chap. H.] THE GOODS OF SUBJECTS ARE LIABLE, &c. 313 

not dlBtingmshed between killing justly and unjustly, though it might 
happen that he was killed justly : and next, that he does not require 
that first a trial should be demanded : and thirdly, that he requires 
those to bo bound who have receired the homicide, and not those 
among whom the act was committed. And he then refers to the 
androlepsy just mentioned, saying that The law made them responsible 
among whom the homicide took place; but that Andronicus left these un^ 
Umchedy and punished those who received the homicide; though tlie usage of 
all nations was to protect refugees. The fourth objection is, that Aris- 
tocrates makes the matter forthwith a case of public war, the law 
being content with the man-taking. 

3 Of these, the first, second, and fourth arguments are not without 
weight. But as to the third, except it be restricted to the case of 
slaying by accident or in self'-defense, is said rather oratorically than 
according to truth and justice : for the law of nations that suppliants 
are to be receiyed and defended, applies to those, as we have said, who 
have been unfortunate, not criminal. 

4 Moreover the case is the same as to those among whom the 
crime was committed, and those who refuse to punish or to giye up the 
guilty person. And therefore the law which Demosthenes quotes 
either receiyes from usage that interpretation which I have given, or 
was afterwards expressly made valid against such evasions. That one of 
these two was the case will not be denied by any one who attends to 
what is said by Julius Pollux of this androlepsy, referring it to those 
who receive the homicide. So Harpocration on androlepsy. 

5 A like practice it is, when, to recover a citizen made captive by 
manifest wrong, citizens of the state by which this has been done are 
detained. Thus at Carthage some interfered to prevent Aristo of Tyro 
being taken, saying that if this was done, the same would be done to 
Carthaginians at Tyre^ and in other mercantile cities whither tJiey vjent 
in numbers. 

IV. Another kind of the violent exaction of rights is taking secu- 
rity of the people of the offender; which the more recent jurists call 
the BigJu of Reprisals ; the Saxons and Angles, Withemamium ; and 
the French, among whom it is granted by the king, Letters ofMarque* 
And this has place, as the jurists say, when Bights are denied. 

y. i This is understood to be permitted by custom, not only if 
Judgment against a criminal or a debtor cannot be obtained within a 
reasonable time ; but also in a very clear case, (for in a doubtful case 
the presumption is for the established judges,) if judgment be given 
plainly against right. Even among subjects, a wrong sentence does 
not abolish a true debt. A true debtor though absolved remains a 
debtor, says Paulus. And when by the wrong doing of the judge the 
creditor takes a thing which was not the property of the debtor, as 
being liable ; and when it was inquired if when the debt was paid this 
ought to be restored to the debtor, Sccevola decided that it was. There is 
this difference [between a question among subjects of the same state 

314 HOW FAR BY THE LAW OP NATIONS [Book IIL 

and a question with foreigners], that the subjects of the same state 
cannot Uwfully impede by force the execution eren of an unjust sen- 
tence, on account of the authority of the law over them; but foreigners 
have the right of compelling : a right howerer which they may not 
lawfully use, so long as they can obtain by judgment what is their 
own. 

2 The rule then that, for such a cause, either the bodies or the 
moreables of the subjects of him who does not grant me justice, may 
be taken by me, is not indeed introduced by nature, but is ererywhere 
recciyod as usage. The oldest example is in Homer, where Nestor says 
that he took the flocks and herds of the Elldians as reprisals for his 
father's horses. He goes on to say that he summoned all those to help 
him who had any debts owing from the Elidians. There is another 
example in the Roman history, where Aristodemus, the heir of the Tar* 
quins, detuned the Roman ships at Gum®, as security for the goods 
of the Tarquins. And Aristotle, in his (Eeonomies, mentions the de- 
cree of the Carthaginians for taking the ships of strangers if any one 
has a claim. 

VI. That the life of innocent subjects should be held bound for 
such cause, was perhaps belieyed among ancient peoples; and on this 
ground, that they conceiyed that erery num had a plenary right oyer 
his own life, and that this might be transferred to the state ; but that 
this is not good doctrine, nor agreeable to sound theology, we haye 
elsewhere said. It m&j howeyer take place, not intentionidly, but by 
accident ; as if they are killed who attempt to impede the exaction of 
rights. But if such a result be foreseen, by the law of charity the 
promotion of right is rather to be omitted, as we haye elsewhere 
shewn ; since by that law, the life of a man ought to bo of more yalue 
to us, especially being Christians, than our goods. 

VIL 1 In this matter, no less than in others, we are to distinguish 
what things are properly juris gentium^ parts of the Law of Nations, 
and what is constituted by Ciyil Law or by Compact. 

2 By the Law of Nations, all the subjects of him who does an 
injury are liable to be security for satisfaction, being subjects from a 
permanent cause, whether indigenous or immigrants; but not they 
who are there in passing, or making a short stay. For such liability 
is introduced according to the example of the burthens which are 
laid on subjects for paying public debts: to which those are not 
liable who are subject to the laws of the place only for a time. From 
the subjects, are excepted, by the Law of Nations, ambassadors not 
sent to our enemies, and their property. 

3 But by the ciyil or instituted Law of Nations, there are often 
excepted from this liability the persons of women and children ; and 
the property of literary classes, and of merchants. By the Law of 
Nations any one may take surety for satisfaction, as in the androlepsy 
of the Athenians. By the instituted law of many places, such satis- 
faction is to be sought from the supreme authority; and in other 

Chap, n.] THE GOODS OF SUBJECTS ARE LIABLE, &c 315 

places, from the judges. By the Law of Nations, the ownership of 
things taken is ipso facto acquired to the extent of the deht and ex- 
penses, the residue being to be returned. By instituted Law, they are 
to be cited who are concerned, and then their property sold or seized 
by public authority for the benefit of those who hare a claim. Such 
and other rules are to be sought in those who treat of the Civil Law^ 
and especially, in this matter, from Bartolus, who has written on 
Reprisals. 

4 I will add, because it is a point which tends to the softening of 
the right of which we are speaking, which of itself is sufficiently 
harsh, that they who, by not paying what they owed, or by withholding 
any right, hare given occasion for thb seizure of securities, are, by 
Natural and Divine Law, bound to make good the loss to those who 
have thereby suffered. 

CHAPTER IIL 

Of a Just or Formal War by the Law of Nations; and 

herein of Declaration of War. 

Sect. I. Formal war is between YIII. 

different Peoples, IX. 

Distinction of a People, • 
though unjustfjrom Pirates, X. 

^c. XL 

A transition may take place. 
Formal war is made by the XII. 

Sovereign. 

Declaration of war required, X III. 

Declaration by Law of Na- 
ture and by Law of Na- XIY. 
tions. 

Declaration pure and con^ 
ditional. 

II. 

III. 
IV. 

V. 
VI. 

VII. 

Declaration by Civil Law. 
War extends to the sub^ 
jeets. 

Not as per te eonsidereel. 
Declaration, why required 
to certain effects. 
These effects do not occur in 
other wars. 

May war be put in ad at 
soon as declared 9 
Must it be declared when 
Right of Legation is viO" 
latedf 

I. I "XTT^ ^^0 aboTo begun to say that ajust war is often so called 
fV in respectable authors^ not from the cause in which it 
originates, nor from the scale of the movements^ but on account of cer- 
tain peculiar jural effects. What kind of war this is, is best understood 
from the definition of an enemy in the Roman Jurist : Those are our 
enemies who publicly declare war against us or we against them : others 
are robbers or pirates, says Pomponius. And so Ulpian, adding : there^ 
fore he who is taken prisoner by robbers is not subject to them, nor is 
postliminium necessary for him. But he who is taken prisoner by emr 
miesy suppose Germans or Parthians, becomes their slave, and recovers his 
former state by postliminium. So Faulus. Ulpian adds that, in ciyil 
wars, the opposite parties are not formal enemies, and therefore the 
captives taken do not lose their free condition. 

2 We may note that which is said by the Roman jurists, of the 
Roman People, is to bo understood of him who has the supreme power 
in any state. He is our enemy, says Cicero, who has the government, the 
council, the treasury, the consent and agreemejit of the citiiwu, and ike 
power of making war and peace. 

IT. I A State or Commonwealth does not cease to be such by 
perpetrating an act of injustice, even in common : nor is a band of 
robbers or pirates a State, although they preserve a sort of equal rule 
among them, without which indeed no body of men can hold together. 
For such a body is associated for the purpose of crime: but the others, 
though they are not free from fault, are associated by mutual rights, and 
acknowledge certain rights in others; if not rights according to Na- 

Chap. IH.] OP A JUST OR FORMAL WAR, ^c. 317 

tural Law (which is often much obliterated), yet rights according to 
certain conventions or usages. Thus the Greeks, whilo they held it 
lawful to plunder at sea, abstained from murder, from night-attacks, 
and from seizing oxen and ploughs, as the Scholiast to Thucydidea 
notes. Other nations, as mentioned by Strabo, who lived by plunder 
at sea, were in the habit, when they had carried their plunder home, 
of sending to the owners to ransom it at a fair price. So Homer. 

2 But in morals, the principal part is taken as the characteristic ; 
BO Cicero and Galen. Wherefore Cicero spoke too widely, when he 
said (in the third book of the Republic) that when the king is unjust, 
or the aristocracy, or the people itself, the commonwealth is not so 
much to be called vicious, as non-existing : which opinion, Augustine 
correcting, says. We are not to eay tJiat the people does not exist, or tJuU 
its common concerns are not tfiose of a commonwealth, so long as there 
remains a body of any reasonable number, associated by a common parti^ 
eipaHon in its interests. A body which is diseased is still a body ; and 
a state, though grievously out of health, is a state, as long as there 
remain the laws, the tribunals, and other things which are necessary 
in order that strangers may there obtain justice, as well as private 
persons in their affairs one with another. Dio Chrysostom speaks 
more rightly when he says that Law, (especially that which realizes the 
Law of Nations,) exists in a state, as the soul in the body ; and that 
when that is taken away, the state no longer exists. And Aristidcs, in 
the oration in which he exhorts the Rhodians to concord, shews that 
many good laws may subsist even under a tyranny. Aristotle in his 
Politics says, if any one carry too far the violent proceedings either 
of the Few or of the People, the commonwealth first becomes vicious, 
and by going on, becomes non-existent. We will illustrate this by 
examples. 

3 That a person taken prisoner by robbers is not subject to them, 
we have above quoted from Ulpian. He says also that those who are 
taken by the Germans do lose their liberty. Yet among the Germans, 
robberies which were exercised out of the boundaries of each state 
were subject to no infamy ; which are the words of Coosar. Tacitus 
says of the Yenedi, In the woody and mountainous region which occu" 
pies the whole space between the Peucini and the Fetmi, they drive 
their booty freely. The same writer elsewhere says that the Catti, a 
noble people of Germany, practise plunder. The same author calls 
the Garamantes a nation habituated to plunder, but still a nation. 
The Blyrians were accustomed to plunder at sea without distinction : 
yet a triumph over them was celebrated, as over an hostile nation ; 
though Pompey had no triumph for conquering the Pirates. So great 
is the distinction between a people, though wicked, and those who, 
not being a people, associate for the sake of crime. 

in. But a transition may take place from one condition to tho 
other; not only in individuals, as Jephtha, Arsaces, Viriatus, from 
being loaders of bands of robbers, became regular rulers ; but also in 

818 OF A JUST OR FORMAL WAR [Book IIL 

Bocietiesy so that they who had been only robbers, embradng another 
mode of life, become a state. Aagustme, speaking of bands of robbers, 
saySy If this evil, by the ctcceesion of bad men, growe to euck a height thai 
they keep poseeseion of their ground, eetablish a seat of residence, occupy 
cities, subjugate peoples, it assumes the name of a kingdom, 

lY. Who have sorereign authority, we hare discussed aboTO : from 
whence it may be understood that if any hare it partially only, they 
may, so far as that part goes, carry on a just war : and much more 
they who are not subjects, but bound by an unequal league ; as under 
the Romans, we learn that the Volsci, Latins, Spaniaids, Carthagi* 
nians, though inferior in the federation, all maintained just wars. 

V. But that a war may be just in this sense, it is not sufficient 
that it be carried on between the supreme authorities on each side; 
but it is requisite also, as already said, that it be publicly decreed ; 
and in such manner publicly decreed, that signification of that fact is 
made by the one party to the other, as Ennius [Cicero, J. B.] speaks 
of promulgated wars. So Cicero, in his Offices, says that by the Fecial 
Law, no war was just except one preceded by a demand for redress, or 
by a declaration of war. So in Isidore. So Livy : and where he nar- 
rates that the Acamanians wasted Attica, he adds. This was the first 
irritation of the minds of the parties ; afterwards a just war uhu decreed 
and declared by the states. 

VI. 1 In order to understand these passages concerning the decla- 
ration of war, we must distinguish what is done by Natural Law, 
and what is, by nature, not duo, but only decent : what by the Law of 
Nations is required for the jural effects of that Law, and what, besides, 
follows from the peculiar institutions of certain peoples. 

By Natural Law, when either yiolenco is to be resisted, or punish- 
ment is to be exacted from an offender, no declaration is required. 
This is what Sthenelaidas the Ephor says in Thucydides : We have 
not to wrangle in words and pleadings, being wronged in more than 
words. And Latinus in Dionysius: He who begins a war may be 
repelled by the sufferer. So Elian from Plato. Hence Dio Chryso- 
stem says that most wars are begun without declaration of war. And 
on the same ground Li?y objects to Monippus, the prefect of Anti- 
ochus, that he had slain certain Romans, war being neither declared, 
nor so far existing, that they had heard of swords drawn and blood 
shed ; thus shewing that cither of these two cases would hare sufficed 
for the defense of the act. Nor is declaration of war any more 
necessary, if the owner attempts to lay hands upon his own property. 

2 But whenever one thing is taken as security for another, or 
the property of the debtor is seized for the debt, and still more, if 
any one sets about taking the property of those who are subjects of 
the debtor, a formal demand is requisite, by which it may appear, 
that in no other way can we obtain our property or our debt. For 
this right of so taking is not a primary right, but a secondary and 
substitutive right, as we have elsewhere explained. And in like man- 

Chap. IH.] BY TIIE LAW OF NATIONS, &c. S19 

ner, before he who has the supreme power can be attacked for the 
debt or delict of his subject, there ought to be interposed a formal 
demand which may put him in the wrong, so that he may be either 
supposed to be the author of a damage, or to have himself committed 
a delict according to the principles already laid down. 

3 And eren when Natural Law does not require such a formal 
demand to be made, yet it is decent and laudable that it be inter* 
posed ; in order, for instance, to avoid offense, or to give room for 
making atonement for the delict by repentance and satisfaction, as 
we have sud in speaking of the ways of avoiding war ; so that ex- 
tremes are not to be tried in the first place. And to the same pur* 
pose is the precept which Qod gave the Hebrews, that before besieg- 
ing a city they should invito it to make peace. This command, 
however, was specially ^ven to the Hebrew people, and therefore is 
wrongly by some confounded with the Law of Nations. Cyrus, when 
he had come into the country of the Armenians, before he did any 
harm to any one, sent persons to the king to ask for the appointed 
tribute and soldiers ; thinking that more humatie than to march upon 
him without notice^ as Xeuophon says in the Cyropcedia. But by the 
Law of Nations, a declaration of war is requisite in all cases to give 
occasion for these peculiar effects ; not on both sides, but on one. 

Vn. 1 But such a declaration is cither conditional or pure ; 
conditional, when it is conjoined with a demand for the restoration of 
the things in question. But under the demand of restoration of 
things, the Fecial Law comprehended not only demands by the right 
of ownership, but also the promotion of anything which was due for 
civil claims or criminal acts ; as Servius rightly explains. Hence the 
formula requiring that the things be restored, satisfiedf given up: 
where given up, as we have elsewhere explained, is to be under- 
stood that the persons summoned may bo allowed to prefer them* 
selves punishing the guilty person. This demand was called clarigar 
iion, as Pliny testifies. Wo have in Livy a conditional declaration : 
that this injury, except it were remedied by those who had done it, they 
themselves would repel : and in Tacitus, except they exact punishment of 
the offenders, he would make a promiscuous slaughter. And in the 
same way in the Supplices of Euripides ; and Statins in his narra- 
tion of the same matter in the Thehais, Polybius calls this demand^ 
ing satis/action ; the old Romans, condicere, 

A pure declaration is what is especially called indictio, 

2 But a conditional declaration is [often] followed by a pure 
declaration, though this is not necessary, but is done ex superabun* 
danti. And the formulss are given, accusing the enemy of injustice. 
But that in this case, as we have said, such declaration is not neces- 
sary, appears from this, that it might be made to the nearest town 
occupied by troops, as the Feciales announced, when they were con- 
sulted about the case of Philip of Macedon, and afterwards of Antio- 
chus, since the first declaration of war was to be made by him who 

320 OF A JUST OR FORMAL WAR [Book HL 

was attacked. In tho war with Pyrrhus, the declaration was made 
to one of the soldiers of Pjrrhus, and this was done in the Circus 
of FlaminiuSy where the soldier was compelled formally to purchase 
his place in order to he a party to the cause, as Serrius relates on 
the ninth hook of the jEneid. 

3 That the formality is unnecessary, is also proved hy this, that 
war is often declared on hoth sides, as the Peloponnesian war hy the 
Gorcyreans and Corinthians, though it was sufficient that it should he 
declared on one side only. 

Vin. There are some things which helong to the institutions of 
certain nations, not to the Law of Nations in general ; as the Caducous, 
or Herald's rod among the Greeks ; the stigmina (sacred herbs,) and 
bloody spear, among the Equicoke at first, and the adoption of this by 
the Romans ; the renunciation of friendship and alliance, if any had 
existed; the thirty appointed days after the demand of restitution; the 
sending of the spear a second time ; and other observances of the 
same kind, which are not to be confounded with things which belong 
to the Law of Nations in general. For Amobius informs us that the 
greater part of those things had ceased to be practised in his time ; 
and even in the age of Varro some were omitted. The third Punic war 
was declared and commenced at the same time. And Maecenas in 
Dio holds that some of these belong especially to a popular state. 

IX. A war declared against him who has the supreme authority 
in a people is conceived as declared, at the same time, not only against 
all who are his subjects, but also against all who join themselves to 
him, as accessories to him ; and this is what the [feudal] jurists say, 
that he who defies the prince defies his adherents ; for to declaro 
war they call to defy. This is to be understood of that especial war 
which is carried on against the person mentioned iu the declaration : 
thus when war had been declared against Antiochus, it was not 
thought proper to declare it against the Etolians separately, because 
they openly joined Antiochus ; the Fecialcs answered that Hie Eto^ 
lians had of tJitmsdves declared war against themselves. 

X. But if, when that war is over, a people or a king are to bo 
attacked on account of aid supplied, then, in order to obtain tho 
effects of the Law of Nations, there is need for a now declaration of 
war. And therefore it was rightly said that those were not just wars 
according to the Law of Nations, which Manlius carried on against 
tho Qallo-Grecians, or Csesar against Ariovistus : for they were then 
attacked, not as accessories in another's wars, but as principals ; and to 
this effect, by the Law of Nations, a declaration of war was required, 
and by the constitution of Rome, a new edict of tho people. For 
what had been said in the decree against Antiochus : Do you decree tJiat 
war should take place with Antiochus and his followers? which form was 
also used with regard to Perseus, seems to require to bo understood, 
as long as the war with Antiochus or with Perseus continued, and with 
regard to those who really joined in tho war. 

CiiAF. m.] BY THE LAW OF NATIONS, &c. . 321 

XI. Tho cause why Dations require a declaration of war for that 
kind of war which we call jitst by tho Law of Nations, is not that giron 
by some, that nothing may be done clandestinely or fraudulently ; for 
that is a matter rather of bold frankness than of right; as some 
nations are related to have announced beforehand the day and place 
of battle: but that it might be clearly known that the war was 
undertaken, not as a venture of private persons, but by the will of 
the two peoples, or their heads : for from this public character arise 
peculiar effects, which do not take place either in a war carried on 
against pirates, or in one which a king makes against his subjects. 
And so Seneca speaks with a distinction, of war declared against neighs 
hours, or carried on against otar own citizens. 

XII. For what some remark, and illustrate by examples, that 
even in such wars, what is captured becomes the property of the cap- 
tors, is true, but on one side only, and that by Natural Law, not by 
the instituted Law of Nations; since that regards only nations and 
their dealings with nations, not those who are without nation, or are 
only part of a nation. They err in this, that they think that a war 
undertaken for the purpose of defending one's self or one's property^ 
does not need to be preceded by a declaration of war; for it by 
all means needs such an introduction : not indeed simply, but for 
the sake of leading to the effects we have already partly ezplained^and 
shall explain further. 

Xin. Nor is it true even that a war may not be begun immedi- 
ately after it has been declared : which Cyrus did in Armenia, and 
the Romans towards the Carthaginians, as we have already said. For 
a declaration of war does not, by the Law of Nations, require any 
definite time after it. But it may be requisite that, by Natural 
Law, some time may be required, in consequence of the quality of 
tho business : as for instance, if property is required to be restored, 
or criminals to be punished, and this b not refused. For then, 
so much time is to be given as may conveniently suffice for doing what 
is asked. 

XIV. But even if the rights of legation be violated, it does not 
follow that a declaration of war is not needed for the effects to 
which I refer: but it is sufficient if it be made in such way as it 
may safely be made, that is, by letter: as also it is usual to make 
summonses and denunciations in unsafe places. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Of the right of killing enemies informal War, and of other 

violence against the person. 

8soT. L 

EffecU of formal war in p»- 

nerah 

XL 

IL 

Lawful disHnguithed into 
what hat impunity and what 

is blameless. 

XIL 

III. 

The effects cf formal war 

are lawful as having tmpu- 

Xlll. 

ntty. 

IV. 

Whysudi effects introduced. 

V. 

Testimonies, 

VI. 

AH unthin the enemies* 

XIV. 

boundaries may be killed 

XV. 

and assailed. 

VU. 

What if they came thither 
before the war 9 

XVL 

VIII. 

The enemf^s subjects every 
where may be assailed. 

XVIL 

IX. 

This extends to women and 

XVIII. 

children ; 

XIX. 

X. 

And to captives ; and at all 

times* 

Even to those who, htniny 
surrendered, were not aO' 
cepted. 

And to those who surren' 
dered unconditionally. 
It is erroneous to refsr this 
Right to other causes, ae re- 
taliation, obsHnaey <nf de- 
fense. 

It extends to Hostages. 
By the Law of Nations, 
poisoning is forbidden. 
Also poisoned weapons and 
poisoning wells. 
Not spoiling waters in other 
ways. 

May Assassins be need $ 
Is Rape against the Law qf 
Nations 9 

I. f\^ the lino of Virgil, JEn, x. 14, in which he says that after the 
V^ declaration of war it will be lawful to rarage the enemy, Ser- 
yius Honoratus glreB an account of the origin of the Feciales, and the 
mode of claiming what had been taken from the Romans, and if satis- 
faction were not giyen by restoration, declaring war by throwing a spear. 
RaperBy to ravage, and satis/acere, to restore, were words of a technical 
comprehensiveness. And thus we learn that a war declared between 
two nations, or their heads, has certain peculiar and appropriate effecta, 
which do not follow from the nature of war itself: and this agrees with 
what we have already adduced from the Roman lawyers. 

IL 1 But Virgil said licebit, it will be lawful; let us see what that 
implies. For sometimes that is said to be lawful which is every way 
right and pious ; though something else might be done which is more 
laudable ; as St Paul says, all things (of a certain kind) are law/td for 
me, but all things are not expedient. Thus it is lawful to marry, even 
when celibacy is better ; it is lawful to marry a second time, though 
once only is better ; it is lawful for a Christian husband to leave hia 
pagan wife (in certain circumstances), but he may keep her: as 
Augustine says, both are lawful before Qod, but not alike expedient. 
Ulpian says, that a seller, after the day appointed for delivering the 

Chap. IV.] OP THE RIGHT OF KILLING, &c. 323 

wine, may let it run away ; but though he may thus shed it, if he do notf 
he is rather to be praised, 

2 In other cases a thing is said to be lawful, not which is agree- 
able to piety and duty, but which is not liable to punishment. So 
among some people fornication is, in this sense, lawful ; and among 
the Egyptians and Lacedeemonians, theft also. So the right of dividing 
the debtor^s body was lawful by the Twelre Tables. But this use of 
the word licere, to be lawful, is less proper, as Cicero says : it is not 
lawful to commit a sin, but we are deceived by an erroneous phrase; 
for we say that is lawful which is allowed by law : and in another place 
he says to the judges, you are not to consider what is lawful or allowed, 
but what is decent and proper. So to kings who are irresponsible 
everything is said to be lawful. But Claudian rightly says to a king» 
You are not to consider what is lawful, but witat becomes you. And so 
Musonius. 

3 And in this sense, what is lawful is often opposed to what is 
right {oportet), as in Seneca repeatedly. So Ammianus, Pliny, 
Cicero. And Cicero opposes fas esse, what is right by nature, to 
licere, what is allowed by law. And Quiutilian opposes jura, lawful 
rights, to justice. 

III. In this latter sense, it is lawful to harm an enemy, both in per- 
son and in property; and this, not only for him who is making a just 
war and who harms the enemy in the way which is allowed by Natural 
Law, as we hare explained ; but on both sides, and without distinction : 
so that he cannot for this reason be punished, if caught in another 
territory, as a homicide or a thief, nor can war be made on him on 
the ground of such an act. So Sallust says. All being lawful to the 
victor by the laws of war. 

IV. The reason of this rule among nations was this : that for 
other nations to offer to pronounce on the right of war between two 
peoples, would be dangerous for those who interfered, and who might 
thus be xnTolred in a war belonging to others ; as the Massilians said, 
in the case of Ceesar and Pompey, that they had neither jurisdiction 
nor power to discern which side was most in the right. And in the 
next place, it can scarcely be known by external indications, in a just 
war, what is the proper limit of self- defense, of recovery of property, 
or of exaction of punishment ; so that it is by all means better to 
leave this to the conscience of the belligerents, than to appeal to ex- 
traneous decision. So the Achseans in their oration to the Senate*, 
ask. In wJuxt manner are things done by the laws of war to be called 
under discussion f Besides this effect of this allowable character of acts, 
there is another, as regards ownership, of which we shall have to 
speak hereafter. 

Y. 1 This right of doing barm to the enemy, extends, first to 
their persons, as we have many testimonies in Greek authors. He is 
pure who slays enemies, according to the Greek proverb in Euripides. 

* Not to the Senate, but to Appiiis the legate in the Achfean ConncU. J. B. 

Y2 

32i OF THE RIGHT OF KILLING ENEMIES [Book IIL 

And therefore by the usages of the Greeks, though it was not lawful to 
wash, or to eat, or to drink, and still less to join in sacred offices, with 
those who had slain a man not in war ; yet it was lawful to do so with 
those who had slain in war. And perpetually, to slay, is called the 
right of war. So in Liry, Marcellus, and Alorcus, and so of the Asta- 
penses slain by the laws of war. So Cicero for Deiotanu and for 
Marcellus ; Csesar to the Haedui ; Josephus ; Statins ; speak of per* 
sons slain, or liable to be slain, by the right of war. 

2 That when these writers speak of the right of war, they do not 
mean a right free from all blame, but such an impunity as I hare men- 
tionod, appears from other places. So Tacitus says, In peace^ men'i 
ease and desert is regarded; when war comes, the guUty and the inno* 
cent /all alike. And elsewhere, Thejtutiee of men did not permit them 
to honour that slaughter, nor the right of war to avenge it. And in 
the same way we must understand the right of war which Liry says 
the Achiyi did not exercise against Eneas and Antenor, because they 
had always advised peace. So Seneca, in his epistles, says that The 
things which, if mjsn did pHvately, would siibject them to capital punish* 
ment, when they are done in the generaVs cloak, we praise; and Cy- 
prian, When individuals commit homicide, it is a crime; it is called a 
virtue when done publicly. Impunity is acquired not by innocence, but 
by the greatness of the mischief done. And again. Rights were cteeom^ 
modated to the convenience of the offenders, and that became lawful 
which was public. So Lactantius says that the Romans inflicted 
injuries legitimately, and Lucan speaks of right given to wickedness, 

VI. And this right to do such things as allowable, is rcry 
comprehensiye. For in the first place, it comprehends not only those 
who actually bear arms, or who are the subjects of him who makes 
the war, but all who are within the hostile boundaries ; as appears by 
the formula in Liyy : Let him be an enemy, and those that are under 
his protection. This is held, because such persons also may give 
occasion for fear, which in a continued and extended war, suffices to 
establish the right of which we speak. This case is different from 
that of securities [of individuals for the state], which, as we hare said, 
were introduced after the example of burthens imposed to pay the 
debts of the state ; wherefore it is not to be wondered at that much 
more is allowable in war than in the law of securities. And this is 
not a matter of doubt as concerns strangers who enter the enemy's 
confines when war has been begun and is known. 

YII. But those who had gone thither before the war, may, it 
would seem, by the law of nations, be held for enemies after a mode- 
rate time within which they could depart. And thus the Corcyreans, 
when about to besiege Epidamnus, first gave allowance to strangers 
to depart, and announced that if they did not, they would hold them 
for enemies. 

Vni. I As to those who are truly the subjects of the enemy, 
that is, from a permanent cause, it is allowable to attack them where- 

Chap. IV.] IX FORMAL WAR, &c. 325 

erer they are, by this right of nations, if wo regard their persons. 
For when war is declared against any people, it is declared against the 
men of that people, as wo shewed above; and so in the decree 
against Philip. And ho who is an enemy may be attacked every- 
where, as Euripides says. So Marcion, of deserters. 

2 Therefore wo may slay such persons on our own soil, on the 
hostile soil, on ground which is no one's, and on the sea. That it la 
not lawful to slay them, or do them violence, in a peaceful neutral 
territory, is a conscquonce, not of their personal rights, but of the 
rights of the lord of tho territory. For civil societies may establish 
a rule that, against those who are in any territory, nothing shall be 
done by violence, except when judicial proceedings have been tried ; 
as we have already quoted from Euripides. And when judicial pro* 
ceedings are in force, then tho deserts of persons are regarded, and 
there is an end of that promiscuous right of doing harm, which, as wo 
have eaid, has been established between enemies. Livy relates that 
seven ships of war of the Carthaginians were in a port belonging to 
Syphax, who was then at peace both with the Carthaginians and tho 
Romans ; and that Scipio came with two ships and might havo been 
destroyed by the Carthaginians before they entered the harbour; 
but that coming with a brisk wind they struck into tho port before 
the Carthaginians could riuso their anchors ; and tlien, in the port be- 
longing to the king, the Carthaginians did not venture to attack them. 

IX. 1 To return to tho subject ; how wide this allowance of 
doing harm to enemies extends, may be understood from this ; that 
the slaughter of infants and women is allowed to havo impunity, as 
comprehended in that right of war. I will not here adduce the 
slaying of the women and the little ones of Ilcshbon (Deut. ii. 34) ; 
and what they did to the Canaanites and their allies; for theso are 
tho doings of God, who has a more absolute right over men than men 
have over brutes. But a passage which approaches more nearly to a 
testimony of the common usage of nations, is that in the Psalms, 
cxxxvii. 9, Happy shall he be that taketh and dcuheth thy little one» 
against the stones. So Homer. 

2 When tho Thracians took Mycalessus they put to death the 
women and children. So the Macedonians did when they took 
Thebes ; the Romans when they took Ilurgis in Spain ; Germanicgs 
ravaged the Marsi with fire and sword without mercy to sex or age. 
Titus exposed the children and women taken at Jerusalem to fight 
with wild beasts in the public spectacles*. And yet Gcrmanicus and 
Titus are considered as humane men ; so much had that kind of cru- 
elty become customary. And hence wo aro tho lees to wonder that 
old men were slain, as Priam by Pyrrhus. 

X. 1 Even captives were not exempted from this liability. No 

* Barbejrac shews that this assertion is not supported bj good anthors, and is 
apparently taken from a declamation of Cardan against Titus. 

326 OF THE RIGHT OF KILLING ENEMIES [Book IIL 

law spares or protects a captiro. So Pyrrhus in Seneca, Scylla in 
the Ciris of Virgil ; and so in the case in Seneca, where the captive was 
a woman, Polyxena. So Horace. Donatus says that servi were so 
called because they were preserved when the law of war was that they 
should be slain. So the captives at Epidamnus were slain ; and five 
thousand captives by Annibal : and by M. Brutus not a few. So 
Ccesarianus in Hirtius speaks. 

2 Nor is the power of killing such captives excluded by any lapse 
of time, so far as the Laws of Nations are concerned ; though by the 
Laws of States, this right is restricted, in some places more» in 
some, less. 

XI. We have even examples constantly of persons who offer 
themselves as suppliants, and are put to death ; as seen in the act of 
Achilles in Homer, and Mago and Tumus in Virgil : which are narrated 
so as to imply a defense of the right of war which I have mentioned. 
And Augustine, praising the Goths who had spared those who begged 
f6r their lives, and those who took refuge in temples, says, What 
would have been allowable by the right of war, they held not aUoW' 
able for them. Nor are those who surrender always received, as 
in the battle of the Granicus, those were not who were serving 
under the Persians*; and in Tacitus, the Uspcnses praying for 
pardon for the free persons ; which prayer^ he says, the vietorg rs- 
jected, tJMt they might rather faU by the right of war. Here again note 
the right of war. 

XII. Even those who have surrendered unconditionally and been 
received, you may find, in history, put to death ; as the rulers of Po* 
metia by the Romans ; the Samnites t by Sulla, the NnmidianSy and 
Vercingentorix himself, by Csesar. Indeed this was almost the constant 
practice of the Romans towards the leaders of their enemies, whether 
taken or surrendered, that they should be put to death on the day of 
the triumph : as Cicero tells us, and Livy, Tacitus, and others. 
Tacitus also relates that Gkdba ordered a body of men to be decimated 
whom he had received begging for their lives: and Cecina, having 
had Avonticum surrendered to him, put to death Julius Alpinus, as the 
instigator of the war : but left the others to the clemency or cruelty 
of Vitellius. 

. XIII. 1 Historians sometimes mention, as the cause of putting to 
death enemies, especially captives or suppliants, the rule of retalia- 
tion, or their obstinacy in resisting: but these causes, as we have 
elsewhere explained, are rather suasory than justificatory. For reta^ 
Uation, which is just, and properly so called, must be exercised against 
the same person who has offended : as may be understood from what 
we have said of the punishment of accessories. But on the other hand, 
it commonly happens that what is called retaliation, falls upon those 

* This is not supported bj the historians of Alexander, as Barbejrac shews. 
f This is not supported bj good historians ; J. B. who explains the error. 

Chap. IV.] IN FORMAL WAR, &c. 327 

who bare no share in the blame which is charged. The practice is, 
that those who are defeated, are made to suffer what thoy had in- 
tended to inflict ; and that by such inflictions, the enemy are restrained 
from orerbearing sereiities. So Diodorus. 

2 As for obstinacy in defending one's own side, no one can think 
that a case for punishment, as the Neapolitans replied to Belisarius ; 
and this is especially true when the part of each side in the war is 
either assigned by nature, or by choice for honourable reasons. Indeed 
this obstinacy is so far from being a crime, that it is a crime if any 
one leare his post ; especially by the old military law of Rome : which 
admitted no excuse of fear or danger. To quit on^s post is with tha 
Romans a capital erimef says Livy. And therefore it is for his own 
utility, that a person uses this extreme rigour when he thinks it good : 
and this rigour is defended by that part of the Laws of Nations of 
which we now speak. 

XrV. The same right has also been used towards hostages ; and 
not those only who have bound themselves by some sort of convention, 
but those who are delivered up by others. By the Thessalians thero 
were put to death on one occasion two hundred and fifty: by the 
Romans, the Volsci Auninci, to the number of three hundred. It is 
to be noted also, that it was the custom to give boys as hostages, as 
by the Parthians ; and this was dono by Simon the Maccabee ; also 
women were given up by the Romans at the time of Porsena; and by 
the Germans, as Tacitus relates "**. 

XV. 1 As the Laws of Nations permit many things, (in this way 
of permitting which we have explained,) which are forbidden by Na- 
tural Law; so they forbid some things which are permitted by Natural 
Law. For him whom it is lawful to put to death, whether wo put to 
death by the sword or by poison, it makes no difforcnce, if we look 
to Natural Law. It b doubtless more generous to kill, so that he 
who is killed has the power of defending himself; but this is not due 
to him who has deserved to die. But the Laws of Nations, if not of 
all, at least of the best, have long been, that it is not lawful to kill an 
enemy by poison. This consent had its rise in common utility, that 
the dangers of war, which are numerous enough, may not be made too 
extensive. And it is probable that this rule proceeded from kings, 
whose life may be defended from other causes, better than the lives 
of other persons ; but is less safe than that of others from poison, 
except it be defended by the scruples of conscience, and the fear of 
infamy. 

2 Livy, speaking of Perseus, calls these clandestine atrocities : so 
Olandian and Cicero use like expressions. The Roman consols say 
that it is required, as a public example, that nothing of the kind be 
admitted, in the epistle to Pyrrhus which Qellius gives. So Valerius. 
And when the prince of the Catti offered to procure the death of 

* J. B. corrects this reference. 

328 OF THE RIGHT OF KILLING ENEMIES [Book IIL 

Arminius by poison, Tiberius rejected the offer ; thus gaining a glory^ 
like that of the ancient generals. Wherefore they who hold it lawfid 
to kill the enemy by poison, as Baldus, following Yegetios, regard 
mere Natural Law, and overlook the Instituted Law of Nations. 

XVI. 1 Somewhat different from poisoning, is the use of poisoned 
arrows or missiles, as approaching to open force : doubling the means 
of death, as Orid says. This was practised by the Get», Parthians, 
Africans, Ethiopians. This, however, is against the Law of Nations* 
not unirersal, but of European nations, and those which share in 
European culture, as John of Salisbury has rightly obserred* So 
Sillus speaks of making the weapon in/amoiu with poison. 

2 To poison fountains, which must be discorered before long, 
Florus says, is not only against old rule, but also against the law of 
the gods ; as the Laws of Nations are often ascribed to the gods ; nor 
is it to be wondered, if to diminish dangers, there be some such tadt 
conventions of belligerents ; as formerly in the permanent war of the 
Chalcidians and Eretrians, it was agreed not to use missiles*. 

XVIL But the same is not true of making waters foul and on. 
drinkable without poisoning them; which Solon and the Amphictyons 
are said to have justified towards barbarians : and Oppian mentions as 
customary in his time. For that is the same thing as turning away a 
stream, or intercepting a spring of water, which is lawful both by Natu* 
ral Law and by consent. 

XVIII. 1 It is often made a question, whether it be consistent 
with the Laws of Nations to send an assassin to put to death an enemy. 
But we must make a marked distinction between assassins who vio- 
late express or tacit faith ; as subjects towards a king, vassals towards 
a seigneur, soldiers towards their general; those received as suppli- 
ants or as guests or as deserters, towards those who have received 
them ; and on the other hand, those who are not bound by any such 
tie of good faith; as Pepin, the father of Charlemagne, wiUi one 
attendant passed the Rhine and slew his enemy in his chamber; and 
Polybius relates that Thoodotus the Etolian attempted the like against 
Ptolemy king of Egypt, a manly deed of daring. Such also is the 
attempt of Mutius Scsevola, praised by historians, which he himself 
defends, sa^^ing, An enemy I sought to slay an enemy. And Porsena 
himself saw nothing but courage in the act : Valerius Mazimus calls 
it a brave and pious deed ; Cicero praises it. 

2 In peril it is lawful to kill an enemy anywhere, not only by Natu- 
ral Law, but by the Laws of Nations, as wo have said above ; nor doe& 
it make any difference how many they are who do or who suffer in 
such case. The six hundred Lacedoemonians with Leonidas entered 
the enemies' camp, and sought their way to the royal tent. A smaller 
number might have done the same with equal right. Those were few 
who laid an ambush for Mctellus the consul and slew him : and those 

• Of such acts in war, see E. M. 10C2, &c. 

Chap. IV.] IN FORMAL WAR, Sie. 329 

who were very near stabbing PetilioB Cerialis in his bed. Ambrose 
praises Eleazar because he attacked an elephant which was eminent 
abore the rest, thinking that it carried the king. And not only they 
who do snch acts, but they who procure others to do them, are 
held blameless by the law of nations. The persons who impelled 
Scserola to his deed were the old Roman Senators, so admired for 
their sanctity in war. 

3 Nor ought any one to be moved by recollecting, that such per* 
sons, when taken, are put to the torture ; for that happens, not because 
they have offended against the Laws of Nations, but because by the 
same Laws of Nations anything is lawful against an enemy; and each 
person inflicts on his enemy a heavier or a lighter ill according to his 
own utility'*'. And thus spies, whom undoubtedly it is lawful by the 
laws of nations to send, such as Moses sent, of whom Joshua was one, 
if taken are subject to the severest inflictions : (as Appian says, It i$ 
the custom to kill spies) : and this is just in some cases, on the part of 
those who have a just cause of war; in others, is justifled by the 
allowance which the right of war gives. And if any have been found 
who would not stoop to use such means, that is to bo referred to their 
magnanimity, and trust in the open force which they can use, not to 
an opinion of what is just or unjust. 

4 But with regard to the assassins whose deed includes perfldy, 
we are to judge otherwise. For not only do the perpetrators of such 
deeds act contrary to the Laws of Nations, but also they who use 
their services. For though in other cases, they who use the services of 
bad men against enemies are held to offend in the eye of God, but not 
in the sight of man, that is, not to act against the Laws of Nations ; 
for in these cases, as Plautus says. Custom has drawn law to its side ; 
and as Pliny says. To deceive according to the manner of the time is 
called prudence ; yet this custom has stopped short of the right of 
murder. For they who make use of the perfidy of others for such 
purposes, are held to have violated, not only Natural Law, but also the 
Laws of Nations. This is convoyed in the letter of Alexander to 
Darius: You carry on an impious war; and though you act with arms 
in your hands, you bargain for the heads of your enemies. And again : 
You who have not even observed the rights of war towards me. And else- 
where. He is to be followed to his destructiony not as a regular enemy, but 
as an assassin or a poisoner. To the same rule is to be referred what 
is said of Perseus ; that he did not make arrangements for a regular war 
with a royal mind ; but used all the clandestine acts of assassins and 
poisoners. So Marcius Phillppus, referring to the same acts of Per- 
seus, that all those acts which voere hateful to the gods, he would feel in 
the sequd of his fortunes. And to the same point tends what Valerius 
Maximus says : that the killing of Viriatus brought on a double accusa-^ 
Hon of perfidy i^'ngainst his friends, in that he was taken off by their 

♦ See E. M, 1064. 

SSO OF THE BIGHT OF KILLING ENEMIES [BookIIL 

hands: — against Servilitis Caspio the coruul^ becatue he was the €tidhor of 
this erimef by granting impunity to the perpetraiorSf and thua did not 
eanif hut buy, a victory, 

6 The reason whj, in thiB case, a different mle was made» firom 
that which prerails in other things is, that the dangers which beset 
eminent persons may not be too extreme. Eomenes said, that he did 
not believe that any general wished to conquer in such a way thai he should 
esUibUsh a very bad example against himeelf, as Justin relates. And the 
same writer says that when Bessus had killed Darius, it was considered 
an example of what might happen to kings, and therefore a common 
cause of kings. So (Edipus in Sophocles ; and Seneca in his tragedy 
on the same subject. The Boman Consuls wrote to Pyrrhus, It aeemed 
suitable to common example and to good faith thai we should not be acees^ 
sary to your death. 

6 And thus in a regular war, or between those who hare the right 
of declaring a regular war, such a practice is not lawful. But out of 
regular war it is held lawful, also by the Laws of Nations. Thus, 
when such a plot was laid against Gannascus the traitor, Tacitus will 
not allow that it was degrading. Curtius says that the treachery of 
Spitamenee might be deemed less odious, because nothing that was 
done agsdnst Bessus, the murderer of his own king, could seem wrong. 
Thus also riolation of faith in dealing with pirates and robbers is not 
blameless ; but by usage, in consequence of the eril character of those 
against whom it is committed, it is unpunished. 

XIX. 1 The violation of women in war you may perpetually find 
both allowed and disallowed. Those who allowed it, looked only at 
the injury done to the person, and judged that it was not incongruous 
to the laws of war that what belonged to the enemy should be subject 
to such injury. But others have judged better, who regarded, not only 
the injury, but the act of uncontrolled lust; and that the act has no 
tendency either to security or to punishment ; and therefore ought to 
be no more unpunished in peace than in war: and this latter rule is 
the Law of Nations, not of all, but of the best. Thus Marcellus, before 
he took Syracuse, is recorded to hare provided for the security of 
chastity, even in the enemy. Scipio says that it concerns both him 
and the Boman people that nothing which is held sacred anywhere should 
be violated by them, that is, by the more cirilizcd people. Diodorus 
says of the soldiers of Agathocles, that they did not abstain from 
wicked violence against the women ; and Elian, when he had related 
that the women and virgins of Pellene were violated by the victorious 
Sicyonians, exclaims. Savage is this, O gods of Greece, and shocking 
even among barbarians, so far as I recollect. 

2 And it is fit that this rule should be observed by Christians, not 
only as part of military discipline, but as part of the Law of Nations : 
that is, that he who violates a woman, even in war, shall be every- 
where liable to punishment. By the Hebrew law, no one could have 

Chap. IV.] IN FORMAL WAR, &c. 331 

committed such an act with impunity; as may be understood from 
what is said, Deut. xxi. 14, of marrying a captire and then not selling 
her, on which place, Bechai, a Jewish master, obserros : Ood willed that 
Hit camp of the IsraeUtea should be holy^ not given up to fornication 
and other aboiniruUionSf like the camps of the heathen, Arrian, when he 
has narrated that Alexander was captirated with the lore of Rozana, 
adds, that he u>oiUd not humble her aa a captive^ but take her in marriages 
and praises the deed. Plutarch says of the same act, He did not 
humble her, but took her to wife like a philosopher. Plutarch relates also 
that by a decree of the Romans, a certain Torquatus was banished to 
the island of Corsica for violating a virgin of the enemy. 

that whi 
eminen^ 

330 OF THE BIQHT OF ^* 

kamdas — againti 8e^" 

Mi erims, by .^ y ^ 

Mm, hiU bur i/J^ 

f «^ '^ ftV/ojKtV Property. 

•*^^ ^ffMmap h§ III. And places of sepuliure. 

^"^ -w-^l^T^*^' ^^' H(wfarltff$traiagem$ 

// ^^ ft is not againat nature to despoil him whom it is 

/^fi^^hle to kill. Wherefore it is not to be wondered at if 

/ 1^ ^^f^onB permit the property of enemies to be destroyed and 

ki^^ ben it has permitted them to be killed. Polybius says that 

g^f^Tj^^ of War, all munitions of the enemy, ports, cities, men, 

AT ^MitB, and anything of like kind, may be either plundered or 

f^fffd. -And in Liry we road ; There are certain rights of war 

^^^00^ be exercised and mttst be submitted to; as to bum crops, to 

fjZy buildings^ to drive of booty of cattle and men. Indeed you find 

erei7 P^S^ ^^ history, whole cities destroyed, walls loTelled with 

^ ground, lands depopulated, conflagrations raised. And it is to be 

noted that these measures are allowed also against those who hare 

forrendered. The townsmen, says Tacitus, opened their gatts and put 

ihffnselves at the mercy of the Romans, which vmu their safety: Artaxatm 

%vas burnt, 

II. 1 The mere Law of Nations, setting aside the consideration 
of other duties, of which wo shall afterwards speak, docs not except 
sacred edifices, that is, those which are dedicated to God or to gods. 
When places are taken by the enemy, all ceases to be sacred, as Pompo- 
nius the Jurist says. The sacred places of Syracuse were desecrated by 
victory, as Cicero says. The cause of this is that the places which are 
called sacred are not really abstracted from human uses ; but are called 
sacred in consideration of the end to which they are destined. A 
sign of this is that when a people gives itself up to another people or 
king, it gives up also what are called sacred cdiflccs, as appears by 
the formula which we hare elsewhere cited from Livy. So Plautus 
in the Amphltruo, 

2 And therefore Ulpian says that public law includes sacred 
things also. Pausanias says that it is a practice common to Greeks 
and barbarians, that sacred things should be at their disposal who 
hare taken the city. So when Troy was taken, the image of Hercoean 
JoYO was granted to Sthonelus *, and Thucydidcs mentions many 
examples of this usage : that they who rule the land possess the temples. 
And Tacitus's account is not really different, that in the Italic towns 
all the ceremonies, temples, images, are under the Roman authority. 

3 Wherefore the people may change its will, and make a sacred 
building into a profane one; as Paulus and Venulcius not obscurely 

Chap. V.] OF RAVAGING AND PILLAGING PROPERTY. 333 

imply ; and we sec that, by the necesaity of the timcfl, sacred things 
are sometimes converted to the use of war by those who had con- 
secrated them; as by Pericles, under the promise of restoring as 
much; by Mago in Spain; by the Romans in the Mithridatic war; 
by Sulla, Pompey, Cocsar, and others. In Plutarch, Tiberius Grac- 
chus says ; Nothing is so sacred as what is dedicated to the honour of the 
gods ; yet this may he used and removed by the people. So Seneca says, 
thatybr the seruice of the public, temples are stripped^ and dedicated o&- 
jects turned into money. So Trebatius in the time of CoHsar. And 
Germanicus used this right of war, when in his war against the 
Marsians he destroyed the celebrated temple at Tanfana. So Virgil. 
And Pausanias notes that objects dedicated to the gods are taken by 
the Tictors; and Cicero calls this the law of war, speaking of P. 
Serrilius. So Livy, speaking of the ornaments of the temples brought 
by Marcellus from Syracuse to Rome. So C. Flaminius in Liry, 
and Fulvius in Polybius, and Coesar in Sallust. 

4 It is however true, that if there be any imago in which a 
divine virtue is supposed to exist, it is wicked that it should be vio- 
lated or destroyed by those who agree in that persuasion. And in 
this sense they who commit such acts are accused of impiety, or even 
of breaking the Laws of Nations ; that is, on the assumption of such 
an opinion. It is another matter if the enemies do not so think. 
Thus the Jews were not only permitted, but commanded to destroy 
the idols of the Gentiles. For their being forbidden to take and 
keep them was for this reason ; that the Hebrews might the more 
defeat the superstition of the Gentiles, being warned that there was 
defilement in the very touch of them ; not as if they spared the 
sacred objects of other nations, as Josephus expounds the fact ; no 
doubt speaking with a view to gain favour with the Romans : as he 
docs also in the explanation of another precept, the prohibition of 
naming the gods of the Gentiles : which he explains as if they were 
forbidden to speak evil of them ; whereas in reality the law did not 
permit Jews to speak of them with honour or without abomination. 
For the Hebrews knew, by the undoubted instruction of God, that 
these idols were not occupied cither by the Spirit of God, or by 
good angels, or by astral influences, as the misguided heathen 
thought, but by evil demons, the enemies of the human race : as 
Tacitus said rightly in describing the institutions of the Jews; All 
things are profane to them which are sacred to us. Thus when 
Xerxes destroyed the images of the Greeks, he did nothing contrary 
to the laws of nations, although the Greek writers greatly exaggerate 
his acts for the sake of throwing odium upon him. For the Persians 
did not believe that there was any divinity in idols, but that the Sun 
was God, and that fire was a portion of him. 

5 By the Hebrew Law, as Tacitus also rightly says, All except the 
priests were excluded from the threshold of the temple. But Pompey, as 
the same writer relates, entered the temple by the right of victory. 

834 OF BAVAGINO AND PILLAGING PROPERTY. [Book UL 

or, as AagoBiine says, not wUh ike daifotion of a wcrtH^ppm'i hut wUh 
ihs claim of a eonqtteror: and he did well in sparing the temple aod 
the things therein, although, as Cioero plainly says, not through 
religion, hut shame and the fear of obloquy; but ill in that he en- 
tered, doing so out of contempt for the true God; as also the Chal- 
deans are condemned by the prophets for doing. And some think that 
it was on this account Uiat, by a peculiar proTidence of God, Pompey 
was slain almost within sight of Judea, at Casius, a promontoi^ of 
Egypt. But if you regard the opinion of the Romansy there vaa in 
what he did nothing contrary to the Law of Natiooi. So the aame 
temple was consigned to destroction by Titus, as Josephus says, by 
the Laws of War. 

in. What wo hare said of sacred places is also to be understood 
of burial-places ; for these do not belong to the dead but the liTing^ 
either a people or a family. And thus as sacred places taken by 
the enemy cease to be sacred, so do places of burial ; as Paulus and 
Pomponius write : Ths sepulehrei of enemies are not obfeete of religion 
to ue; and therefore we may convert to any uee stones therein tahen. 
Which howerer is to be understood in such a way that the bodies of 
the dead are not to be ill-treated; for that is against the rights of 
burial, which is part of the Law of Nations, as we have elsewhere 
shewn. 

rv. I will briefly again notice that by the Law of Nations, our 
property may not only be rescued from the enemy's hands by 
force, but also that deceit which inTolres no perfidy is allowed, and 
eren the procurement of perfidy in others. In fact the Law of 
Nations has begun to connire at these smaller and frequent offenses, 
as the Ciyil Laws conniTO at prostitution and usury. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Of the right of acquiring things captured in War, 

Sect. I. The Law of Nature as to XIV. 

Captures. 
IL The Law €f Nations, 
IIL When are moveables cap^ XV. 

tured9 

IV. When lands 9 XVI. 

V. What is not enemies' pro- 
perty is not acquired, XVII. 

VI. Goods found in enemies* 

ships f XVIII. 

VII. By the Law of Nations we XIX. 
acquire what the enemy had X X. 
taken from others, XXI. 

VIII. That captures belong to the 
individual captors, refuted, XXII. 

IX. By Natural Law posses- 
sion and ownership are ac- 
quired per alium. XXIII. 

X. Public and Private acts of 

war. XXIV. 

XI. Land acquired to ifie people XXV. 
or party making the war, 

XII. Moveables taken by private XXVI. 

act belong to the individual 

captors, XXVII. 

X III. Except barred by Civil Law, 

Moveables taken by pubKo 
act belong to the State mak' 
ing the war, 

But by usage, the command* 
ers have the disposal : 
Who give them to the trea^ 
sury ; 

Or divide them among the 
soldiers; and how; 
Or give them up to plunder ; 
Or grant them to others ; 
Or make some partition. 
Peculation applies to plun- 
der. 

This Common Rule may be 
changed by Law or other 
act. 

Thus the booty is granted to 
allies ; 

Or to subjects. 
The use of what has been 
said. 

Of things captured out of the 
territory of both parties. 
How the above Rights be* 
long to Formal War, 

I, I T) ESIDES the impunity of certain acts among men, which we 
fj hare hitherto noticed as one of the effects of war, there ig 
another effect peculiar to a war regular according to the Law of 
Nations : namely, acquisition. 

By Natural Law we acquire in a just war such things as are equi- 
Talent to a deht due to us which we cannot otherwise obtain, or such 
things as Inflict on a guilty person a reasonable measure of punish- 
ment, as we hare explained elsewhere. By this right Abraham gare 
of the spoil which he had taken from the five kings, a tenth to God, 
as the narratiye in Oen. sir. is explained by the writer to the Hebrews, 
Tii. 4. And in the same way the Greeks, the Carthaginians, and the 
Romans, consecrated a tendi of their booty to their gods, Apollo, 
Hercules, and Jupiter Feretrius. And Jacob, leaylng to Joseph his 
legacy, says, / give thee a portion above thy brethren which I took from 
the hand of the Amorite with my aword and with my bow : Gen. xlriii. 
22. In which place the word took seems to be used by a prophetic 

336 OF THE RIGHT OF ACQUIRING [Book III. 

mode of spoakiDg for shall take ; and that is ascribed to Jacob which 
his posterity were to do : as if the progenitor and his descendants 
were the same person. For this is a better explanation than to refer 
it to the plunder of the Shechemites, which had been already perpe- 
trated by the sons of Jacob : for that deed Jacob, as a pious man, 
always condemned. Gen. zzxir. 30 ; zllx. 6. 

2 That the right of taking booty within the natural boundaries 
which I hare mentioned was approred by God, appears from other 
places also. God, in his law, speaking of a city taken after it had 
refused peace, says, Deut. zz. 14 : All the spoil thereof ehali thou take 
to thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies which the 
Lord thy Ood hath given thee. So 1 Chron. t. 20, the Rcubenites, 
Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh, made war upon the Hagarites 
and their neighbours, and took much spoil ; there being added as a 
reason, that they cried to God in the battle and he was entreated of 
them. Also 2 Chron. zir. 13, the pious king Asa is related to hare 
cried unto the Lord, and to hare conquered the Ethiopians who 
attacked him unjustly, and to hare carried away rery much spoil : 
which is the more to be noted, because in that case arms were not 
taken up by a special mandate, but on the ground of the common 
Laws of Nations. 

3 Also Joshua, (zzil 8) when he sent away the Reubenites, and 
blessed them, said. Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren. 
And Darid, (1 Sam. zzz. 2C) when he sent to the Hebrew elders 
part of the spoil of the Amalekitcs, said, Behold a present to you of 
the spoil of the enemies of the Lord. Indeed as Seneca says, it is a 
graceful thing for a military man to enrich a friend with the spoil of 
an enemy. There are also dirine laws concerning the diTision of the 
spoil. Num. zzzi. 27. And Philo says that it is among the curses of 
the law, that the land be plundered by the enemy, whence want to 
friends and abundance to enemies. 

II. 1 But by the Laws of Nations, not only he who for just 
cause carries on a war, but any one, in a regular war, may without 
limit or measure take and appropriate what belongs to the enemy, 
to this effect, that both he and those who derire their title to the 
property from him are to be defended in possession thereof. So 
Xenophon and Plato say that in war all the property of the con- 
quered becomes the right of the conqueror : and the latter in ano- 
ther place enumerates among the natural modes of acquisition that 
by war, contest, or strong hand ; and in this Xenophon agrees with 
him, as where Euthydemus is made to allow that it is not unjust 
to despoil an enemy. 

2 So Aristotle says the law is a sort of conyention by which 
what is taken in war becomes the property of the captors. So Anti- 
phanes, Plutarch, Xenophon, Philip, Eschines. 

3 Marcellus in Liry speaks of what he took from the Syracusans 
as taken by the laws of war. So the Romans to Philip, Masinissay 

Chap. VL] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAR. 337 

Miihridates in Justin, Cicero, of Mitylene. So ho says, that private 
property hegan when men took possession of what was vacant, or won 
it in war. So Dio Cassias, and Clemens Alczandrinus. 

4 What is taken from the enemy becomes the property of the captor^ 
says Cains the Jurist. This Theophilus calls natural acquisition ; so 
Aristotle. For in this case the naked fact of possession is looked 
At, and right arises from that. So Nerva, as Paulus quotes him, said 
that ownership arises from natural possession ; and that a yestige of 
this right appears in things which are taken in hunting, and also in 
war, which forthwith are the property of the captors. 

6 Those things are supposed to he taken from the enemy which 
are taken from his subjects. So Dercyllides reasons in Xcnophon, 
that since Phamabazus is the enemy of the Laccdcemonians, and 
Manias the subject of Phamabazus, the goods of Manias are in a con«- 
dition in which they may be fairly captured as prize of war. 

III. 1 But in this question of war, it has been established as a rule 
of nations, that he is understood to hayo captured a thing who detains 
it in such a manner that the other has lost probable hope of recoyer* 
ing it ; or so that the thing has escaped from his grasp, as Pompo- 
nius says. And in moyeables, this is applied so that things are con- 
sidered as captured when they are brought within the boundaries, or 
intra prasidia^ under the protection of the enemy. A thing is lost in 
the same way in which it is recoyered by postliminium : and it is 
recoyered when it comes again within the boundaries of the empire, 
which is elsewhere explained as intra prcesidia. Indeed Paulus 
expressly says of a man, that he is lost when he goes out of our 
boundaries ; and Pomponius explains a man taken in war to be 
one of ours whom the enemy has taken and brought intra prassidia 
sua : and that till then he is a citizen. 

2 A man and a thing in this part of the Law of Nations are under 
the same rule. Hence it is to be understood that when it is said 
that things captured forthwith become the property of the captors, 
is to be understood with a certain condition, namely, that the pos- 
session continues till they are thus brought intra proisidia. Whence 
it seems to follow that at sea, ships and other things captured are 
understood to be captured when, and not till, they are brought into 
dock or harbour, or to the place where the fleet is; for then reco- 
very becomes desperate. But we find that it has been established 
by the more recent law of nations among Europeans that such 
things are understood to be captured when they have been twenty- 
four hours in the possession of the enemy. 

IV. 1 But lands are not understood to be captured as soon as 
they are occupied. For though it be true that the part of the 
land which an army has entered upon with a great force is for the 
time in its possession, as Celsus notes ; yet for the effect of which 
we speak, possession of every kind is not sufficient, but firm 
possession is required. Thus the Romans were so far from judg- 

Z 

338 OP THE RIGHT OF ACQUIRINO [Book IIL 

ing the land on which Annibal had planted his camp to be lost, 
that at that rery time it sold for no less than it had sold for be- 
fore. That land then is conceirod to bo captured, and no other, 
which is included in permanent defenses, so that it is evident there 
is no access to it till these are carried. 

2 And this origin of the word territoryy a terrendt$ hosttbusp 
from terrifying the enemies from it, given by Siculus Flaccus, ap- 
pears no less probable than that given by Yarro, a terendoy from 
ploughing it ; or that of Frontinus'^, from tenroy the land ; or that 
of Pomponius the jurist, from the right which the magistrates had 
terrendi, of going out with the lictors before them (GronoT.). So Xeno- 
phon says that possession in the time of war is held by muniments. 

y. This also is plain, that in order that a thing may become 
ours by the right of war, it is requisite that it should have be- 
longed to the eneniy. The thinp wluch are in the hands of the 
enemy, as in their houses or under their protection, but of which 
the owners are neither subjects of the enemy nor hostile in inten- 
tiouy cannot be acquired by war; as Eschines shews that Amphi- 
polls, which dty belonged to the Athenians, could not become the 
property of Philip by his war against the Amphipolltans. For the 
reason why it should do so is wanting; and this right of changing tho 
ownership by mere force is too odious to be extended beyond the 
strict meaning of the rule. 

YI. Wherefore what is said, that goods found in Enemies' ships are 
to be treated as enemies' goods, ought not to be accepted as a settled 
rule of tho Law of Nations, but as indicating a certain presumption 
which may be rebutted by valid proofs to the contrary. And so it was 
judged in full senate by our Hollanders in 1333, when a war was 
raging with the Hanse towns ; and the judgment has become law. 

Vn. 1 But this is beyond controversy, if we look at the Laws of 
Nations, that those things which we take from our enemies cannot be 
reclaimed by those who possessed them before the enemy, and lost them 
in war ; because the law of nations first made them owners prima 
facie, and then us. And on this ground, among others, Jephtha defends 
himself against the Ammonites, because the land which the Ammon- 
ites claimed had passed by the law of war from the Anunonites, as also 
another part from the Moabitcs to the Amoritcs, and from the Amor- 
ites to the Hebrews. So David takes as his own and divides what 
he had taken from the Amalekites, and the Anudekites before from 
the Philistines. 

2 Titus Largius, when the Yolsci reclaimed in the Roman Senate 
what they had formerly possessed, declared that the Romans held the 
right of possession of land by conquest to be good, and would not 
recede from it. So the Romans in their answer to the Aurunci ; and 
again to the Yolsci ; and to the Samnites. 

3 Livy, after relating that the land near Luna was dirided by the 

* FrontinnB it here misqaoted : see Barbejraot 

Chap. VI.] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAE. 389 

Romans, remarks. This land had been taken Jrom the Ligurians, aihd 
had at a still previous period belonged to the Etruscans, On this ground 
they retained Syria, and did not restore it to Antiochus Pius, from 
whom Tigranes, an enemy of the Romans, had won it. And so Pom- 
pey replied to the same Antiochus [Antiochus Magnus, J, B.]> that he 
had not taken i$ Jrom him^ and would not give him what he did not know 
how to defend. So those parts of Gaul which the Cimbri had taken 
from the Gauls, the Romans kept as their own. 

Yin. It is a more serious question, who becomes the owner of 
tlungs of the enemy taken in a public and regular war ; whether the 
people itself, or particular persons of the people, or in the people. On 
this point the recent interpreters of the law greatly yary. The greater 
part of them, haying read in the Roman Law that things captured 
become the property of the captors, and in the body of canons, that 
the booty was distributed by public order, haye followed one another, 
as is usual in such cases ; and haye said that in the first place, and by 
law, the captures become the booty of the persons who actually take 
them, but that they are to be assigned to the general to distribute 
among the soldiers. As this opinion, though generally receiyed, is 
&lse, it must be carefully refuted by us, as a specimen how little safety 
there is in such authority on such subjects. For it cannot be doubted 
that by the consent of nations either rule might be established ; that 
captures might go, either to the people which makes the war, or to the 
indiyiduals who actually take them. But we inquire what they really 
haye established, and we say that they haye ruled that the property 
of enemies should be, for enemies, in the same condition as res nuUius, 
that which is no one's property, as we haye already explained from the 
dictum of Nerya (§ n. Art. 4). 

IX. 1 Now res nullius do indeed become the property of those 
who take them, but of those who take them by the agency of others, 
as well as by their own. Thus, not slayes only, or sons who are under 
their fathers, but also free men, if they work for others in fishing, 
fowling, hunting, pearl-fishing, acquire their captures for those who 
employ them. So Modestinus says that the possession which we can 
acquire by naiwral law, we may acquire by any one whom we appoint: 
and Paulus, in a well known maxim : We acquire possession by bodily or 
mental act: the mental act is our own ; the bodily act may be ours or 
another's ; which he explains to mean, if others giye their labour to 
us. Thus, among the Greeks, the prizes at the Olympian Games were 
gained by those who sent the combatants. The reason is, that by 
Natural Law, a man who wills it, may be the instrument of another 
who wills it, as we haye elsewhere said. 

2 Wherefore the distinction which is deliyered between free per- 
sons and seryile, as to acqidsitions, belongs to the Ciyil Law, and pro- 
perly pertains to ciyil acquisitions, as appears from the passage quoted 
from Modestinus. And eyen these ciyil ac:;[uisition8, the emperor 
SeyeroB afterwards brought nearer to the example of natural acquisi- 

Z2 

340 OF THE RIGHT OP ACQUIRING [Book IIL 

tions, not only for the sake of utility, as he professes, but also of 
jarisprudence. Hence, setting aside Ciril Law, the rule holds, that 
what a person can do by himself he may do by another, and it is the 
same thing whether ho do it by himself or by another. 

X. But in our question, we must distinguish between acts 
really public done in a war, and prirate acts done on the occasion 
of a public war : and by these prirate acts, things are acquired by 
prirate persons primarily and directly; by those public acts, they 
are acquired to the public. And by this law of nations Scipio deals 
with Masinissa : Syphax was conquered and taken under ihs atupiees 
of the Roman people ; therefore he and aU that was his is tha booty of 
the Roman people. In the same way Antiochus the Great argued 
that Coele-Syria became the property of Seleucus, not of Ptolemy, 
because the war was the war of Seleucus, and Ptolemy had only acted 
as an auxiliary. 

XI. I Landed property cannot be taken except by a public act, 
by leading in an army, and establishing strong places. Therefore, as 
Pomponius gare his opinion: Land which is taken from, an enemy 
becomes ptiblic property : that is, as he explains, does not become pri- 
tate booty. So Salome the proefectus prastorii said : That captives and 
other things should become private booty is not unreasondbUf (that is, if it 
be done by the public consent,) but land belongs to the prince and 
people of Rome, 

2 So among the Hebrews and Lacedsemonians [Qu. Athenians, 
/. B,\ land taken in war was dirided by lot. So the Romans, 
when they took land in war, either kept it and let it for rent, some- 
times leaving a small portion to the ancient possessor, honoris gratia ; 
or sold it ; or assigned it to settlers ; or imposed a ground-rent upon 
it ; as we haye perpetual eyidence in the laws, and histories, and in 
the commentaries of the agrimensores. So Appian. Cicero, in his 
Oratio pro Dom^o sua, notes that sometimes lands taken from the 
enemy were consecrated by the Imperator, but by order of the People. 

XXL I Things moyeable and self-moying are cither taken in the 
public seryice or extraneously to it. If extraneously to it, they are 
the property of the indiyidual captors. To this we must refer what 
Celsus says, The things which, belonging to the eneniy, are in our hands^ 
are not public property t but the property of those who take possession : 
the things which are in our hands, that is, which are found with 
us when war arises. The same rule was obseryed with regard to 
men, at the time when men were reckoned among things captured. 
There is a noted passage of Typho on the subject : TTiose who in peace 
come to another nation, if war between the nations suddenly breaks out, 
become the slaves of those enemies among whom their destiny has thrown 
them. Ho speaks of destiny because they are reduced to slavery by no 
desert of their own. So Nasyius, It is the destiny of the MetelU to be 
consuls at Rome. 

2 It follows from the same view, that what soldiers capture, when 

Chap. VI.] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAR. 341 

not on duty or on service to which they are ordered, but in the course 
of what thoy do by promiscuous right or by permission, is forthwith 
their own : for they do this not as public serrants. Such are spoils 
which they win from any enemy in single combat ; and such as they 
take in free excursions not made by order, at a distance from the 
enemy ; (the Roman rule was ten miles, as we shall see). This kind of 
capture the Italians at present call correriOf plunder, and distinguish 
it from butinaf booty, 

XIII. But when we say that by the law of nations such things 
are acquired directly by indiyiduals, we are to understand that this is 
the law of nations previously to all ciyil law. For any nation may 
establish a different rule with regard to its own subjects ; and antici- 
pate the ownership of individuals, as we see in many places done with 
regard to wild beasts and birds [by game-laws]. And so a rule may 
be introduced by law that all things which are taken from the enemy 
shall bo public property. 

XIV. I But with regard to the things which any one takes by a 
regular military process, the case is different. For then individuals 
bear the character of the State and act on its behalf; and therefore 
the people, if the civil law do not otherwise direct, obtains through 
them both possession and ownership, and transfers it to whom it will. 
And as this is directly at yariance with public opinion, we must adduce 
proofs more largely than usual, from the examples of the most eminent 
peoples. 

2 I begin with the Greeks. Homer speaks of the cities being 
divided which had been taken : he makes Achilles say that he gave to 
Agamemnon all that he won in war. In which case Agamemnon is to 
be regarded partly as the prince of all Greece, and as representing the 
people; and partly as holding the office of general, and therefore 
having a larger share than the rest. So in another place Achilles says 
to him. [See.] And in another place, Agamemnon offers to Achilles, 
by the public consent, a ship full of brass and gold and twenty female 
slares. So Virgil, speaking of the capture of Troy, describes the 
plunder under the custody of Phoenix and Ulysses. So at a later 
period, Aristides guarded the booty taken at Marathon. After the 
battle at Platssa there was a serere edict that no one should privately 
take any part of the booty. Afterwards, when Athens was conquered, 
the booty was made public property by Lysander: and the Spartan 
officers who had to deal with this measure were called prize-sellers. 

3 If we go to Asia, the Trojans were accustomed, as Virgil teaches, 
to draw prizS'lots, as is done in dividing common property. In other 
cases the decision of the matter was with the general : and by this 
right. Hector promises Dolon the horses of Achilles when he stipulates 
for them; by which you may see that the right of prize- treasure 
was not in the captor alone. So when Cyrus was victor, the booty 
was taken to him ; and when Alexander, to him. 

If we look at Africa the same custom recura. Thus what was 

342 OP THE RIGHT OF ACQUIRINO [Book nt 

taken at Agrigentum^ and in the battle of Gannse, and elsewhere, was 
sent to Garthage. 

Among the ancient Franks, as we learn from Gregory of Tours, 
what was captured was diyided by lot ; and the king had nothing of 
the booty but what the lot gave him. 

4 But in proportion as the Romans were eminent abore other 
nations in military matters, they are the most worthy examples to refer 
to. Dlonysias of Halicamassus, a most diligent obsenrer of Roman 
manners, thus teaches us on this subject : WhcUever ia captured from 
th/b enemy, the law directs to be public property ; so that not only private 
persons are not the owners of it, hut even the gemral is not. The 
Questor takes it, sells it, and carries the money to the public account. 
These are the words of those who accuse Goriolanus, somewhat turned 
to the purpose of making him odious. 

XV. For, that the people was the owner of the prize-treasure 
was true; but it was not less true that the office of deciding on its 
distribution had been left with the General while the republic was 
free ; with the condition that he was responsible to the people. So 
L. Emilius, Cities taken not surrendered, are plundered; but in these 
eases the decision is with the general, not the soldiers. But this deci- 
uon which usage gare to the general, they sometimes, in order to 
ayoid all suspicion, threw upon the Senate, as Gamillus : and they who 
retained it, in proportion as they were actuated by conscience, repu- 
tation, or ambition, are found to hare used it diyersely. 

XVI. 1 They who wished to be, or to appear, most scrupulous, 
did not at all touch the booty, but if the prize were money, directed 
it to be receired by the questor ; or, if it were other objects, ordered 
them to be sold by auction (sub hastd) by the questor : and on this 
account the money thus raised was called manubice. This money 
was transferred by the questor into the treasury : being in the first 
place howeyer, if there was a triumph, publicly shewn. So Liyy of 
G. Valerius ; Yelleius of Pompey ; Gicero of himself. And this was 
the common custom in the good old times. So Plautus. 

2 But other generals sold the booty themselyes without the inter- 
yention of the questor, and transferred it to the treasury, as is to be 
collected from the words of Dionysius. So when king Tarquin had 
conquered the Sabines, he sent the booty and the captiyes to Rome. 
So Romilius and Yeturius the consuls are related to haye sold the 
booty on account of the low state of the treasury, the army being 
much discontented with the proceeding. But inasmuch as this occurs 
perpetually, there is no need to accumulate examples, how much each 
general carried to the treasury from Italian, African, Asiatic, Gallic 
and Hispanic triumphs. That is rather to be noted, that the booty, 
or a part thereof, was sometimes giyen to the gods, sometimes to the 
soldiers, and sometimes to others. To the gods either the captured 
things themselyes were giyen, as the spoils which Romulus hung up 
to Jupiter Feretrius, or the money produced from them, as Tarquinius 

Chap. VL] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAB. 343 

Superbus from tho Pometine spoil built the temple of Jupiter in the 
Tarpeian mount. 

XVn. 1 To give the plunder to tho soldiers appeared to the 
ancient Romans an act sarouring of ambition or popularity-hunting: 
as Sextus the son of Tarquin the Proud, while an exile at Gabii, is 
said to haye distributed the booty among the soldiers, as a mode of 
gaining influence. Appius Claudius in the senate condemned a simi- 
lar liberality as new, lavish, and imprudent. 

Booty which is giren up to the soldiers is either dirided or scranu 
bled for. It may be divided either in the proportion of the pay, or 
of the deserts of individuals. That it should be divided in proportion 
to the pay, was the direction of Appius Claudius ; and if he could not 
carry that, that the money raised from it should be transferred to the 
treasury. Polybius explains accurately the whole scheme of such a 
division ; namely, that one part of the army, the lesser portion, was 
copimonly sent to collect the booty; and that what each found he 
was ordered to bring into the camp, that it might be equally divided 
by the tribunes ; those being summoned to take their share who had 
guarded the camp, (which also was ordered by David among tho 
Hebrews, and thence, as we Icam, passed into a law,) and those 
who had been absent from sickness, or any sent off on service 
elsewhere. 

2 But it was not the booty itself, but the money raised from it, 
which was given to the soldiers in the place of the booty, which was 
often done in the triumph. I find this proportion in Livy; one 
share to a foot-soldier, twice as much to a centurion, three times as 
much to a horseman or knight. Sometimes one share to each of the 
foot, two to the horse. Again, one share to the foot- soldier, two to 
the centurion, four to the tribune and the horsemen. Often account 
was taken of desert, as Marcius, in consideration of his bravery, was 
rewarded out of the spoils of Corioli by Posthumius. 

3 In whatever way the division was made, it was allowed to 
the general to take a fint choice, some principal thing, of what 
value he chose, that is, what he thought fair: and this was some- 
times awarded to others on account of their valour. So Euripides 
in the TroadeSf speaking of the noblest of the Trojan women, says, 
that they were given to the leaders of the army. And of Andro- 
mache, that in this way she became the property of Pyrrhus. So 
Ascanius says, in Vii*gil, that the shield and the helmet he will ex- 
clude from the division by lot. Herodotus tells us that after the bat- 
tle at Platsea, Pausanias had, given to him, tho most eminent objects, 
women, horses and camels. So king TuUius received Ocrisia, the prin- 
cipal person of the Comiculanse. Fabricius in Dionysius, in his oration 
to Pyrrhus, says. Of those things which were taken in war, it w<u 
aUofwed me to take what I chose. Isidorus, referring to this passage, 
when he speaks of military law, says, the distribution of ike spoil is, a 
just division according to the quaUlies and per/ormance$ of persons, and 

5i4t OF THE RIGHT OF ACQUIRINa [Book m. 

the princess portion. Tarquin the Proud, as it stands in Liry, both 
wished to enrich himself and to win the minds of the people with 
the distribution of prize-money. Ser?iliu8 in his oration for L. Pau- 
luSy says that he might hare made himself rich by diriding the 
shares of booty "^t And there are writers who think that the prince's 
portion was rather what was really meant by manubioBf as Asoonlns 
Pedianus. 

4 But those persons are more praised who, giring up their right, 
took no part of the booty to themselTOs; like Fabricius, of whom I 
ha?e spoken. Who in his hve 0/ glory put ande even jutt ffoinf as Dio* 
nysius says ; which he said he did according to the example of Yale* 
rius Publicola, and a few others. And these, M. Porcius Cato also 
imitated in his Spanish yictory; asserting that nothing should come 
to him from the spoils of war, except what he had spent in meat 
and drink : adding howerer, that he did not blame the generals who 
had accepted the adyantages usually granted ; but that he would rather 
contend for the prize of rirtue with the best, than for the pre-emi- 
nence in wealth with the richest. Nearest to this praise come those 
who have taken to themselycs a moderate share of the prize-trea* 
sure ; as Pompey in Lucan is pnusod by Cato, for haying giren op 
more than he kept. 

5 In the dirision, there is sometimes account taken of those who 
have been absent; as Fabius Ambustus directed when Anxnr was 
taken. And sometimes for some special reason account is not taken 
of some of those who were present, as of the Minutian army, by the 
dictator Gincinnatus. 

6 The right which, under the old republic, the Imperator had, was 
after the extinction of the republic, transferred to the magistri mt/t* 
turn, as appears by the Codex of Justinian; where, in speaking of 
reports to be made to the emperor, of the proceedings of the military 
authorities, an exception is made with regard to donations of moTe* 
ablos which the mctgistri militum make to the soldiers out of the 
spoils of the enemy; whether in the occupation of war, or in tho 
places where thoy are known to liye. 

7 But this division, from an early period, gave opening to calumny, 
as if the generals had in this way sought private favour; on which 
ground accusations were brought against Servilius, Coriolanus, Ca« 
millus, as having lavished the public treasure upon their friends and 
clients. And thoy defended themselves by alleging the public good, 
that they who had had a share in the servicef by receiving the reward of 
their labour^ might be more prompt to other expeditions, as Diony- 
sius says, 

XVIII. 1 I come now to speak of indiscriminate pillage. This was 
granted to the soldiers, either when a country was to be ravaged ; or, 
after a battle or the taking of a town, it was allowed that pillage 

* Not himself, but Senrius Galba, who was discontented that he was not 
allowed to make the division. J. B. 

Chap. VI.] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAR. 345 

was to begin at an appointed signal. This was rare in early ages, but 
stiU, not without example. Tarquinius gave up Suessa to be pillaged 
by the soldiers ; Q. Servilius the Dictator gare up the camp of the Equi 
to the same fate : Camillus the city of Veii ; Senrilius the consul, the 
camp of the Yolsci ; L. Valerius permitted pillage in the country of the 
Equi; Q. Fabius did so when the Volsci had been dispersed, and 
Ecetra taken ; and others frequently on subsequent occasions. When 
Perseus was conquered, Paulus the consul gave the spoils of the army 
which was defeated to the infantry, the plunder of the surrounding 
country to the caralry. The same leader, by a decree of the senate^ 
garo up the cities of Epirus to pillage by the soldiers. When Lu- 
cullus conquered Tigranes, he long restrained the soldiers from taking 
spoil, but at last, when the rictory was certain, he gave permission to 
pillage. Cicero puts, among the ways of acquiring property, if we 
take anything from the enemy which is not liable to be di?ided and 
sold on the public account. 

2 They who condemn this practice say, that greedy hands, actiTO 
in pillage, are so forward as to snatch the prizes which ought to fall 
to the share of the brayest; for it commonly happens that they who 
are slowest in fight are quickest in plunder, while the brarest soldiers 
commonly take the main share of danger and toil ; as Appius says in 
Liry. And so in Xenophon. On the other hand it is said that what 
each takes from the enemy with his own hand and carries home, is 
more grateful and valued than a thing of many times the yaluOf 
which he receiyes at the will of another. 

3 Sometimes again, pillage is allowed, when it cannot be pre^ 
Tented. In the storming of Cortuosa, a town of the Hetrusci, Livy 
says. The Tribune$ directed that the booty should be pttblic property ; but 
the eommand was too slow for the intention. The soldiers had alrecidy 
taken the booty^ and it could not be taken from them without doing a 
very odious thing. So the camp of the Gallo-Grsecians was plundered 
by the troops of C. HeWius contrary to the general's wish. 

XIX. What I have said, that booty or prize-money is sometimes 
given to others than soldiers, generally happens, in order that those 
who hare contributed to the expenses of the war should be remune- 
rated ; we may also sometimes read of public spectacles provided out 
of the spoils. 

XX. 1 But not only have different usages prevailed in different 
wars, but in the same war the same booty has often been applied to 
different uses, either by dividing it into parts, or by distinguishing 
the kind of objects. Thus Camillus dedicated the tenth part of the 
spoil to Pythian Apollo, following the example of the Greeks, which 
however, came originally from the Hebrews: and at that time, the 
dedication of a tenth of the spoil was held by the priests to include, 
not moveables only, but the lands and the city. By the same gene- 
ral, when victorious over the Falisci, the greater part of the booty 
was transferred to the questor, and a small part only given to tho 

346 OP THE RIGHT OP ACQUIRINa [Book IIL 

Boldien. So L. Manilas, either sold the spoil, that part of it which wa$ 
to go to the public, or divided it among tJie soldiers, taking care that 
the division shotdd be exactly fair, as Liyy says. 

2 The classes of objects into which spoil may be dirided, are 
these: men, captiyes, herds and flocks, which the Greeks, when they 
speak strictly, call Xc/a ; money and other moYoables, either precions 
or common. Q. Fabius, when he had conquered the Volsci, ordered 
the Xe/a and spoils to be sold by the questor; he himself managed 
the money. The same, when the Yolsci and ^qui were conquered, 
gare to the soldiers the captives, except the Tusculans ; and in the 
land of Ecetra, gave up men and cattle to pillage. L. Cornelius, 
when Antium was taken, transferred to the treasury the gold, silver, 
and brass; the captives and spoil he sold by the questor; he gave up 
to the soldiers what pertained to food and raiment. Nor was the 
rule of Cincinnatus dissimilar, who, when he became master of Oor- 
bio, a town of the ^qui, sent the more precious parts of the spoil 
to Rome, and divided the rest according to centuries. Camillus, 
when Yeii was taken, assigned nothing to the public except the 
money from the sale of the captives. When the Hetrusci were con- 
quered, and the captives sold, out of the money he repaid to the 
matrons the gold which they had contributed, and placed three 
golden paterse in the Capitol. When Cossus was dictator, all the 
prey of the Yolsci, except the bodies of the free men, was given up 
to the soldiers. 

3 When Fabricius had conquered the Lucani, Brutii and Sam- 
nites, he enriched the soldiers, restored the tributes to the cities, and 
carried forty talents to the treasury. Q. Fulvius and Appius Clau- 
dius, when the camp of Hannibal was taken, sold the booty and 
divided it, giving donations to those who had performed eminent 
services. Scipio, when Carthago was taken, gave up to pillage what 
was in the city, excepting the gold, silver, and donations. Acilius, 
when Lamia was taken, partly divided and partly sold the spoil. Cn. 
Manlius when the Gallo-Grsocians were conquered, burnt their arms 
from a Roman superstition, and ordered all to bring in the rest of 
the spoil; and either sold that part of it which was to go to the public, 
or divided it with care that the division should be fair"^. 

XXI. 1 From what we have said, it appears that among the 
Romans, as well as among most other nations, the spoil belonged to 
the people, but that some discretion in dividing it was allowed the 
general; but, as we have said, in such way that he was responsible 
to the people. This appears, among other instances, by the exam« 
pie of L. Scipio, who was condemned for peculation, as Yalerius 
Maximus tells us, as having received four hundred and eighty ses- 
terces of silver more than he had transferred to the treasury; and 
of others whom we have mentioned. 

I* He had quoted this before. Art. 1, of this section, but had by mistake called 
the general L. Manlius instead of Cnsus Manlius. (Gronov.) 

Chap. VI.] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAR. 347 

2 M. Cato, in an oration concerning prize-treasure, written, as 
GcUios Bays, in rehement and brilliant language, complained of the 
impunity and licence of peculation. Of that oration this fragment 
is extant : PrivcUe robbers are put in prison and in bonds : public rob^ 
bers are seen in purple and gold. He had elsewhere said that He mar^ 
veiled that any one could set up in his house images which were taken 
in war. So Cicero makes it a point to inflame the odium against 
Verres, that he had appropriated an image, and that one taken as spoil 
from the enemy. 

3 And not the generals only, but the soldiers also, were held 
accountable for peculation of prize-treasure; that is, if they did not 
transfer it to the public. For all were bound by the military oath, 
as Polybius says, not to appropriate any part of their booty, but to 
keep their good faith as sworn. And to this perhaps we may refer 
the formula of oath in Gellius, by which the soldier is commanded 
not to take anything, within ten miles of the army, of more ralue 
than a silver nummus (sesterce), or if he did take it, to bring it to 
the consul, or to announce it within three days. Hence we may un« 
derstand what Modcstinus says; He who secretes booty taken from 
the enemy is guilty of peculation ; and this passage alone might 
satisfy juristical interpreters, that they are not to suppose that what 
individuals take from the enemy becomes their own : since pecula- 
tion can only apply to property public, sacred, or religious. All 
these cases concur to make it appear, as we have said above, that set- 
ting aside the Civil Law, and primarily, things taken by military 
operations become the property of the people or king who are carry- 
ing on the war. 

XXII. 1 I have added " setting aside the Civil Law, and prima- 
lily,'' that is, directly. The first clause, because concerning things 
not yet actually acquired, the law may regulate according to public 
utility ; whether the law be made by the people, as among the Ro- 
mans, or by the king, as among the Hebrews and elsewhere. And 
under the name of ^ law," I also include custom rightly introduced. 
The other clause, ^ primarily," tends to this : that we mean that spoil, 
like other things, may be conceded by the people to others, not only 
after acquisition, but also before ; so that when the capture follows, 
the two events may be conjoined brevi manv^ so as to be one, as the 
jurists speak. And such concession may be made, not only naming 
each person, but by classes ; as in the times of the Maccabees, a part 
of the spoil was given to widows, old men, and needy orphans ; or 
even to uncertain persons, as in a scramble, in which the Roman 
consuls gave things to those who caught them. 

2 And this transfer of right (from the public to private persons,) 
which is made by law or concession, is not always a mere donation, 
but sometimes a contract, sometimes a payment of what is due, or a 
remuneration for losses suflbred, or expenses incurred in the war, 
either in the way of payment or of work done ; as when allies and 

348 OF TIIE RIGHT OP ACQUIRING [Book HT. 

subjects ser?o in the war without pay, or with pay insufficient to the 
work. For we see cases in which the whole booty^ or a part of it, is 
assigned for such causes. 

XXIII. And this we find that our jurists note as almost univer* 
sally introduced by custom ; that what is captured by allies or subjects 
who carry on the war without pay, at their own risk, becomes theirs. 
The reason in the case of allies is evident; because, by Natural Law, 
fdly is bound to ally for the reparation of losses which occur in the 
course of a common or public transaction. Add, that work is seldom 
done gratis. Physicians are paid, says Seneca, beeaiue they leave 
their own business to attend to ours, Quintilian thinks the same 
thing is reasonable in adyocatcs, because by spending their time 
and strength on that office, they are prevented from making gain in 
other ways. So Tacitus. It is therefore presumable, except some 
other cause appear, for instance mere good will or antecedent con- 
tract, that this hope of getting gain from the enemy was looked to, as 
the compensation for loss and labour. 

XXIV. 1 In the case of subjects the argument is not equally 
obyious, because they owe their labour to the state. But on the 
other hand, when it is not all, but only some, who serve in war, these 
have a claim to retribution for the labour and expense which they 
incur beyond others, and still more, for the loss. And in the place 
of such certain retribution, it is not unreasonable to concede to 
them a hope either of the whole spoil, or of an uncertain part thereof. 
So the Poet Propertius. 

2 We have an example, as to allies, in the Roman league, in 
which the Latins are admitted to an equal share of the spoil in the 
wars carried on under the auspices of the Roman people. So in the 
war which the EtoUans carried on, the Romans helping them, the 
cities and lands were given to the Etolians, the captives and move- 
ables to the Romans. After the victory over king Ptolemy, Deme- 
trius gave a part of the spoil to the Athenians. Ambrose, in treating 
of the history of Abraham, shews the equity of this custom : He gives 
to those who had been with him and helped him, a part of the gain cu a 
reward of their labour. 

3 With regard to subjects, we have an example in the Hebrew 
people, among whom half of the spoil went to those who were in 
service in the army. Thus also the soldiei-s of Alexander had for 
their use the booty taken from private persons, except that there was 
a custom of transferring to the king any object of peculiar value ; 
and accordingly, we find that those who were said to have conspired 
at Arbela, were accused of intending to appropriate the whole of the 
spoil, and to give nothing to the treasury. 

4 But what had been with the enemy, public property or king^s 
property, was exempted from this licence. Thus we read that the 
Macedonians, when they stormed the camp of Darius at the river 
Pyramus, plundered a great mass of gold and silver, and left nothing 

Chap. VI.] THINGS CAPTURED IN WAR. 349 

nntoucbed except the king's tent: according to the esUiblished usagCf 
says CurtiuSy that the conquered party should receive the conqueror in 
the kin^e tent. And the usage of the Hebrews was not different, who 
put the crown of the conquered king on the head of the conqueror, 
and assigned to him (as we read in the Talmud ic Collections) the 
royal furniture which was taken in the war. So, in the history of 
Charlemagne, we read that when he had conquered the Hungarians, 
the prirate treasure went to the soldiers, the royal, to the treasury. 
Among the Greeks there were two different words for public and 
priyate spoil, \d<l>vpa and o-jcvXa. The latter implies what was taken 
from the enemy during the contest; the former, what was taken 
afterwards ; which distinction was also made by some other nations. 

5 But among the Romans, there was not so much allowed to the 
soldiers under the old republic ; as sufficiently appears from what we 
hare siud abo?e. In the civil wars, they began to be more indulged. 
Thus we read that Equulanum was plundered by the soldiers of Sulla. 
And Csesar, in Lucan, gives up the camp of Pompoy after the battle 
of Pharsalia to be plundered. The soldiers of Octavius and Antony 
plundered the camp of Brutus and Cassius. In another civil war, the 
Flayians being led to Cremona, though night was at hand, hasten to 
storm that rich colony ; fearing lest otherwise the wealth of the Cre- 
monese should fall into the lap of the prefects and legates ; knowing 
in fact, as Tacitus says, that when a city is stormed^ the booty belongs to 
the soldiers ; tuJien it is surrendered^ to the general, 

6 In the decay of discipline, this concession to the soldiers was the 
more willingly made, lest they should, before the fight was over, turn 
away from the enemy to fall on the spoil, and so have their hands ill 
employed ; a turn by which many yictories were frustrated. When 
Corbulo stormed the strong place Volandum in Armenia, the common 
people, says Tacitus, was sold by auction, the rest of the booty was given 
to the soldiers. In the same writer, Suetonius, in the Britannic battle, 
exhorts his men to continue the slaughter of the enemy without 
regarding the spoil ; adding that when the victory is gained, all will be 
theirs ; and the like you find in many other places. Add what wo 
have just adduced from Procopius. 

7 Some matters of booty are so small that they are not worth 
giving to the public. These are conmionly allowed to belong to the 
captor by the permission of the people. Such, in the old republic of 
Rome, were the spear, javelin, firewood, food, water-bottle, scrip, link, 
and small money. For we find these exceptions added in Gellius to the 
military oath. And something similar was allowed sailors when senr- 
ing in war : the French call this spoil or pillage, and comprehend in it 
clothing, and gold and silver within ten crowns. In some places, a 
certain fraction of the booty is given to the soldiers, as in Spain; 
BomeUmee a fifth, sometimes a third : in other cases, a half goes to the 
king ; and a seventh, sometimes a tenth, to the general ; the rest to 
the captors ; except the ships of war, which go altogether to the king. 

850 OF THE BIGHT OF ACQUIBINa [BookUI. 

8 In 8omo cases the partition is made, taking account of trouble^ 
danger, and expense; as among tho Italians, the third part of a 
captured ship goes to the captain of the yictorioiis ship, a third 
part to the merchants to whom the cargo belonged, and a third 
part to the sailors. Also in some cases, those who fight at time 
own danger and expense do not take the whole booty, but are 
obliged to give a part to the public, or to those who derire thdr 
right from the public. So with the Spaniards, if ships are sent out 
at priyate expense, part of the prize goes to the king, part to the 
High AdmiraL By the custom of France, the Admiral has a tenth ; 
and so with tho Hollanders ; but here a fifth part of the booty is 
taken by the State. By land, the common use eyerywhere now is, 
that in pillage of towns, and in battles, eyery one makes his own 
what he takes ; but in expeditions for booty, the captures are com- 
mon to those who are in the company, and are diyided according 
to their rank. 

XXV. The tendency of these remarks is, that if, in a neutral 
nation, a controyersy arises concerning things captured in war, they 
are to be adjudged to those to whom they belong by the laws and 
customs of the people by whose party the capture is made. And if 
there is no proof on this point, then, by the common Laws of Nations, 
tho thing is to be adjudged to tho nation itself, proyided it be taken 
in war. For from what wo haye said, it appears that the assertion 
of Quintilian is not exactly true, pleading for the Thebans ; that in 
a matter which can be brought into a court of justice, the right of 
war goes for nothing ; and that which is taken by arms can only bo 
kept by arms. 

XXVI. 1 Things which do not belong to the enemy, though 
they are found with the enemy, do not belong to the captors ; for 
that, as we haye said, is neither congruous to natural law nor esta- 
blished by tho Laws of Nations. So the Romans say to Prusias, If 
the land had not belonged to Antiochus, it would thence follow that 
it did not become the property of the Romans, But if the enemy 
had any right oyer these objects, such as is connected with posses* 
sion; as a right of pledge, retention, seryitude, there is no reason 
why that should not pass to tho captors. 

2 This also is often made a question, whether things taken out- 
side the territory of both belligerents become the property of tho 
captors; which is controyertod, both with regard to persons and 
things. If we regard only the Laws of Nations, I think the place is 
not to be considered ; as we haye said, that an enemy may be lawfully 
slain anywhere. But he who has authority oyer the place, may by 
his law, prohibit such an act ; and if it be done against the law, may 
require satisfaction. It is like the case in which a wild creature 
taken in another's land is said to be the property of the captor : but 
our access to it may be prohibited by the owner of the land. 

Chap.VL] THINaS CAPTURED IN WAR. 361 

XXVn. This oxtemal right *, howerer, of becoming the owner 
of things captured in war, is peculiar to a regular war according to 
the Laws of Nations, so that it does not obtain in other wars. For in 
other wars between strangers, a thing is not acquired by force of the 
war, but as a compensation for a debt which cannot otherwise be 
obtained. But in wars between citizens, whether they be great or 
small warn, there is no change of ownership without the authority of 
a judge. 

* A right which exists between persons of different nations. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Of the right over PrisoMra of War. 

Sect. I. 

By the Tmio of NeUiona all 

V. 

Captives taken in a formal 

VI. 

war are Slaves, 

II. 

And their Offspring. 

VIL 

IIL 

Anything it lawful towards 
them with impunity. 

VIII. 

IV. 

The Possessions of the cap- 
lives, even incorporeal^ pass 
with the owner. 

IX. 

The reason why. 
Is it lawful for Captives to 
escape ? 

Or to resist their Master 9 
This Right has not always 
held. 

And does not hold now 
among ChrisHane, 

I. I T) "7 nature, that is, in the primeral state of nature, and without 
Vw the act of man, no men are slayes, as we have elsewhere said ; 
and in this sense we may assent to what the jurists say, that slarery 
is agunst nature. But that slavery should hare its origin in human 
act, that is, in convention or delict, is not repugnant to natural jus* 
tice, as we have also shewn. 

2 But by the laws of nations, of which we now speak, slarery is 
more comprehensive, both as to persons, and effects. For, if we 
regard the persons, it is not those only who surrender themselves, or 
promise slavery, who are reckoned slaves ; but all persons whatever 
who are taken in a regular war, as soon as thoy are brought intra 
prcBsidia, as Pomponius says. IS or is delict requisite ; the lot of all is 
alike : even of those, as wo have said, who by their destiny are found 
within the enemies' boundaries when war breaks out. 

3 So Polybius says, What punishment have these justly incurred f 
some one may say, when he sees men sold wUh their wives and children^ 
when they have been conquered in war. These calamities are by the laws 
of war to he home hy those who have done no wrong. And hence, as 
Philo notes, many good men have, hy various misfortunes, lost the 
liberty to which they were bom» 

4 Dio Prusscensis, after reciting some modes of acquiring owner- 
ship, adds. When a person, having acquired another as a captive in 
war, holds him as a slave. So to carry off boys captured in war 
Oppian calls the Law of War. 

II. And not only do they themselves become slaves, but their 
posterity for ever ; that is, those who are bom of a slave-mother in 
slavery. And this is what Martianus says, that by the Law of Nations, 
those are born our slaves, who are born of our slave-servants. The 
womb was subjected to slavery, says Tacitus, speaking of the wife of 
a German leader: [Arminius, whose wife was pregnant when she 
came into the power of the Romans. Oronov.] 

Chap. VIL] OF THE RIGHT OVER PRISONERS IN WAR. 353 

III. 1 Tho effects of this right are unlimited, so that the 
master may do any thing lawfully to the slave, as Seneca says. 
There is no suffering which may not be inflicted on such slaves with 
impunity ; no act which may not in any manner be commanded or 
extorted; so that even cruelty in the masters, towards persons of 
servile condition, is unpunished ; except so far as the Civil Law imposes 
limits and punishments for cruelty. In all nations alike, says Gaius, 
tue may see that the masters have the power of life and death over slaves. 
He adds afterwards, that by the Roman Law, limits were set to this 
power, that is, on Roman ground. So Donatus on Terence, What is 
not lawful from a master to a slave f 

2 And all the property which is token becomes the right of the 
master, along with the person. The slave who is under the power 
of another, can have nothing of his own, says Justinian. 

IV. Hence the opinion is refuted, or at least restricted, of those 
who say that incorporeal things are not acquired by right of war. 
For it is true that such property is not primarily and per se acquired, 
but it is acquired by the intervention of a person to whom it had 
belonged. We must except however rights which flow from a pecu« 
liar character of the person, and are therefore inalienable, as the 
paternal right. If these can remain at all, they remain with the 
person ; if not, they are extinguished. 

Y. 1 All these powers are introduced by the Laws of Nations, 
for no other cause than this ; that the captors, induced by so many 
advantages, may willingly abstain from tho extreme rigour by which 
they were allowed to put captives to death, either immediately or 
after any delay, as we have said. They are called servi, says Pom- 
ponius, because the conquerors commonly sell them, and so preserve them 
from being killed, I have said that they may willingly abstain : for 
it is not a compact by which they are compelled to abstain, if you 
look at the Laws of Nations ; but a mode of persuading them to 
adopt a more useful course. 

2 For the same reason, this right is allowed to be transferred to 
others, like the ownership of things. And this right is extended so as 
to apply to the offspring, on this account ; that otherwise, if the captors 
had used their extreme right, they would never have been bom. From 
which it follows, that those born before the calamity, if they are not 
captured, do not become slaves. And therefore it was established 
that the children should follow the condition of the mother, because 
the cohabitation of slaves was not guarded, either by law or by sure 
custody, so that there could be no sufficient presumption to indicate 
the father. And in this sense we must take the dictum of Ulpian : 
The law of nature is this, that he who is bom out of legitimate matri' 
mony follows the mother : that is, the law of general custom, drawn 
from a natural reason ; as we have shewn that the phrase the law of 
nature is elsewhere improperly used. 

3 That these rights were not introduced in vain by the nations, 

AA 

354 OF THE RIOIIT OVER PRISONERS [Book HL 

we may understand by the example of civil wars, in which we com- 
monly find the captives put to death, because they could not be 
reduced to slavery; as Plutarch and Tacitus note. 

4 Whether those who are captured belong to the people or to 
indiyiduals, is to be determined by what we hare said of prize: for 
the laws of nations have put men on the footing of things, in this 
point. So Gains saysy What is taken from the enemy beeom£S Jbrih- 
ivUhy jure gentium, the property of the captors; and thus free men also 
are reduced to slavery, 

YI. 1 But what some theologians hold, that they who are cap- 
tured in an unjust war, or bom of such captives, have no moral right 
to escape, except to their own people, I do not hesitate to pronounce 
a mistime. There is indeed this difference ; that if they esci^ to 
their own people while the war is still going on, they obtain their 
liberty by the right of postliminium: if they escape to others, or 
even to their own people after peace is made, they are to be restored 
to their master on his claiming them. But it does not thence follow 
that they are under a bond of conscience : for there are many rights 
which only regard an external judgment ; and such are those rights of 
war which we are now expounding. Nor is it a valid objection that 
such a bond arises from the nature of ownership. For I reply that 
there are many kinds of ownership; and that thus there may be 
ownership which is valid only in a human judgment, and that, a co- 
active one : and this occurs also in other kinds of rights. 

2 Such also, to a certain extent, is the right of annulling testa- 
ments, for defect of some formality which the Civil Law prescribes. 
For the more approved opinion is, that what is left me by such a 
testament, I may retain with a good conscience : at least as long as 
it is not contradicted. And nearly the same is the case of one who, 
according to the Ciril Law, occupies a thing by prescription malAfide^ 
knowing that he had no right to it : for he too is protected in his 
ownership by the Civil Law. And by this distinction, we easily solve 
the knot which Aristotle proposes, It is right that each one should have 
his own. But what the judge decides sincerely, even if wrong, is law. 
And thus the same thing tvould be right and not right. 

3 But in our question, [whether a captive may escape,] no cause 
can be devised why nations should have imposed any bond beyond 
the external one. For the right of claiming a slave, of coercing 
him, oven of putting him in chains, and of keeping his property, was 
sufficient to induce captors to spare their captives ; or if they were 
so savage as not to be moved by these advantages, they would cer- 
tainly not be moved by that mental bond ; and even this, if they 
judged it necessary, they might demand as a promise or oath. 

4 Nor are we lightly, in a law which is established, not upon 
natural equity, but for the sake of avoiding a greater eril, to assume 
an interpretation which would make unlawful an act otherwiso law- 
ful. So the Florentine Jurist; It makes no diference how a cap- 

Chap. VII.] IN WAR. 355 

the retumSf whether he hoe been set at liheriif or escaped by art or force. 
For in fact, this right of captivity is a right, in such a sense that in 
another sense it is commonly a wrong : as it is called by Paulus 
the jurist. It is a right, so far as certain effects are concerned ; 
it is a wrong, if you look at the intrinsic nature of the thing. 
Whence this also appears ; that if any one, captured in an unjust 
war, comes into the power of the enemy, he is not morally guilty of 
theft if he carries away his own property, or the reward of his 
labour, if there is any due beyond his aliment ; provided that he 
do not owe any thing to his master, either on his own or on the 
public account, or to him whose right the master has received. Nor 
does it prove any thing, that such flight and subduction of property 
is commonly severely punished. For these and many like things 
are done by the more powerful, not because they are just, but be- 
cause they are expedient. 

5 The precepts in some of tho Canons, forbidding persons to per- 
suade a slave to leave the service of his master, if you refer them to 
slaves who are bearing a just punishment, or have made themselves 
slaves by a voluntary compact, are just precepts. But if you refer 
them to those who are captured in an unjust war, or bom of such 
captives, tho precepts tend to show that Christians ought rather to 
encourage Christians to patience, than to a course which though law- 
ful, may offend minds strangers to Christianity, or otherwise weak. 
And in the like spirit we must receive the exhortations of the Apostles 
to slaves, except that these seem rather to exhort them to obedience 
while they are slaves, which is agreeable to natural equity ; for aliment 
and work done have a natural correspondence. 

YIL But I think that another precept of tho theologians whom I 
have begun to speak of is right : that a slave cannot, without violating 
tho duty of justice, resist tho master in the execution of that external 
right. For between this case and tho other, there is a manifest dis- 
crepance. Tho external right, which consists not only in tho impu- 
nity of the act, but in the protection of the right by the judicial tribu- 
nals, is void if the right of resisting on the opposite side remain. For 
if it be lawful to resist the master by force, it will bo lawful to resist 
the magistrate who protects the master; and yet the magistrate, by 
the Law of Nations, ought to defend the master in his ownership and 
its exercise. This right, therefore, resembles that which we have else- 
where ascribed to the supreme authority in each state, that to resist 
them by force is not lawful or morally right. And so Augustine joined 
the two, when he said. The common people m%tst hear with princes, and 
slaves with their masters, that by tlie exercise of langstiferinff, temporal 
things may be borne, and eternal things looked to. 

Vin. This also is to be noted ; that this Law of Nations respect- 
ing captives, has neither been received always, nor among all nations ; 
although the Roman jurists speak universally, pointing at the more 
known part by the name of the whole. Thus among the Hebrews, 

A A 2 

356 OF THE RIGHT OVER PRISONERS IN WAR. [Book III. 

who wero separated by special institutes from the common rules of 
other nations, there was a refuge for slaves (Oeut. zxiii. 15): that is, 
as the commentators rightly note, for those who had fallen into that 
calamity by no fault of theirs. And from a like cause appears to hare 
arisen jthe right which, in the Franklsh land^ was given slaves, of claim- 
ing to be free ; although at present that is given not only to captives 
taken in war, but to slaves of every kind. 

IX. 1 It has also been established among Christians in general, 
that in cases of war, the captives are not to be made slaves so as to be 
sold, forced to work, or to suffer other things which belong to the con- 
dition of slaves : and most rightly : since they have been, or ought to 
be, better taught by the great teacher of all charity, than to be inca- 
pable of being withheld from killing wretched men except by the con-^ 
cession of some smaller cruelty. And we are told by Qregoras that 
this custom long ago passed from one generation to another of those 
who professed the same religion : nor was it peculiar to those who lived 
under the Roman empire, but common to them with the Thessallans, 
Illyrians, Triballians and Bulgarians. And this advance, at least, a small 
advance though it be, was produced by a reverence for the law of 
Christ, which, when Socrates formerly urged upon the Qreeks, as a rule 
among themselves, he produced no effect 

2 The rule which the Christians follow in this matter, the Ma- 
homedans also follow among one another. But there has remained 
among Christians the usage of keeping captives till a price is paid for 
them, of which the appointment is in the will of the victor, except 
there be some certain convention. The right of retaining captives is 
usually given to those who have captured them, except persons of the 
highest rank : for with regard to them, the custom of most countries 
gives the right to the State or its Head. 

CHAPTER Vm. 

Of Lordship over the Conquered. 

Sect. L By war Civil authority may III. Someiifnes the$e are mijced. 

he acquired^ regal or popum IV. The incorporeal possessions 

lar, of a People may be acquired, 

II. Also Herile authority^ and The Thessalian promissory 

then the People ceases to be note. 
a State. 

1. \ C\ INCE the yictor can subject individuals to personal servitude, 
O ^t is not surprizing that he should be allowed to reduce a 
body of men, whether they be a State, or part of a State, to a servi- 
tude, either civil or domestic, or mixed. This is the argument used 
by some one in Seneca : That he is my slave whom I have bought by 
the laws of war, is a rule expedient for you Athenians; otherwise your 
empire which has been gained by war is reduced within its ancient 
limits. And accordingly, Tertulllan says that empire is sought by 
arms and extended by victories: and Quintilian, that kingdoms, 
peoples, the boundaries of nations and of cities, are defined by wars. 
Alexander, in Curtius, says, that laws are given by the conquerors, 
and accepted by the conquered. So Minio in his speech to the Ro- 
mans : Why do you send to Syracuse and tlie other Greek cities of Sicily 
every year your prcetor with the ensigns of ojfficef You can only say 
that you have imposed those laws on conquered peoples. So Ariovistus in 
Cesar. 

2 Justin, from Trogus, relates, that those who made war, before 
Ninus, did not seek empire hut glory ; and, content with victory, abstained 
from empire; that Ninus was the first who extended the bounds 
of empire, and reduced other nations to his authority by war ; and that 
thenceforth it became a custom. So Bocchus in Sal lust, says, that he 
had taken arms to defend his government; for that the part of Numidia 
from which he had expelled Jugurtha was his by the right of war. 

3 But authority may sometimes be acquired by victory, only so far 
as it exists in the king or other ruler : and in that case, the conqueror 
succeeds only to his rights, and no more : or as far as it is in the peo- 
ple ; in which case the victor has the authority, in such a way that he 
may alienate it, as the people could have done. And hence it comes 
to pass, that some kingdoms are patrimonial, as we have elsewhere 
said. 

IT. 1 But more may sometimes be effected by the right of con- 
quest ; namely, so that what was a state may cease to be a state ; so 
that it may become an accessory part to another state, as the Roman 

358 OF LORDSHIP OVER THE CONQUERED. [Book UL 

proYlnces ; or may be attached to no state, as if a king, carrying on a 
war at his own expense, subject a people to him in such a way, that he 
may direct it to be governed mainly to the advantage, not of the 
people, but of the governor ; which is a character, not of civil govern- 
ment, but of a master over servants. So Aristotle : Gavemfnent i$ 
sometimes for the advantage of the governor ^ sometimes, of the governed: 
the latter has place among freemen : the former is the government of 
servants by a master. The people which is so governed is, from the 
time of conquest, not a state, but a large family. For it was well 
said by Anaxandiides, that slaves do not make a state. 

2 And Tacitus opposes these conditions to one another : Not mas* 
ters and slaves, btU a governor and citizens. So Xenophon of Agcsi- 
laus, that Ae governed the cities which he reduced not as slaves under 
a nuister, but cu free men obey their rulers* 

IIL And hence we may understand what is that mixed govern- 
ment, compounded of mastership and civil rule, of which we have 
spoken ; namely, when servitude is combined with a certain personal 
liberty. Thus we read of peoples whose arms were taken from them, 
and who were commanded not to possess any iron except for agricul- 
ture; and of others who were compelled to change their language and 
habits of living. 

IV. 1 For, as the things which had belonged to individuals, do, 
by the laws of war, become the property of those who conquer them, 
so also the property of the general body becomes the property of the 
victors, if these so choose. What Livy 6a3rs of persons who surren- 
der, that all things arc surrendered to the conqueror^ and that it is for 
him to decide what tliey mxiy keep and what they must forfeit, holds with 
regard to the conquered in war. For surrender gives up what would 
otherwise be taken by force. So Scaptius in Livy, of the land of 
Corioli. Annibal in his oration to his soldiers in the same historian, 
told them that all that the Romans had won would be theirs. So 
Antiochus said of the possessions of Seleucus. So Pompey took all 
that belonged to the empire of Mithridates. 

2 And hence incorporeal rights also, which had belonged to the 
general body, become the rights of the victor, so far as he chooses. 
Thus when Alba was conquered, the Romans claimed what had been 
the rights of the Albans. Whence it follows that the Thessalians were 
altogether liberated from the obligation of a hundred talents, claimed 
by the Thebans ; which sum Alexander the Great, having conquered 
Thebes, gave to them by the right of victory ; nor is that true which 
is alleged for the Thebans in Quintilian : that that only belongs to the 
victor which he himself has in his hands ; and that an incorporeal right 
cannot so be taken possession of: that the condition of an heir is 
different from that of a victor, because to the former the right passes, 
to the latter the thing only. For he who is lord of the persons, is lord 
of the things also, and of all things which belong to the person. Ho 

s*. 

Chap. VIIL] OF LORDSHIP OVER THE CONQUERED. 359 

who is in the possession of another, has no possession for himself; and 
he who is not his own master, can be master of nothing else. 

3 Even if any victor leave to the conquered people the rights of 
their state, he may take to himself some things which belonged to the 
state : for it depends on his own will what limit he chooses to fix to the 
benefits which he gives. Cesar imitated the act of Alexander, in re- 
mitting to the Dyrrachians the debt which they owed to some of the 
adverse party. Bat here it might be objected that the war of Cesar 
was not of that Idnd for which this law of nations was established. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Of Postliminium. 

Sect. I. Origin of the word, 
IL In what placet it holds, 

III. By Postliminium some 
things revertf some are re- 
sumed, 

IV. The Right holds in peace 
and in war, 

y . When a free man, the war 
continuing^ returns bgPott- 
liminium, 
YI. JVhat Rights he resumes^ 
what not, 

yil. Rights against him are re- 
sumed, 

VIII. Whg those who surrender 
have not the Right of Post- 
liminium, 

IX. Whenhas a people the Right 
of Postliminium f 

X. What is the Civil Law for 

those who return bjf Post- 
liminium f 

XI. Servants, Deserters, ran- 
somed Persons, received bp 
Postliminium, 

XII. Are Subjects resumed by 
Postliminium $ 

X IIL Lands are resumed by Post- 
liminium, 

XIV. Ancient distinction with re- 
gard to moveables, 

XV. Present Rule for move- 
ables, 

XVL Things resumed not need- 
ing Postliminium. 

XVII. Changes of the CivU Law 
as to Subjects, 

XVIII. Postliminitun between par- 
ties who were not enemies, 

XIX. When that holds at present. 

I. 1 rpHOSE who in previous ages have treated of ^'tw, as they 
I have given no sound rules concerning captures from the 
enemy, so have they given no sound rules concerning postliminium. 
This subject was treated more accurately by the old Romans, but often 
too confusedly; so that the reader was not able to distinguish what 
belonged to the Laws of Nations, and what to the Civil or Roman 
Law. 

2 With regard to the word postliminium^ we must reject the opinion 
of Servius, who thinks that the latter part of the word is a lengthen- 
ing of the former, without signification. We must follow Scsevola, who 
taught that the word was compounded of post, implying a return, and 
limen. For limeny a threshold^ and limeSf a boundary, differ in their 
ending and declension, but otherwise are the same in their primitive 
notion and origin ; for they come from the old word Ztmo, wluch sig- 
nifies transversum, across : like materia and materies ; pavus and pavo ; 
eontagio and eontages; citcumis and cucumer; although in later 
usage, it came to pass that limen, a threshold, was referred more to 
private things, limes, a boundary, to public. So the ancients used 
eliminare, meaning to expel from the bounds of the state, and exile 
they called eliminium, 

II. 1 Postliminium, then, is the right which arises from returning 

Chap. IX.] OF POSTLIMINIUM. 361 

in limen, that is within the boundaries of the state. Thus Pomponias 
says, he is retamed by postliminium who has begun to be within our 
prcBsidia ; Paulns, when ho has entered our boundaries. But by parity 
of reason, the consent of nations led to the rule that postliminium 
should hold, if any man or any thing to which civil rules apply, comes 
to our friends or allies, as the same two jurists also say. And hero 
our friends and allies are to be understood, not simply those with 
whom we are at i>eace, but those who are of our party in the war. 
Those who come to such are safe, as if they, man or thing, came to 
their own people. 

2 Coming among those who are friendly, but not of the same party, 
prisoners of war do not change their conditiou, except by special com- 
pact. As in the second league made between the Romans and Car- 
thaginians, it was agreed that those of the peoples, friends of Rome, 
who were taken prisoners by the Carthaginians, if they came into ports 
subject to the Romans, might claim their liberty ; and that the friends 
of the Carthaginians should have a like right. Therefore those of 
the Romans in the second Punic war, who, being prisoners, came into 
Greece on commercial designs, had not there the right of postliminium, 
because the Greeks, in that war, had taken part with neither side: 
and therefore it was necessary for them to bo ransomed, in order to 
regain their liberty. In Homer too wo see prisoners of war sold in 
neutral places, as Lycaon, Iliad xx. Eury medusa, Odi/ssee viii. 

III. The old phraseology of the Romans spoke of free men also 
as receiyed by postliminium, namely, if a man went to another city 
and then returned to his own. Also servants, horses, mules, ships 
which fell into the enemy's hands, and were then retaken, were reco- 
vered by postliminium. The later jurists made two kinds of postli- 
minium: that by which we ourselves return, and that by which we 
recover anything. 

IV. I The right exists in war and in peace. In peace, it belongs 
to those who, when the war breaks out, are among the enemy. Other 
prisoners of war have not postliminium, except that bo agreed upon. 
So Tryphoninus, emended ; and Zonaras. Pomponius says. If a pri* 
toner of war, being allowed by treaty to retum, chooses to remain with 
the enemy, he loses postliminium. Paulus says. If a captive of war, after 
peace is made, escapes to hts home, by postliminium he returns to the 
master to whom he umis captive during the war, except tJiere be a convention 
that captives are to be returned* 

2 The reason why captives taken in war are thus allowed to 
remain in the enemy's hands, is given by Tryphoninus ; That they might 
place their hope of returning rather in valour than in peace, was the 
wish of tJie Romans : the city having little indulgence for captives, as 
Livy says. This reason being peculiar to the Romans, could not bo 
the reason for the law of nations : but it might bo among the reasons 
why the Romans took such a rule from other nations. But the truer 
reason is, that the belligerents are regarded as if their wars were just. 

362 OP POSTLIMINIUM. [BookIIL 

and neutrals cannot safely interpose, and must therefore acquiesce; 
and so, must reckon actual capiives as justly captircs. 

3 But with regard to thcie who were caught among the enemy 
when the war broke out, the same could not be said: for they could 
not be conceiyed to hare done any wrong. Yet to diminish the 
strength of the enemy, they were retained while the war lasted. These 
then, by the consent of nations, were to be liberated, on the arrind of 
peace, as innocent; but other prisoners to be regulated by laws of 
war, except so far as regulated by compact And for the same reason, 
slaves and other property are not restored at peace, except by com- 
pact ; for they are supposed to be taken by right, and to deny this, 
would be to make wars grow out of wars. Whence it appears that what 
is alleged by Quintilian for the Thebans, is ingenious, but not true. 

4 By postliminium in war, those who were free men before their 
capture, return; slaves and things are recovered, 

y. A free man returns by postliminium, if he comes to his own 
party with this intent : inasmuch as, in order that a dare [or a captive] 
may become free he must, so to speak, acquire himself, which cannot 
be done without his will. But whether he be recovered from the 
enemy by warlike force, or make his escape, makes no difference, as is 
noted by Florentinus. The same follows if he be spontaneously given 
up by the enemy. 

But what is the result if he be sold by the enemy in the usual 
way of traffic, and so come to his own people ? This controversy is 
treated by Quintilian, with reference to the Olynthian, whom Parrha- 
sius had bought. For a decree having been made by the Athenians 
that the Olynthians should be free, he enquires whether this means 
that they should become free, or should bo adjudged to be free : of 
which the latter is the more true opinion. 

YI. 1 Moreover a free man, after ho has returned to his own 
people, acquires, not only himself, but all the property which he had 
in a neutral State, both corporeal and incorporeal. For the neutral 
State, as they took the fact for law in the case of captivity, must do 
the samo in the case of liberation, to shew themselves impartial to 
both parties. Therefore the right, which he who possessed him by 
the law of war, had over his property, was not altogether vnthout con- 
ditions : it was liable to cease without his consent, if he who had been 
captive made his way to his own people. Ho therefore loses the pro- 
perty, as he loses the man to whom it was an accessary. 

2 But what if ho had alienated this property ? Will he who de- 
rives his title from him who, at the time, was owner, by the right of 
war, be safe by the law of nations ; or may the property be recovered 
from him ? I speak of the property which he had in a neutral state. 
Here, it seems, we must make a distinction between things which arc 
of such a nature that they return by postliminium, and things not of 
that nature: which difference wo shall soon explain. The former 
class of things are, it would seem, alienated with their cause, the per- 

Chap. IX.] OF POSTLIMINIUM. 363 

son, and under condition : the latter are simply alienated. By alien- 
ated, I mean giren away, or acknowledged as receiyed. 

YII. And as the person who returns by postliminium recoTcrs 
his rights, so also rights against him are restored, and are held the 
same as if he had nerer been in the power of the enemy, as Trypho- 
ninus says* 

Ym. To this rule concerning free men, Paulus rightly annexed 
this exception. Those who surrender themselves, lose postliminium, 
namely, because conyentions made with an enemy are valid by the law 
of nations, and against these, postliminium does not hold. So the 
Romans captured by the Carthaginians, say, in Oellius, that they have 
no right to postliminium, since they were captives by right. Whence 
during a truce, there is no postliminium, as Paulus rightly notes; but 
those who are surrendered to the enemy without any compact, return 
by postliminium, as Modestinus gave his opinion. 

IX. I What we have said of individuals, I conceive holds also for 
a people ; so that they who have been free, recover their liberty, if it 
happen that the force of their friends extricate them from the power 
of their enemies. But if the multitude which had constituted the 
state or city be dissolved, I conceive it to be more true that it is not to 
be reckoned the same people, and that their condition is not restored 
by postliminium, by the law of nations : for a people, like a ship, by the 
dissolution of its parts, perishes outright ; since its whole nature con^ 
sists in the continuity of its composition. And therefore that which 
had been the city of Saguntum was no longer the same city, when the 
same place was restored to the old inhabitants eight years later : nor 
was Thebes the same city when the Thcbans had been sold as slaves 
by Alexander. Hence it appears that what tho Thcssalians owed the 
Thebans was not restored to the Thebans by postliminium, and that, 
for two reasons : because it was a new people ; and because Alexander 
could and did alienate this right; and because a credit is not of the 
number of the things which return by postliminium. 

2 What we have said of a city, is not dissimilar from the old 
Roman law, according to which, marriages being dissolvable, the mar 
riage state was not considered to be restored by postliminium, but 
required to bo renewed by a new agreement. 

X. I Such is the Law of Nations, as to postliminium for free men : 
the Civil Law modifies and extends this. So deserters had not this 
privilege; nor sons under the Quintal j[>a^r{a poteatas: for, as Paulus 
says, the discipline of the camp outweighed the love of children : as 
Cicero says of Manlius, that he preferred discipline and loyalty to pa- 
ternal affection. 

2 Again, there was this restriction of the priyilege, by Attic and 
Roman laws, that he who was ransomed must serve his ransomer, till 
he had remunerated him. This however was to encourage the prac- 
tice of ransoming. And this servitude was afterwards mitigated, and, 
by Justinian, reduced to five years: and extinguished by the death 

364 OF rOSTLIMINIUM. [Book IIL 

of the person ransomed ; as also remitted by marriage contracted 
between the ransomed and the ransomcr ; and lost by the prostitu- 
tion of a woman so redeemed ; and other laws of Rome there were on 
this subject. [See the text.] 

3 Again, the privilege was extended by the Roman and Attic law, 
80 that all rights were restored to the person. So a person, calling 
himself the son of Callias, who had been a slave in Thrace, having 
been taken in the defeat at Acanthus, returned to Athens, and claimed 
the inheritance of Callias from the possessors of it; and, in the trial, no 
enquiry was made, except whether he were the son of Callias. So the 
Messenians, after long servitude, recovered their liberty and their 
country. Even what had been lost by usucaption, or otherwise, might 
be recovered. 

4 The Cornelian law provided for the heirs of those who died 
while in the enemies' hands. If this had not been so, any one might 
have seized their property, for they were reckoned as nullified ; and 
if they returned, had no right, except to postliminium jure gentium. 
The confiscation of the property of captives, if there is no heir, is a 
special Roman law. 

So much of those persons who return : now of the things which 
are recovered. 

XI. 1 Such are men and women slaves, even when repeatedly 
alienated, or manumitted by the enemy : for such manumission cannot 
prejudice the right of the citizen owner. But that a slave be recovered, 
he must be in a condition to be got at by his master ; not only re- 
turned within the empire, but known of; it is not enough if he be 
hidden in Rome. And as a slave in this differs from inanimate things, 
in another point he differs from a free man ; it is not necessary ho 
should have come with a view of staying with us. 

2 Runaway slaves are not excepted from this rule. The owner 
recovers his former right to them. To punish them, would injure the 
master rather than the slave. The rule with regard to slaves reco- 
vered by the army, is that they are recovered, not captured : the soldier 
is their defender, not their owner. 

3 Slaves ransomed from the enemy, become the property of the 
ransomer, or may bo recovered by postliminium, on paying the price. 
But the details of this belong to the juristical commentators : and 
were afterwards changed. 

XII. Another question belongs more to us ; whether a people, 
who have been subjected to a foreign authority, return to their ancient 
condition : which may be treated, if not he to whose government they 
had belonged, but some of his allies, have delivered them from the 
enemy. I conceive we must here decide as we do concerning slaves, 
except there be some other convention in the alliance. 

XIII. 1 Among things, land first occurs. This is recovered by 
postliminium, when the enemy are expelled : that is, when the enemy 
can no longer openly approach the land. So the Lacedsemonians, 

CuAP. IX.] OP POSTLIMINIUAI. 365 

when thoy had taken Egina from the Athenians, restored it to its 
ancient owners. Justinian gave the lands taken from the Goths and 
Vandals to the heirs of the old possessors, not admitting contrary pre- 
scriptions. 

2 What is true of lands, is true of all rights adhering to the soil. 
So places which had been consecrated as religious, if liberated, resume 
their former state : as Cicero argues against Yerres, of the Diana of 
Segeste. Marcion compares the right of postliminium to that by which, 
when a house tumbles down, the soil is restored to the shore. And 
therefore the usufruct of rocovcred land is to be restored : as was 
ruled, if it had been inundated. So the Spanish law directs that 
counties, and hereditary jurisdictions, are restored by postliminium ; 
the major ones, absolutely ; the minor, if they are claimed within fire 
years from their recovery ; except that a fort, lost and regained, the 
king has the right of retaining. 

XIV. 1 Concerning moreables, on the other hand, the contrary 
rule in general holds : that they do not return by postliminium, but 
become prize. Hence objects of traffic, wherever bought, become the 
property of him who buys them : and if found among neutrals, or 
brought home, cannot be claimed by the old owner. But from this 
rule, were excepted formerly munitions of war; the reason being, appa- 
rently, that men might bo more active in recovering these. For 
many states have their laws made especially with a view to war. We 
have already stated what are munitions of war. [See also Cicero, &c.] 

2 Arms and clothing have their use in war, but had not the privi- 
lege of postliminium ; because they who lost them were little favoured, 
indeed were disgraced. And so a horse is different in this respect 
from arms; for the horse may be lost without fault of the rider. 
BoethiuB seems to imply that the distinction held up to his time, 
under the Goths. 

XV. But at a later period, if not sooner, this distinction was abo- 
lished ; for those who speak of customs, always say that moveables 
have not postliminium ; and we see this, in many places, practised as 
to ships. 

XVI. Things which are not yet brought intra prassidxa^ though 
seized by the enemy, do not need postliminium, because they have not 
changed their master ^ure gentium. So, what things pirates and robbers 
take from us, do not need postliminium; for such persons, jure gentium^ 
cannot change the ownership. And on this ground, when pirates had 
taken Halonesus from the AthenianF, and Philip had taken it from 
pirates, the Athenians wished him not to give, but to restore it to 
them. Things taken by such persons may be claimed wherever they 
are found : except, as elsewhere said, that by natural law, we must 
pay the possessor who has acquired them at his own expense, as much 
as the owner would pay to recover them. 

XVn. But other rules than this may be established by Civil 
Law : as by the Spanish law, ships become theirs who regain them 

3C4 OF POSTLDOXmY [Booe UI. 

of the pcnon nosomed; u aim r.race intereite cboulJ 

between the Tunomed and t^ .^.i/ of recovery being bo 

tion of a woman lo rede'- .^ rtnuigeii from trying to 

this subject. [See tb 

3 Agun, the pr' '^ fiiat, as the Boman Laws testify, 

so that all righta ^ • y^^ '^ ®°^7 between enemies, but 

himself the son .-^'Jl^' nations. But, as we hare elsewhere 

been taken in ' ^'^y^Cii^ nomade age of mankind, in which 

the inheritar .. •^'>vi<^ ^® natural sense of the natural 

enquiry wfl J,- C^ ^^ men to men. And thus, eren between 

Messenia' \ ^^jfahlie war between them, there was a kind of 

country ^•^'^"''^^jlelMred war : and in order that this licence might 

be rec ^'^^f^^!Ad patting strangers to death, there was intro- 

s ^-^^^^^Idiig prisoners between nations; from which it 

wh' S^^^M^ ^^^ '^^ occasion for postliminium, in a different 

hr ^^ j^ltf''^^'* *"^ pirates ; because that force, used in such cases, 

I t^^^j^Lacis; which are commonly held in no regard by robbers 

^f^^gfipeut formerly to hare been a matter of controversy 
/ i^0fe members of a people* allied to us, who arc slayes in our 
^^zl^ if they return home, return by postliminium. For so 
#i^fv|^opose8 this question ; and Gallus ^lius says, that with free 
^^^ allied people, and with kings, we hare postliminium, as with 
^i^. On the other hand, Proculus says, HIqaX, ftderait peoples are 
\Znif and thai there is not postliminium with them, 
$ I conceive that a distinction must be taken between different 
^goes of alliance. If these wore entered into merely for the pur- 
pose of settling or preventing a public war, these would not prevent 
either captivity or postliminium : but if the leagues contained a pro- 
rision that those who came from one party to the other shouhi be 
safe on the public security, then, captivity being removed, postlimi- 
nium would cease also. So Pomponius : If we have, with any nation, 
neitfmr /riendship, hospitaliti/, nor league of friendship, these are not eiie^ 
mies ! hxit if anything of ours goes to them it becomes theirs; and a free 
man of ours, made captive there, is their slave; and so from them to us. 
In this case, tJten, postliminium exists. By saying ''a league of friendship,"' 
ho sliowB that there may be other leagues, which do not give the right 
of hospitality or friendship. So Proculus sufficiently implies that ho 
means, by " federate peoples," thoso who have promised friendship or 
safe hospitality, by saying. For what need is tJiere of postliminium in 
such a cafe ; since tliey retain their liberty and ownership in our territory 
equally as in their own ; and we in theirs f Wherefore what follows in 
Gallus Julius : With the nations which are under our authority, there is 
no postliminium, is to bo understood with the addition, nor with thoso 
with wliom wo have a league of friendship. 

XIX. 1 In our own time, not only among Christians, but also 
among most Mahometan nations, the right, both of making prisoners 

Chap. IX.] OF POSTLBIINIUM. 367 

out of war-time, and tho right of postlimioium, havo vanished ; tho 
eccssity of both having disappeared, by tho restoration of that rela- 
uiship which nature intended to exist among men. 

2 But that ancient Law of Nations may havo phice, if wo have to 
do with a nation so barbarous, that it is accustomed, without causo or 
declaration, to treat all foreigners and their property in a hostile 
manner. 

And at the very time that I am writing, a judgment to this effect 
18 given in the High Court of Paris, under the presidency of Nicolas 
Verdun : tliat goods which had belonged to French citizens, and had 
been taken by tho Algerines, who aro accustomed to send sea-rovers, 
and to attack all nations, had changed their owner by the right of war: 
and consequently, being recovered by others, became tlie property of 
those who had recovered them. And in the same cause, this also was 
adjudged, that ships are not, at tho present day, in tho number of tho 
things which aro recovered by postliminium. 

CHAPTER X. 

Warnings concerning things done in an unjust War. 

Sect. L How Decency forbidt what IV. Obligation of rettituHon 

Law permit* : hence arisinff, 

II. Applied to things permitted V. Are captivet taken m an 
by the Law of Nations. unjust war to be restored hy 

III. What is done in an unjust the captor : 

war, is intrinsically unjust, VI. And by the holder, 

I. 1 T MUST now tread back my stops, and take from bolUgerents 
X nearly all, which I have soemed to grant them ; and yet have 
not really granted ; for when I began to explain this part of the Law 
of Nations, I testified that many things were said to bo law, or lawful^ 
because they are done with impunity ; partly also, because coactiTe 
judgments of tribunals accommodate their authority to them : while the 
things themselves either deviate from the rule of right, (whether 
that rule be regulated by strict justice, or by the precepts of other 
virtues,) or at least, may more righteously and laudably be omitted. 

2 We have often pudor, shame, referred to as moderating strict 
rights : pudor meaning, not so much a regard to reputation and men's 
opinion, as a regard to what is equitable and good, or at least, more 
equitable and better. So Seneca. So in Justinian's Institutes, Trusts 
(Jidei commissa) are said to have for their bond the pudor of the Trus- 
tees. So Quintilian says the creditor cannot go to the surety, salvo 
pudore, except the debtor fails him. And in this sense jn^for is often 
conjoined with justice, as in Ovid. So Hesiod conjoins dixi; and 
aidcDf . And Plato says that alders is the assessor of biaj. And in the 
Protagoras, he says that the two, d/in; and aldus, a feeling of justice 
and of mutual reverence, were given to man to hold society together. 
So Plutarch also, and Dionysius of Halicamassus. So Josephus, and 
Paulus the Jurist. Cicero arranges the offices of justice, and verecun- 
dia, so that the former prevents us wronging men, the latter, offend- 
ing them. 

3 So Seneca says : How much wider is duty than law ! and the like. 
Justice is distinguished iromjus, law; iov jus is what holds in external 
judgments. And elsewhere, he explains this by the example of a 
master's right over his servants. We are not to consider what you may 
do, hut what is required by justice and fairness, which require us to spare 
even captives and slaves. And again: Though everything is lawful to- 
wards a slave, there are things which common humanity declares not to he 
lawful Whence note the two different uses of lawful, referring to 
external and to internal justice. 

U. 1 The same distinction is made by Marcellus speaking to the 

Chap. X.] WARNINGS CONCERNING THINGS DONE, &c. 369 

Senate : by Aristotle, when he says that shiyery, though lawful, may 
be unjust : by the Thebans in Thucydides. 

2 So the Roman jurists, though they speak of the right of cap- 
tirity, also call this right a wrong, if^ria. So Seneca. So Livy says 
the Italians were obstinate in injury, because they retained what they 
had in war taken from the Syracusans. So Dio Pruseeensis speaks of 
captires taken in war, as unjustly enslared. So Lactantius says that 
philosophers, discussing the rights of war, do not regard justice and 
Tirtue, but the customs of states : and he speaks of the kgitimate 
wrongs inflicted by the Romans. 

in. First, then, we say, that if the cause of war be unjust, though 
the war be regular in manner, all acts thence arising are unjust, 
according to internal injustice. And all who operate knowingly in such 
acts, or co-operate, are in the number of those who cannot enter into 
the kingdom of hearen without repentance for their acts. Now repent- 
ance, if time and opportunity be granted, requires restitution. And 
therefore, God declares that the fastings of those who (Isaiah Iriii. 6) 
do not unloose unjust bonds are not grateful to him. And (Jonah iii. 
8) the king of Nineveh proclaimed a fast, that the people might cease 
from riolence : acknowledging, by a natural impulse, that repentance 
was idle without such amendment. And such we find the judgment, 
not only of Christians and Jews, but of Mahomedans. 

IV. The restitution is due, from the authors of the war, for all 
erils inflicted : and for anything unusual which they have done, or not 
prerented when they could. So the generals are responsible for 
what is done by their order ; and the soldiers seyerally and jointly 
who hare joined in any act ; as the burning of a city : and in separa- 
ble acts, each for what he did, or aided in doing. 

y. 1 Nor do I conceire that the exception is to be admitted, of those 
who act for others, if they have committed any fault [with deceit, J, B.] ; 
for to make restitution be proper, fault is enough without deceit. There 
are some who seem to think that things taken in war, even if there 
were no just cause of the war, are not to be restored, because the 
belligerents are understood to hare given such things to the captors. 
But no one can be lightly presumed to set his property on a cast: 
and war of itself is far removed from the nature of a contract. And 
In order that neutral parties might have a clear rule to follow, and 
might not be involved in a war against their will, the introduction of 
that external ownership, of which we have spoken, was enough; which 
may consist with the internal obligation of restitution. So the Sam- 
nites, in Livy, give up what they had taken ; whichf they say, ieemed 
ours hy the right of war : seemed, because the war was unjust, as the 
Sanmites had confessed. 

2 It is a case of the same kind, that an unequal contract, made 
without deceit, gives, by the Law of Nations, a right of compelling the 
fulfilment of the compacts ; and yet he who has the advantage, is bound 
by the duty of an honest and pious man, to reduce it to equality. 

BB 

370 WAR5I508 COXCERMNG THIXG8 DOXE. kc [BookIH 

VL 1 But also, he who bai not canted any damage, or bas 
camed it inthoat aoT fudt, but who baa in his poaeeasion a thing 
taken in war from another, is boond to restore it, because there is no 
eaose, natnrdly jost, why the other shoold be deprived of it ; not his 
consent ; not his ill desert ; not compensation. There is a story to 
this effect in Yalerins Maximns : When P. Ckmdiui had taken and 
bM the people of Camerina, although tke money and ike eongueH were 
very advaniagemu^ the Roman people eoughi them out and redeemed them^ 
heeanm the juetice of ike proceeding did not eeem dear; and gave them a 
dwelling in the Aventtne, and retlored their property. So, by a decree of 
the Romans, the Phocenses had their liberty and land restored. So 
the Ligurians who had been sold by M. Popilins, were redeemed and 
restored to liberty, and their property given back. So with regard 
to the Abderites, the Senate decreed the same thing, adding the reason, 
that the war had been unjust. 

2 Bat he who holds sach property, if he hare spent anything 
upon it, may deduct as much as it was worth to the owner to recoTer 
possession, as wo hare elsewhere explained. If the possessor hare 
without fault consumed or alienated the thing, he is not bound, except 
io far as he is made richer. 

[This and the succeeding chapters point out the Restndnta which 
morality and religion impose on the exereise of Rights. That the 
exercise of rights will be restrained by morality and reh'gion, wherc- 
CTor these provail among men, is so ob?iou8, that it does not need 
any large array of authorities to prore it : and the application of 
such Yiows has, in some measure, modified the received usages of war 
among Christian nations. I shaU, therefore, considerably abridge the 
illustratiro matter in this part Of the Laws of War so modified, see 
EUmentB of Morality, 1061, &c W. W.] 

CHAPTER XL 

Sestraints as to the Right of killing in War. 

Sect. I 

. In a formal war tome acts 

are void qf internal Justice. 

IX. 

11. 

Who may he killed accordm 
ing to internal justice. 

III. 

No one can rightly be killed 
for misfortune; as those 
who follow a party by com- 

X. 

pulsion. 

XI. 

IV. 

Nor for a fault intermem 

XII. 

diate between misfortune 

XIII. 

and deceit. 

XIV. 

V. 

The authors of a war to be 
distinguished from the fol- 

lowers. 

XV. 

VI. 

Among the authors^ pro- 

bable and improbable causes 

XVI. 

to be distinguished. 

VII. 

Enemies who have deserved 
death, often rightly pardon* 

XVII. 

ed. 

XVIII 

VIII. 

Care must be taken to avoid 

killing innocent persons 

XIX. 

without the purpose. 
Boys always to be spared ; 
women, except grievous qf" 
fenders; and old men. 
Also persons who are dcm 
voted to a sacred or a lite- 
rary life. 

And husbandmen. 
And merchants and the like. 
And captives. 

Persons willing to surren- 
der on fair conditions, to be 
received. 

Persons surrendering «»- 
conditionally, to be spared. 
Except a grave delict have 
preceded. 

Delinquents may be spared 
on account of their number. 
Hostages not to be killed 
except as criminals. 
Uselessfightingto be avoided. 

I. 1 [TXT^ h^YQ boon Bpoaking of the rostraints which tho iiy'us- 
V f tice of a war imposes ;] but even in a just war, we aro 
not to say with Lucan, He who denies justice, gives everything. Better 
Cicero, Thsrt art duties even against those who have injured us. There 
is a limit to punishment and revenge. And he praises the old times 
of Rome, when the erent of a war was either mild or necessary. So 
Seneca. So Aristides says that OTcr-panishment makes a new injury ; 
and so Ovid. 

2 So the Plateans in Isocrates, and so Aristidesy speak of a mea- 
sure of punishment proportioned to the offense. So Fropcrtius and Ovid. 

II. What killing is just in war, according to internal justice, we 
may see from what has been said. A man may be killed of purpose, 
or not of purpose. No one can be justly killed of purpose, except 
either as a just punishment, or so far as we cannot otherwise defend 
our life and property. And eren this step, of killing a man for perish- 
able human property, is at Tarianco with the law of charity. In order 
that punishment may be just, it is necessary that he who is killed 
should have himself offended, and so offended, that a just judge would 
think death a lit punishment. Of this we haye spoke, in treating of 
punishment. 

n It 2 

372 RESTRAINTS AS TO THE RIGHT [Book m. 

in. I Above, in speaking of suppliants (for there arc such in 
war as in peace, namely, those who ask for mercy,) we distingaished 
misfortune and misdeed. So Oylippus considers to which ohus the 
Athenians belong, and says they were not men unfortunate, but 
unjust, and must therefore bear the evils of war. Of unfortunate 
persons, examples are those who are with the enemy, without being 
hostile in mind, as the Athenians at the time of Mithridates. So 
Patorculus describes them, applying what Livy says, of Indibilis the 
Spaniard, that his body was with the Carthaginians, his mind with 
the Romans. 

2 So Cicero speaks of faults of necessity, as opposed to those of 
will : so Julianus, the commentator on ThucydideSySays, that according 
to the mild spirit of the Greeks the Corcyrean captives were spared 
on this ground. The Plateans plead the same excuse in Isocrates ; 
and the other Greeks. So Herodotus of the Phocians. So Alexan- 
der spared the Zelitcs. So Nicolaus of Syracuse, pleading for the 
captives. So the Syracusans in Livy. So Antigonus said that he 
made war on Cleomenes, not on the Spartans. 

IV. 1 But wo mast note that, between a clear injury and a mere 
misfortune, there is a middle case, composed of both; so that the act 
can neither be said to be that of one simply knowing and willing^ nor 
of one ignorant or unwilling. 

2 This is what Aristotle calls afiaprrnuiy and we may call cvlpa^ a 
fault. The passage is in Eih, y. 10. There art thrw eates in wkiek 
damage may he done to men : by misfortune^ by /auU, and by injury. 
But injury may be done, willingly indeed^ but not deliberately ^ as when 
it is done through sudden anger, 

3 Anger at supposed wrong is some excuse, 

4t What is done through ignorance is excusable. 

5 Michael Ephesius comments, and explains, this passage. So 
Aristotle in his Rhetoric, And the ancients quote Homer to the same 
effect. 

6 A similar division is given in Marcian, of delicts proposito, tm- 
petUf easu. The first two are distinguished by Cicero. So Philo says, 
that without purpose prepense, the deed is reduced to half. 

7 The principal examples are those which necessity, if it do not 
justify, at least excuses. So Demosthenes; Thucydides; the Coe- 
rites for themselves; Justin for the Phocians; Isocrates; Aristides; 
Philostratus for the Messcnians. So Aristotle speaks of a man half 
unckedf not unjust, for the act was not deliberate, Themistius uses 
this difference in praise of Yalens. 

8 The same writer elsewhere presses it upon the young Emperor. 
So in Josephus, Titus makes a difference. 

Mere misfortunes neither deserve punishment, nor oblige to recom- 
pense of loss : unjust actions do both. The intermediate case, fault, 
is liable to restitution, but often does not merit punishment, especi- 
ally capital punishment. So Valerius Flaccus. 

Chap. XI.] OF KILLING IN WAR. 873 

v. ThemistioSy in the passage above quoted, praises Yalens for 
making a difference between the authors of the war, and their follow- 
ers : and this is often exemplified in history. So the Greeks, in deal- 
ing with the Thebans for joining the Modes. So the leaders of the 
sedition at Ardea were put to death : so at Agrigentum, Atella, and 
Calasia; and elsewhere. So Eteocles is praised in Euripides ; and the 
Athenians, for this reason, repented of their decree against the Mityle- 
nians. So Demetrius acted at Thebes. 

YI. 1 But also, in the authors of the war, the causes of the act 
are to be distinguished ; for there are some which, though not just, 
may impose on those who are not bad men. The writer to Herennius 
puts this as a strong ground of excuse. So Seneca; so the Cssrites 
plead in Livy ; so the Phocians and others were pardoned by Rome ; 
so Aristides pleads for the Thebans. 

2 Cicero says that those are to be spared, who have fought without 
cruelty; and that wars for glory should be carried on less bitterly. So 
Ptolemy tells Demetrius that they were to fight, not for existence, but 
for glory and empire. So Severus says of Niger. 

3 Often, as Cicero says of the war between Ceesar and Pompey, 
the case was obscure, and that many doubted which was the bettor 
side. And of himself he says. We may not be free from hwnan faulty 
but we are free from wickedness. So he says also of Deiotarus. 
So Sallust says of the multitude. What Brutus wrote of the civil 
wars, may be applied to other wars : JTust they who raised them were 
more proper objects of anger tJian they who were conquered in tJiem. 

VU. 1 Even when justice does not require us to spare men's 
lives in war, it is often agreeable to goodness, to moderation, to mag- 
nanimity. So Sallust says of one, that he increased the greatness of the 
Roman people by mercy, Tacitus recommends keenness against the 
enemy, kindness towards the suppliant. Seneca says that it is only 
the baser wild beasts which tear them that are down ; elephants and 
lions pass them by. So Virgil, of the Trojan feeling. 

2 There is a passage to this effect in the book ad Herennium, 
which pnuses the Romans for sparing those they had vanquished. 
But to this, other passages may be opposed, as the panegyric of Con- 
stantine. But this again is too lax. Josephus gives a like example 
of the Roman severity, speaking of putting to death Simon Barjoras : 
but he speaks of l^uiers like Pontius the Samnite, not of kings. 
Cicero, in his Yerrine Oration, says the same. 

3 With regard to this putting to death loaders, there are every- 
where examples. Some there are of kings, as Aristonicus, Jugurtha, 
Artabasdus, [Gronovius notes that the two former wore spurious 
kings; and that the last was put to death at Alexandria, M, An- 
tonii sceluSf as Tacitus says]. But besides Perseus, others, as Syphax, 
Gentius, Jnba, and at the time of the Ciesars, Caractacus, escaped this 
punishment; so that it appears that the Romans regarded the cause 
of the war, and the mode of conducting it by the enemy: and yet they 

374 RESTRAINTS AS TO THE RIGHT [BookIH. 

wore too hanh in yictory, as Cicero and oUiera acknowledge. And 
M. ^milioB Paulusy in ploading for PerseuBy warns the Roman Se- 
nators to fear Nemesis, the divine Tengeance» if they use yictory inso- 
lently. Plutarch notes that, in the Grec^ wars, even the enemies did no 
Tiolence to the Lacedaemonian Kings, out of reyerence for their dignity. 

4 An enemy, therefore, who considers, not what human laws per- 
mit, but what is his duty, what is righteous and pious, will spare hostile 
blood : and will nerer inflict death, except either to aroid death, or 
erils like death, or to punish crimes which are capital in desert. 
And eren to some who haro deseryed that, he will remit all, or at 
least, capital punishment, either out of humanity, or for some other 
plausible causes. So Diodorus says that victory dependi on fortune, 
btU mercy in victory on virtue. So Curtius, of Alexander. 

Vin. With regard to those who are killed without its being in- 
tended, we must hold that if justice do not require, at least mercy 
does, that wo should not, except for weighty causes tending to the 
safety of many, undertake anything which may inrolTO innocent per- 
sons in destruction. So Polybius. 

IX. 1 Haying settled tiiese principles, it will not be difficult to 
lay down more special rules. 

Children are excueed by their age, women by their eexj as Seneca says, 
in the books in which he writes, angrily, Agamet Anger, Gt>d himself, 
eyen when peace had been offered and refused, directed that women 
and infants were to be spared, except in a few cases, in which the 
war was the war of God, not of men, and was so called. And when 
he directed the Midianitish women to be slain for their crime, he 
excepted the yirgins. And when he had threatened Nineyeh with 
destruction, he was moyed to change his purpose, (Jonah iy. 11,) by 
the consideration that there were so many persons who could not dis- 
tinguish right from wrong. So Seneca and Lucan speak of children. 
And if God did and directed thus, the Giyer and Lord of life, what 
should men do, to whom he has given no authority over men, except 
what is necessary to preserve the safety and society of men? 

2 With regard to Children, we are supported by the judgment of 
the most moral times and peoples. So Camillus, in Liyy ; Plutarch, 
who says there are, among good men, certain laws of war : where note 
apud bonos, among good men, that you may distinguish those laws 
from the customary rights of war, which only mean impunity. So 
Florus: and Liyy again. 

3 The rule of mercy which obtains always in infants, obtains mostly 
in Women, (except they have incurred punishment by some special act, 
or assumed masculine offices). For the sex is unfit for arms : Does 
enemy apply to women f is asked in the tragedy. So Alexander in 
Curtius ; Gryphus in Justin ; and another in Tacitus, neqite adversut 
feminaa: [but it is feminas gravidas in the passage. /. BJ] 

4 Valerius speaks of ^e savage cruelty of Munatius Flaccus to 
women and children, intolerable to hear of . So the Carthaginians 

Chap. XIJ OP KILLING IN WAR. 876 

are said to hare put to death old men, women, children, tuithaui /eeU 
ing,' This is cruelty, 80 Pacatus and Papioios. 

X. 1 The same rule is to he laid down generally, for Men whose 
kind of life is repugnant to arms. Slaughter of mm armed and resUt- 
ing is the law of war^ says Livy ; that is, hy Natural Law. So Josephus 
says, that it is reasonable that they who have taken arms should be 
punished in battle, but that Non-combatants are not to be hurt. So 
Oamillus, in storming Veil, directed the unarmed to be let alone. 

In this class, first we must place Those who perform sacred ofiices. 
For that these abstain from arms, is an ancient custom of all nations ; 
and in old time, they were not molested. So the Philistines did not 
hurt the school of the prophets (1 Sam. z. 5 and iO) at Gaba, where 
they had a garrison. And so (1 Sam. xiz. 18) Da?id and Samuel took 
refuge at Naioth, where there was also a school of the prophets. 
Plutarch relates that the Cretans, in their intestine wars, abstained 
from injuring the priests, and the buriers of the dead. Hence the 
Greek proTerb, not even the pyre-lighter was leftf when all were killed. 
Strabo notes that in ancient times, when fdl Greece was in disturbance 
with arms, the Eleans, as sacred to Jupiter, and they who were under 
their hospitality, liyed in profound peace. 

2 Along with Priests, are properly ranked in this matter, all who 
haye chosen a similar course of life, as Monks, and Norices, that is. 
Penitents ; and these, the Canons direct, are to be spared, as well as 
priests ; following, in this, natural equity. Add to these, Those who 
giye their labour to honourable literary studios, useful to mankind. 

XI. Next add Husbandmen, whom also the Canons include. Dio- 
dorus, praising the Indians, says that in their wars, the warriors i^ght, 
but they leaye the cultivators unmolested, as the common benefactors 
of both sides. So Plutarch, of the old Corinthians and Megareans. 
So Cyrus proposed to the king of Assyria. So Belisarius acted, as 
Suidas says. 

XIL The Canon adds Merchants, which is to be understood, 
not only of those who make a temporary residence in the hostile 
country, but also of permanent subjects. For their life also is foreign 
to arms. And under this name are included Artisans, and Workmen, 
whose gain requires peace, not war. 

XIIL 1 To come to those who haye borne arms, we haye already 
quoted the speech of Pyrrhus in Seneca, who says that we are pre- 
yented, pudore^ by decency, from putting a captive to death. We 
adduced a similar opinion expressed by Alexander, who conjoins cap- 
tives with women. We may add Augustine, Xenophon, Diodorus 
Siculus. 

2 When Sallust says, that all the men were slain after the sur- 
render, he adds, contrary to the Laws of War : that is, contrary to the 
manner of humane nations. So Lactantius. So Tacitus of Antonius 
and Varus. So Aristides. 

Elisha the prophet says to the king of Samaria, 2 Kings yi. 22 : 

376 RESTRAINTS AS TO THE RIGHT pBooKlIL 

Wouldest thou tmite iho§e wham thou hatt taken captive unik tky 
sivord and wUk thy bow f So in Euripides. So the B jsuittiies and 
Chalcedonians are Baid to hayo done acts of extraordinary cruelty, in 
killing captives. And to spare captires, b a common law. So Seneca, 
already quoted. And when a general, embarrassed by the number of 
his captives, dismisses them, ho b pnused in hutory. 

XIV. 1 Hence surrender on condition of life b accepted, both in 
a battle and in a siege. Hence Arrian says that the slaughter of the 
Thebans, who had surrendered, was an un-Oreek massacre. So Thn- 
cydides. You received us, holding out our hands a» turrendering : to kill 
tueh is not the Greek custom. So the Syracusans in Diodorua ; and 
Sopater. 

2 In besieging towns, the Romans did this, before the battering- 
ram had struck the walls. So Csesar announces to the Aduatici. And 
this rule holds at the present day for weak places, before the fire of 
artillery begins ; in strong places, before a storm b ordered. Cicero, 
looking at equity, says, those who surrender are to be reoeiTed, even 
if the ram haye struck the wall. The Hebrew commentators note 
that their countrymen, in their sieges, were wont not to cany the 
works quite round the city, but to leave an opening for escape^ to 
avoid the shedding of blood. 

XY. The same equity commands us to spare those who surrender 
unconditionfdly, or ask their lives. To %n€uea€re those who surrender^ 
is savagCf says Tacitus. So Sallust of Marius ; and Livy. 

And pains ore to be taken to make them rather surrender through 
fear, than bo slain. Brutus is praised that ho ordered hb adver- 
saries to be turned in flank, not chained in front, as being soon his 
own. 

XVI. 1 Exceptions, by no means just, to these precepts of equity 
and natural justice are often alleged : — Retaliation : — the necessity of 
striking terror:— the obstinacy of the resistance. It b easily seen 
that those are insufficient arguments. There is no danger from cap- 
tives or persons willing to surrender ; and therefore, to justify put' 
ting thorn to death, there should be antecedent crime, of a capital 
amount. And when this can be urged, surrender on condition of 
life b sometimes not accepted ; or they are put to death after sur- 
render : for instance, those who, though convinced of the injustice of 
the war, remained in arms ; or attacked the reputation of their ene- 
mies with monstrous calumnies; or violated faith; or other laws, 
such as the rights of legation ; or were deserters. 

2 But as to Retaliation, nature docs not allow it, except against 
the ofTondcr himself. Nor is it sufficient, that the enemy b, by a sort 
of fiction, conceived as forming ono body ; as appears from what we 
have said above of the punbhment of accessories. Arbtides speaks 
of blaming what others do, and yet imitating it. Plutarch accuses 
the Syracusans on this ground, as having put to death the wives 
and children of Ilicetas, because he had killed the wife, sister, and son 
of Dion. 

Chap. XI.] OP KILLING IN WAR. 377 

3 The advantage which is expected by striking terror, cannot giro 
a right to kill men : but if we hare a right, it may be a reason for 
not remitting it. 

4 An obstinate adherence to one's own party, if their cause be not 
indecently bad, does not deserre punishment : [so in Procopius:] or at 
least, not a punishment extending to death ; for no impartial judge 
would so decide. When Alexander ordered the men to be put to 
death, in a town which had resisted obstinately, the Indians thought 
him a ruffian ; and he, in fear of such a reputation, afterwards used 
his yictory more temperately. To the Milesians he was more gene- 
rous, sparing them for their fidelity to their friends. When Phyto the 
gOTemor of Rhegium was led to death with torture by Dionysius, for 
defending his city obstinately, he exclaimed that the gods would 
reyenge his case ; his unjust punishment, as Diodorus calls it. Cscsar, 
in Lucan, wishes well to him who can think that his citizens hare done 
well, though they carried arms against him ; which I admire, includ- 
ing, in eitizenSf the citizens, not of one nation, but of all. 

5 Still less is such killing justified by grief for calamity suffered ; 
as when we read that Achilles, JEneas, Alexander, marked the fune- 
rals of their friends with the blood of captives, or persons who had 
surrendered. Homer calls such a purpose icoKa ^pya^ evil deeds, 

XVII. Even when the offenses are such that they may seem to 
deserre death, it is the office of mercy to remit the extreme of right, 
on account of the number of offenders. We find an example of this 
clemency in God himself, who allowed that the Canaanites and their 
neighbours should hare the offer of peace, on condition of tribute. So 
Seneca, Pardon is necessary , wJien the whole army has deserted. What 
takes away the wise man's anger f the offenders* number. So Lucan. 
Cicero speaks of lot in such a case. So Sallust to Ca>8ar. 

XVHL 1 What is to bo the rule of hostages, wo hare already 
suggested. Formerly, when it was believed that every one had a right 
over his own life, and that he had transferred this to the state, it is 
not so surprizing, if we find hostages, without any private crime, put 
to death, for the fault of their city ; either as by Uieir own consent, or 
by the public consent, in which their own was included. But when a 
better wisdom has taught us that our life is not put in our power by 
God, it follows that no one can by mere consent give a right over 
his own life, or that of his follow- citizen. And so Narses thought it 
atrocious to punish innocent hostages : and Scipio said he would not 
punish the hostages, but the offenders: not the unarmed, but the 
armed. 

2 What is said by recent writers, that such conventions are valid if 
authorized by custom, I allow, if they mean that they obtain impunity, 
which often passes for right ; but if they mean that they are free from 
sin, who take away life on a mere convention, I am afriud they are 
both wrong themselves, and mislead others. K, howoTer, a person 
who comes as a hostage, is or has been a grave criminal, or grier- 

878 RESTRAINTS AS TO THE RIGHT, lie. [Book m. 

OQily Tiolatet his fiuth pTen, h maj be that the ponMiment maj be 
right. 

3 But Clelia, who ww sent as a hostage, not br her own eonsent 
but by commaiKi of the citT,aiid who eso^wd bj swiimiihig the Tiber, 
was praised by the Etnucan king, as Ltvy saja. 

XIX. We iDiist add, that all eombats by diaHenge!, whidi are of 
DO use in obtaining rights, or in ending the war, bat are merely for the 
sake of shewing Taloor or skill, are at Tarianee with Christian doty 
and with hnmanity. Rulers onght dectsir^y to forbid such, since 
they most render an aooonnt to him, in whose stead they bear the 
sword, of blood sbed uselessly. So Sallost praises leaders who con> 
qner bloodlessly. So the Catti, a people of known Taloar, are prused 
by Tacitus, because, with tkemf cktumpiom Uepfimg cmtofthe raidb, and 
chamee figku^ are rare. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Restraints as to Wasting^ and the like. 

Sect. I. What wa$iing i$ just, and sources of support. 

how far, V. Or \f the things be of no 

II. yo wasting to be done, on use for supporting the war, 
things valuable and out of YI. Especially as to sacred 
the enemy^s power, things, 

III. Or if there be great hope of VII. And burial-places , 
speedy victory. Y III. The advantages of such mo- 

lY. Or if the enemy have other deration, 

I. 1 TN order that any ono may destroy tho property of another 
X without wrong, one of these three things is necessary : — either 
such a necessity as must be supposed to be accepted in tho first insti- 
tution of property : (as if any one, to save himself, threw into the rirer 
the sword of another, which a madman was going to use; in which 
case, however, the better opinion is, that the obligation of restitution 
remains :) — or some debt remaining unpaid, in which case the thing 
destroyed is to be reckoned as received, otherwise the right does not 
exist : — or some ill desert, to which such punishment is suited, and so 
that the loss does not exceed tho desert : for, as a sound theologian 
rightly notes, it is not equitable that for some cattle driven away, or 
some houses burnt, a kingdom should be laid waste ; as Polybius also 
said; who would not allow that in war punishment should go on to an 
indefinite extent, but only so &r that the offenses may bo equitably 
expiated. And for these causes, and within these limits, to damage 
another's property is not to do a wrong. 

2 But except there be some motive of utility, it is foolish, for no 
good of your own, to harm another. Thoreforo wise men are com- 
monly moved by their advantages, of which the principal is, that which 
Onosander notes : Let the general waste, humj and ravage the enermf% 
country ; for the want of money and provision breaks down a war as 
abundance holds it up. And so Proclus, It is the part of a good gens^ 
ral to cut 0^ the enemt^s resources. So Curtius, of Darius. 

3 Such ravage is tolerable (to the moralist) as in a short time 
reduces the enemy to seek peace : which was the kind of war that 
Halyattes carried on against the Milesians, the Thracians against the 
Byzantines, the Romans against the Campanians, Capenates, Spaniards, 
Ligurians, Nervians, Menapians. But if you weigh the matter well, 
you will find that such practices are admitted, rather through spite 
than prudence. For it generally happens, either that these motives 
cease, or that other motives which act the other way are more powerful. 

n. 1 That will be the case, in the first place, if we are in posses* 

380 RESTRAINTS AS TO WASTING, [Book UL 

sion of the country which yields provisions, so that it cannot avail the 
enemy for their supply. And to this point properly tends the divine 
law (Deut xx. 19, 20), which forbids the cutting down fruit-trees for 
bulwarks and other warlike uses, and points out trees which do not 
supply food, as proper to be used for such purposes ; and adds the 
reason, that " the tree of the field is man's lifo,** and that they cannot 
war against man, as man can. And this Philo extends to fields which 
have fruit ; adding, that they minister food and comfort to the victors: 
they pay tribute. Josephus adds, on the same place, that if the trees 
could speak, they would complain of the injustice of their bearing the 
penalty of the war, of which they are not the cause. And on the same 
ground rests the Pythagorean dictum in Jamblichus, that it is unlawful 
to hurt a fruit-bearing tree. 

2 Porphyry, in his book Against Eating Animals, speaking of the 
manners of the Jews, being guided, as I conceive, by custom, extendi 
this to animals used in agriculture : for he says that Moses commanded 
to spare theso also. And the writers of the Talmud, and the Hebrew 
Commentators, say that this law is to be extended to anything which is 
destroyed without cause, as when buildings are burnt, or victuals 
spoiled. And with this law, agrees the prudent moderation of Timo- 
theus, the Athenian general, who did not allow a house or city to be burrUf 
or a /ruil-tree to be cut doum, as Polysenus relates. In Plato's Laws 
we havo this, that tlie land is not to be ravaged nor houses burnt. 

3 Much more will this hold after a complete victory. Cicero does 
not approve of Corinth being destroyed; where, nevertheless, the 
Roman ambassadors had been shamefully treated. The same writer 
elsewhere says, that a war made against walls, roofs, columns, and posts, 
is horrible, wicked, and stained with all spite. Livy pnuses the clemency 
of the Romans, when Capua was taken, that there were no severities 
exercised, by conflagration and ruin, against harmless roofs and walls. 
So Agamemnon, in Seneca, declares he wished of Troy. 

4 The Sacred History tells us of some cities, which were given up 
to destruction ; and that, even against the sacred law which we have 
mentioned ; the trees of the Moabites were commanded to be cut 
down (2 Kings iii. 19) ; but this was not done in hostile spite, but in 
detestation of wickednesses, which were either publicly known, or 
were, in the judgment of God, worthy of such inflictions. 

III. 1 In the second place, the rule which we mention will hold, 
even when the possession of the land is doubtful, if there be strong 
hope of a speedy victory, of which the reward will be, both the land 
and its fruits. So Alexander restrained his soldiers from wasting 
Asia, telling them not to destroy what was to be their own. So 
Quintius exhorted his soldiers to march through Thcssaly, as a country 
already their own. So Croesus said to Cyrus, to dissuade him from 
wasting Lydia, You will not destroy my possessions, but your own. 

2 To those who do otherwise, we may apply what Jocasta says in 
Seneca: You destroy your country whUe you try to vHn it, ^c. So Cor- 

Chap. XH.] AND THE LIKE. 381 

tins, What they spoiled they acknowledged to belong to the enemy. So 
Cicero argaes against Pompey's design, of reducing his country by 
famine. And on this ground Alexander Isius blames Philip, as Liry 
translates from Polybius. 

rV. 1 In the third place, this holds if the enemy can support 
himself from other quarters ; as if the sea, or boundaries on another 
side, be open. 80 Archidamus exhorting the Lacednmonians from 
war with the Athenians, asks if they depend on wasting Attica, when 
the Athenians have other territories (Thrace and Ionia), and can 
obtun supplies by sea. In such a state of things, then, it is best that 
agriculture should bo secure, eyen in the contested region, which we 
have lately seen practised in the war in Germanic Belgium*, on 
paying a tribute to both parties. 

2 This is agreeable to the practice of the ancient Indians, among 
whom the cultiyators worked undisturbed close to the camps, as a 
race sacred from injury, and beneficial to all. 

3 Xenophon says that a conTcntion was made between Cyrus and 
the Assyrians, that there should be peace urith tlie cultivator ^ war with the 
soldiers. So Timotheus let the most fertile part of the land to hus- 
bandmen, as Polysenus relates, and even, as Aristotle adds, sold the 
produce to the enemy, to raise money to pay his soldiers; and so 
Viriatus did in Spain. And the same was done in the Belgico- 
Germanic war of which we have spoken, with great reason, and great 
advantage, to the admiration of foreigners. 

4 These practices are proposed for imitation by the Canons, the 
teachers of humanity, to all Christians, as owing and professing a 
humanity greater than other men. And therefore these Canons direct, 
not only that cultivators should be out of danger of war, but animals 
for the plough, and the seed for sowing. And this is for the same 
reason for which the Civil Laws forbid the instruments of ploughing 
to be taken in pledge ; and among the Phrygians and Cyprians of 
old, and among the Athenians and Romans, it was reckoned abomin- 
able to kill the ox that drew the plough. 

V. In the fourth place, it happens that some things are of such a 
nature that they are of no effect in making or carrying on war ; and 
these, it is reasonable should be spared during the war. To this case 
belongs the pleading of the Rhodians to Demetrius the City-taker, in 
£ivour of the painting of lalysius, which Gellius gives. They tell him 
that if he destroy that part of the city, he will be supposed to make 
war upon Protogenes the great painter. So Polybius says, that it is a 
mark of a savage mind to make war on things which neither weaken 
the loser nor strengthen him who destroys them ; as temples, porticos, 
statues, and the like. So Cicero says, ^at Marcellus spared the build- 

* The War of the United ProTinces against Spain. Gronovioa says that this 
was not only done with regard to lawfol Articles under Licenses (Licetden), bnt 
that ships of war were furnished out at Amsterdam for the enemy with the con* 
niyance of the magistrates. 

382 RESTRAINTS AS TO WASTING, [BookIH. 

ings of Syractuej public and privcOe, mi/ his army had eame to defend^ 
not to destroy them. And again, that Our ancestors left to them what is a 
gratification to the conquered and a trifle to U9. 

YI. 1 And as this is true in all ornamental works, for the reason 
which wo have mentioned, there is, besides, an especial reason in things 
dedicated to sacred uses. For though these, as we hare sud, are 
public in a peculiar way, and therefore may bo violated with impunity 
by the laws of nations ; yet if there be no danger from them, there 
is a motive for sparing them, besides those which have been mentioned, 
in the reverence for dirine things : and especially, among those who 
worship the same God by the same law, even though they differ in 
some rites and doctrines. 

2 Thucydides says that this was the rule of the Greeks. Liry 
says, that when Alba was destroyed, the temples were spared. When 
Capua was taken, Silius speaks of the religious feeling which led the 
Romans to preserve the temples. Livy says that it was objected to 
Q. Fulvius the Censor, that he built temples with the ruins of temples, 
as if the gods were not everywhere the same ; and thus involved the 
Romans in religious irreverence. When Maroius PhiUppus came to 
Dius, ho ordered the tents to bo pitched under the temple, that 
nothing in the sacred place might be violated. Strabo relates that 
Tectosages, who had plundered the treasures at Delphi, did, in order 
to appease the offended deity, consecrate them at his home with 
additional offerings. 

3 To come to Christians: Agathias relates that the Franks spared 
the temples ; being of the same religion as the Greeks, whom they 
conquered. And even men were commonly spared on account of the 
temples, as (not to adduco examples of heathen nations, which are 
numerous, inasmuch as writers call this the common usage of the 
Cheeks,) by the Goths, when they took Rome; which Augustine 
praises. 

VII. 1 What has been said of sacred places, may be applied also 
to burial-places, and to the monuments of the dead : for these, though 
the Law of Nations allows wrath to do its work on them with impu- 
nity, cannot bo violated without trampling on humanity. Jurists say 
that that is the highest Reason, which is on the side of religion. So 
Euripides, speaking both of temples and of tombs. Apollonius 
Tyanceus interpreted the war of the giants against the gods to mean, 
that they violated the temples. In Statius, Annibal is called saerileguSf 
for that he Deumface miseuit aras, put the torch to the altar. 

2 Scipio, when Carthage was taken, gave donations to the soldiers, 
except those who had transgressed against Apollo's temple. Csesar would 
not venture to destroy the trophy erected by Mithridates, as being 
consecrated to the gods. Marcellus, withheld by religion, did not touch 
what victory only had made profane, as Cicero says ; and adds, that 
there are enemies who, oven in war, respect the rights of religion and 
custom. And elsewhere, he calls the violence of Brennus, done to the 

Chap. XH.] AND THE LIKE. 383 

fane of Apollo, nofariouB. The act of Pyrrhns, in despoiling the 
treasure of Proserpine, is called, by Livy, foul and contumacious against 
the Gk)ds. So Diodorus speaks of Himilco ; Livy, of Philip. Florus, of 
the same, calls it wickedness and madness. Polybius, touching on the 
same history, says the like, as already quoted ; and does not admit 
the excuse of retaliation. 

YIIL 1 Although it is not a part of our purpose to speak of the 
advantctges of any course of conduct, but rather to restrain the loose 
license of war to that which is lawful by nature, or among the lawful 
ways, the better ; yet eyen Virtue, in this ago often little esteemed 
on her own account, ought to pardon me, if I try to make her yalue 
apparent by her utility. First, then, this moderation in preserving 
things which do not affect the course of war, takes away from an 
enemy that great weapon, despair. So Archidamus says, that the 
enem/s land is a hostage, to be spared that despair may not givo 
them strength. So Agesilaus advised to let the Acamians sow their 
land ; saying, that they would be all the more desirous of peace. So 
Juvenal, spoUcUis arma mpenunt, when men have lost all they find 
arms. So Livy says the Oauls judged; when they took the city. 

2 Add, that such a course, during war, presents the appearance of 
a great confidence of victory ; and that clemency is apt to bend and 
conciliate men's minds. So Annibal, in his conduct towards the 
Tarentines, does not waste the land ; not from moderation, but to con- 
ciliate them. So Augustus acted towards the Pannonians. So Timo- 
theus, in the case already mentioned, obtained the good will of the 
enemy. So Quintius and the Romans, in the case above given, found 
that, as the fruit of their conduct, the cities of Thessaly and the 
others came over to them. The city of the Lingones, which escaped 
the apprehended ravage in the war against CiviliSf was reduced to dbedi- 
eneey and supplied seventy thousand armed men ; as Frontinus relates. 

3 The opposite cause leads to an opposite result. Livy gives an 
example in Annibal, when he committed ravage in his retreat, and 
alienated the mindsy both of those who suffered, and of those who 
feared. 

4 It is also most true, as some theologians have noted, that it is 
the duty of rulers and leaders, who wish to be reckoned Christians by 
God and by men, to abstain from storming of cities, and other like 
violent proceedings; which cannot take place, without great calamity 
to many innocent persons, and often do little to promote the ends of 
the war: so that Christian goodness almost always, justice mostly, 
must inspire a repugnance to them. The tie of Christians amongst 
each other is closer than was that of the Greeks formerly ; and yet 
there was a decree of the Amphictyons, that in their wars, no Greek 
city should be destroyed. And the ancients relate, that Alexander 
the Great never repented of anything, so much as he did of tho 
destruction of Thebes. 

CHAPTER XIIL 

Restraints respecting Captures. 

Sect. I. Things taken from ene- III. This includes debts subnaS' 
mies* subjects in war are cent in War, 

retained as a Debt. IV. Humanity requires not to 
II. But not as a punishment qf exercise extreme Rights, 

another^ s Crime, 

I. 1 |ji YEN the capture of what belongs to the enemy in a just war, 
Pi is not to be conceiyed to bo free from fault, or relieved from 
all burthen of restitution. For if you look at what is right, it is not 
lawful to take or have anything, beyond what rests on the enemy's debt 
to you ; except that beyond this, things necessary to your safety may 
also be detained, but are to be restored when the peril is orer, either 
in themselves or in their price ; as we have explained, B. u. C. ii. 
For what would be lawful in things belonging to those with whom 
we are at peace, is still more clearly lawful in the case of an enemy. 
This is the right of taking, without the right of keeping. 

2 As a debt may be due to us, either to rectify an existing in- 
equality, or as a punishment ; so a thing belonging to the enemy nuiy 
be acquired either way, but with a difference. For as we have said 
above, in virtue of the former kind of debt, the property, not only of 
the debtor himself, but of his subjects also, is bound by the Instituted 
Law of Nations, as under a kind of suretyship. And this Law of 
Nations we hold to be of another kind from that which consists only in 
impunity, or the compulsion of tribunals. For, as he with whom wo 
deal, does, by our private consent, acquire, not only an external right 
to our property, but an internal also ; so also is such a right acquired 
from a kind of common consent which contains in itself by a peculiar 
force the consent of individuals ; in which sense, the Law is called 
the Common Pact of the State. And that such an appointment was in- 
tended by nations, in this case, is the more probable, inasmuch as this 
Law of Nations is introduced, not only for the sake of avoiding a 
greater evil, but in order that each one may obtain his own right. 

II. But in the other kind of debt, which is debt as penalty, I 
do Jiot see that such a right over the property of subjects is esta- 
blished by the Law of Nations. For such an obligation, imposed on 
the property of another, is an odious rule, and therefore ought not to 
be carried further than it appears to be actually settled ; nor is the 
utility of the extension on a parity, in this, and in the other kind of 
debt : for the other is a part of my property, but this is not ; and 
therefore the exaction of it may be omitted without wrong. Nor is 
there any objection, in what we have said above of the Attic law. For 

Chap. Xm.] RESTRAINTS RESPECTINQ CAPTURES. 885 

in that case, men wore obliged, not properly because the city could be 
punished, but only in order to compel the city to do what it ought to 
do, that is, to pass judgment on a guilty person ; which official debt 
is to be referred to the former kind of debt, not to the latter. For 
it is one thing to owe the duty of punishing, another, to owe or to be 
liable to a punishment ; although, from the omission of the former, 
the latter often may follow; but still, so that they are distinct, the 
former as the cause, and the latter as the effect. Therefore the pro- 
perty of subjects cannot be acquired on the ground of penalty, but 
that of those only who hare offended ; among whom are included 
also the magistrates, who do not punish offenses. 

m. But the property of subjects may be both taken and kept, 
not only for the exaction of the primary debt, from whence the war 
arose, but also of a debt which grows up during the process, as we 
said at the beginning of this Book. And in this sense, we are to take 
what is sud by some theologians, that captures in war are not to 
be reckoned only in the way of compensation for the principal debt. 
For this is to be understood until, according to a sound judgment, 
satisfaction is made for the damage which has been inflicted in the 
war itself. Thus the Romans in their dispute with Antiochus, thought 
it a reasonable demand that the king should repay all the expenses 
of the war, since by his fault the war took place. So, of the expenses 
of tho war, in Justin, Thucydidcs; and elsewhere frequently. And 
what is justly imposed on the conquered, is justly extorted by war. 

IV. 1 But here too, we must recollect what we have elsewhere 
said, that the rules of charity are wider than those of justice. He 
who abounds in wealth, is guilty of want of clemency, if he wring a 
needy debtor with stringent rules, and exact the uttermost farthing : 
and st}ll more, if that debtor have run into the debt by his own good- 
ness, as for instance, by being security for a friend, without having 
turned any of the money to his own profit. The danger of a surety 
is to be pitiedf as Quiutilian says. And yet even so hard a creditor 
does nothing against strict right. 

2 Wherefore humanity requires that we should leave, to those who 
are not in fault in the war, and who are only bound as sureties, the 
things which we can do without, better than they can : especially if it 
appear that they will not recover from their city what they thus lose. 
So Cyrus, when Babylon was taken, said to his soldiers, muit ye do 
not take from the enemy , they will owe to your humanity, 

3 This also is to be noted, that so long as we have a hope of 
receiving oiur debt from the original debtor, or from those who have 
made themselves debtors by not yielding our right, to come upon 
those who are free from fault, although it may not be at variance 
with strict law, is contrary to humanity. 

4 Examples of this humanity are everywhere extant in history, 
especially that of Rome : as when, on the conquest of a country, the 
lands were granted, on condition that they should belong to the con* 

00 

S86 RESTRAINTS RESPECTING CAPTURES. [Book UI. 

quered city : or when a portion of the land was left h4ynori$ grcoia to 
Uie old possoBSors. Thus the Veientes were mulcted of part of their 
land by Romulus. So Alexander of Macedon gave the Uxii their 
lands, on the payment of tribute. So you often read that cities which 
surrendered, were not plundered. And we hare said aboye, that not 
only persons, but the lands themselyes of the cultiyators, were often 
spared, with general approval, and according to the pious precept of 
the Canons, at least under tribute; and that, under a like tribute, 
merchants hare been accustomed to reoeiye protection in war. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Restraints respecting Prisoners. 

Sect. I. How far we may, by inter^ 
naljiutice., take Captive*, 
IL What lawful Right has the 
Mastery by internal justice., 
over the Slave. 

III. // is not lawful to kill an 
innocent Slave., 

IV. Nor to punish him merci- 
lessly, 

y. Nor to impose too severe 
tasks on him. 

VI. How the Slave's peculium is 
the Master's, how the Ser- 
vant's, 

VIL Is it lawful for Servants to 
escape 9 

VIII. Jre the Offspring of Ser- 
vants bound to the Master, 
and how far 9 

IX. JVhat is to be done when 
the Slavery cf Captives is 
not the usage. 

I. I TN those places in which the captivity and servitude of men is 
X usual, it must, if we regard internal justice, be limited in the 
same way as property; so that we may have such acquisitions, only so 
far as is permitted by tlie amount of a debt, either primary or sub- 
nascent; except there should be some peculiar delict, which equity 
allows to be punished by the loss of liberty. So far, therefore, and 
no further, has a belligerent right over captive enemies, and the 
power of a valid transfer of such right to others. 

2 It will moreover be the duty of equity and goodness, to apply, 
here also, those distinctions which we noted before, with regard to 
killing enemies. Demosthenes praises Philip, because he did not 
make slaves of all who had been his enemies, but weighed their 
deserts. 

n. 1 But first, this is to be noted ; that the right which arises 
from citizens being a sort of surety for the State, is by no means to be 
extended so widely as the right which arises ex delicto against those 
who are penal slaves. And thus, a certain Spartan said, that he was a 
captive, but not a slave. For if we rightly look at the matter, this 
general right against captives, is on a like footing with the right of a 
master over those who have sold themselves into slavery under the 
compulsion of want; abstracting the heavier part of their calamity^ 
that they have come into that case, not by any special act of their 
own, but by the fault of the rulers. It ia the bitterest lot, to he a captive 
by the law9 of war, as Isocrates says. 

2 This servitude, then, is the perpetual obligation of working for 
perpetual aliment. The definition of Chrysippus here exactly applies; 
A slave is a perpetuai labourer /or hire. And the Hebrew law plainly 
compares him who, under the compulsion of need, has sold himself, to 
a labourer for hire; and directs that, in redeeming him, his labour 

cc 2 

388 RESTRAINTS RESPECTING PRISONERS. [Book HI. 

shall be reckoned in the same way, that the produce which has been 
gathered from land sold, is to be reckoned to the former owner. Deut 
XT. xriii. 

3 There is a great difference between that which maj be done 
with impunity towards a shiye by the Law of Nations, and that which 
natural reason suffers to be done. We hare before cited Seneca to 
this effect So Philemon says, A slave does not cease to be a man. 
Seneca adds that Slaves are not only men, but fdlow^lodgers, humble 
friends, fdloW'Servants : agreeing plainly with what St Paul says, 
Colos. iv. 1. And elsewhere, Eph. yi. 9, he directs masters to do good 
to their slaves, forbearing threatening, on the same ground, knowing 
that their Master also is in heaven, who docs not regard such differences. 
In the Clementine Constitutions we have the same. So Clemens 
Alexandrinus bids us use our slaves as our other selves, since they are 
men no less than we ; following the saying of the Hebrew wise men. 

IIL The right of life and death over a slave, then, gives the master 
a domestic jurisdiction ; which, however, is to be exercised with the 
same regard to conscience, as a public jurisdiction. So Seneca, as 
before ; and again, he compares a slave to a subject, and says that, 
though by a different title, the same things only are lawful in the 
one case as in the other ; which is especially true with regard to this 
right of taking away life, and what approaches to it. Our ancestors, 
says Seneca, regarded a house as a small r^mblic : so Pliny. Cato 
the Censor, if any slave was supposed to have committed a capital 
offense, did not pmiish him, till he had been condemned by the judg- 
ment of his fcIlow-Borvants. See Job xxxi. IZ, If I did despise the 
cause of my man-servant, &c. 

IV. And even with regard to smaller punbhments, as stripes to 
servants, wo must apply equity, and even clemency. The Hebrew 
law says, Deut. xv. 17, 45, 53, Thou shall not oppress him nor rule him 
harsldy, of their servants ; which must now by analogy be extended 
to all servants. And on this Philo comments. So Seneca says. Is it 
not savage and foolish to treat servants worse than brute animals f &c. 
Hence by the Hebrew law, If a inan smote out the eye or tooth of a 
servant, he obtained his liberty, Exod. xxi. 26. 

V. 1 There is, moreover, to be moderation and regard to the 
servant's health, in the work required of him. And this, among other 
things, is aimed at in the institution of the Hebrew Sabbath ; that 
there may be a breathing time from labour. So Pliny, to Paulinus, 
speaks of their common kindness to their slaves; quoting Homer, who 
speaks of Priam being always kind as a father ; and saying that he 
always recollects the Roman word Paterfamilias. 

2 So Seneca judges of lessons contained in this word paterfami" 
lias, and in the name for slaves, /amt7tare«. So Dio Prusteensis says 
that a good king will not like the term master, not only of freemen, 
but even of slaves. Ulysses, in Homer, says that the slaves who have 
been faithful, shall bo as if they were brothers of Telemachus his 

Chap. XIY.] RESTRAINTS RESPECTING PRISONERS. 389 

Bon. Tertallian says, fathers rather than mcuters, Jerome or Pauliniu 
exhorts Celantia to be a mother rather than a mistress of her family. 
So Augustine says that masters help their servants to worship God. 

3 There is a similar lesson of piety in the word puer for aervarUf 
as Scrrius notes. So the Heracleotes called their slares g\/l-hearen. 
Tacitus praises the Germans whose servants were as tenants. Theano 
says that slares should not sufifer from orer-labour or want. 

VI. 1 In return for labour, sustenance and clothing are duo to 
the slare. So Cicero, Aristotle, Cato, Seneca. The food allowed was 
four bushels of wheat a month. Martianus the jurist speaks of the 
things which the master is bound to proride the slare, as clothing 
and the like. The cruelty of the Sicilians, who starred the Athe* 
nians, is branded in history. 

2 Moreorer Seneca prores that, for some purposes, the slare is 
free ; and that he has the moans of conferring benefits on his master ; 
as, if he do anything which exceeds the measure of a slare's duty, 
and which proceeds, not from command, but from good-will, where 
there is a transition from serrice to the affection of a friend. With 
this agrees what Terence says, (in the Phomiio) that if a slare has 
sared anything by liring sparely, or working over-hours, it should be 
in a way his own. Thcophilus defines the physical means of a slare 
to be a natural patrimony, as we might define contuhemium^ the coha- 
bitation of slares, to be a natural matrimony : and XJlpian says the 
peculiumj the slare's prirate store, is a little patrimony. Nor does it 
make any difference, that the master may, at his pleasure, take away 
or diminish this peculium ; for if he do this without cause, he will not 
do what is just. And by cause, 1 here understand, not only punish- 
ment, but also the need of the master ; for the adrantage of the slare 
is subordinate to the advantage of the master, eren more than the 
advantage of the citizens to that of the State. So Seneca, We are 
not to say that the slave has nothing^ because he will have nothing if the 
master refuse his permission, 

3 And hence it is, that the master cannot recover from the slare 
a debt which was due to him during his serritude, and which he paid 
afler manumission ; because, as Tryphouinus says, the distinction of 
indebted and not indebted, is understood according to Natural Law, 
and not according to Ciril Law, in such an action for debt ; and the 
master may owe a debt to the slare by Natural Law, though not by 
Ciril Law. And accordingly, we find, that as clients hare made contri- 
butions for the use of their patrons, and subjects for the use of kings, 
so slares hare done the same for the use of their masters; for 
instance, for the dowry of a daughter, the ransom of a son, or any 
similar object. Pliny, as he tells us in his Epistles, allowed his ser- 
rants to make wills, and to dispose of their property within his family. 
In some nations, we hare read of a larger right of acquiring property 
being conceded to slares ; as we hare elsewhere siud, that there are 
serend degrees of slarery. 

390 RESTRAINTS RESPECmNG PRISONERS. [BooKin. 

4 In many nationSy the laws hare reduced that external right of 
masters to this internal juRtice which we are expounding. For among 
the Oreeksy when slaves were harshly treated, they were allowed 
to demand their eaU : and at Rome, to fly to the statues for refuge, 
or to implore the help of magistrates against cruelty or starration, or 
intolerable wrong. This is a matter, not of strict law, but of 
humanity and kindness : and sometimes this makes the slave's liberty 
bis due, after long or very great labours. 

6 When Slavery was introduced by the Law of Nations, the benefit 
of Manumission was added, says Ulpian. So in Terence, the slave is 
made a freedman, for serving liberally. Salvian says that slaves have 
often their liberty given, and are allowed to take with them their 
property. Of this kindness, we have many examples in the martyro- 
logios. And here, we must praise the kindness of the Hebrew law ; 
which directed that the Hebrew slave was, after a certain time, to be 
absolutely manumitted, and '* not empty," Deut. xv. 13 : of the n^^ 
lect of which law the prophets complain heavily. Plutarch condemns 
Oato the Elder, because he sold his slaves when past work, thus dis- 
regarding the common bond of human nature. 

VII. The question here occurs, whether he who is taken prisoner 
in war may justifiably make his escape. We do not here speak of 
him who has merited such punishment by crime, but who has been 
brought into the condition by some public event. The truer opinion 
is, that the stop is not justifiable ; because, as we have said, by the 
common convention of nations, he owes his labour on the part of 
the State. Which, however, is to be understood, with the provision 
that intolerable cruelty do not impose on him such a necessity. See 
on this subject the Response of Gregory XVI. 

VIII. 1 We have elsewhere discussed the question, whether, and 
how far, children, bom of slaves, are bound to the roaster by internal 
justice ; and this question ought not to be omitted in its especial 
bearing on prisoners of war. If the parents had, by crime, deserved 
the penalty of death, their prospective posterity might be bound to 
slavery, as a condition of life spared, because otherwise they would 
not have come into existence: for parents may sell their children 
into slavery, on account of the want of sustenance which would 
otherwise fall upon them, as we have said. Such was the right which 
God granted to the Hebrews over the posterity of the Canaan ites. 

2 And those who were already bom, might be liable for the debt 
of the State, as being part of the State, no less than their parents. 
But this cause does not seem sufficient, in those who are not yet 
born; some other seems necessary; either the express consent of 
the parents, added to the necessity of providing sustenance for them, 
and that, for ever ; or the actual supply of sustenance, and that holds 
only till they have worked off the whole expense of their maintenance. 
If any right beyond this is given to the master, it seems to proceed 
from a Civil Law, too liberal to masters. 

Chap. XIV.} RESTRAINTS RESPECTING PRISONERS. 391 

IX. 1 Where this right of serritade arising from war b not 
established by use, it will be the best course to exchange the pri- 
soners; and next to that, to let them be ransomed at a reasonable 
rate. What this is, cannot be precisely defined: but humanity 
teaches us that it should not be stretched so far that it leases the 
prisoner without the necessaries of life. For eren the Ciyil Law 
grants this indulgence to many who hare come into debt by their 
own act. In other cases, this is determined by law or custom; as 
anciently, among the Greeks, the ransom was set at a mina, and 
among soldiers, at a month's pay. Plutarch says that the Corin- 
thians and Megareans carried on war humanely. Captives were 
reckoned as the guests of their captors, and dismissed on their promise, 

2 More lofty in spirit is what Cicero quotes of Pyrrhus {Off. 1. 12); 
so Cyrus ; Philip, after Chseronea ; Alexander, towards the Scythians; 
Ptolemy and Demetrius contending in generosity to prisoners, as in 
arms. Dromichsetes, king of the Getse, made Lysimachus his pri- 
soner, his guest, and a witness of the poverty and equity of the 
Gette, and thus gained him as his friend. 

CHAPTER XV. 

Restraints respecting Conquest 

Sect. I. Haw far internal justice 
permits the acquisition of 
Empire. 

It is laudable to abstain 
from exercising this right 
over the conquered ; 
Either by mixing them with 
the conquerorsy 
Or by leaving the authority 
in the hands qf those who 
formerly had it. 
Sometimes placing Garri- 

II. 

IIL 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 
VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

Or imposing TribuU, 
The Utility of thie modera- 
tion. 

Examples. Change of form 
^f government qf the con- 
quered. 

Part of the authority to be 
left to the conquered. 
Or at least some Liberty. 
Especially in matters of Re- 
ligion, 
Clemency is a duty. 

sons I 

I. Xp QUITY, which is required, and humanity, which is praised. 
Pi towards indiriduals, are the more requisite and praiseworthy, 
towards nations and parts of nations, inasmuch as the injury or kind- 
ness is greater with the number. Now as other things may be acquired 
in a just war, so may imperial authority orer a people, and the right 
which the people itself has in the government : but only so far as is 
limited, cither by the nature of a penalty arising from delict, or by 
the nature of some other debt. To which is to be added, the reason 
of averting extreme danger. This last cause is conunonly mixed up 
with others ; but is, in reality, to be much regarded for its own sake, 
both in establishing peace and in using victory. For other things 
may bo remitted out of compassion ; but in a public danger, a disre- 
gard of the danger which goes beyond the just limit, is want of com- 
passion. Isocrates tells Philip that he must master the barbarians, 
so as to place his own territory in security. 

XL 1 Sallust says of the old Romans : Owr aneettorSf the matt r&' 
ligious of men, took from tJie vanquished nothing but the licence of 
wrong-doing; words worthy of having been said by a Christian : and 
with them agrees what is also said by the same writer : Wise men hear 
labour in the hope of rest, and make war for the sake of peace. So 
Aristotle also says : and so Cicero, in several places. 

2 To the same effect is the teaching of Christian theologians, that 
the end of war is to remove the liinderances to peace. Before the 
time of Ninus, as we before said, following Trogos, it was rather the 
habit to defend than to extend the boundaries of empires : every one's 
rule ended with his own country; kings did not seek empire for 
themselves, but glory for their peoples, and content with victory, 

Ghap.XY.] restraints RESPECTING CONQUEST. 893 

abstiuned from empire. And to this point, Aagustine brings us back, 

when he says : Let ihem consider that it ia not tJie part of good men to 

rejoice in the extent of empire; and again: It is a greater fdicity to 

have a good neighbour at peace, than to conquer a bad neighbour in 

war. The prophet Amos Boverely rebukes the Ammonites who had 

committed atrocities that they might enlarge their border, Amos i. 13. 

III. To this pattern of ancient innocence, the nearest approach 

was made in the prudent moderation of the old Romans. What 

would our empire be at this day, says Seneca, except a wJiolesome prur 

dence had mixed the conquered unth the conquerors? And, Ourfounr 

der Romulus, Chiudius says in Tacitus, carried his vnsdom so far, that 

most of the peoples with whom he had to do were, on the same day, Urtt 

his enemies, and then his citiiens. He adds, that nothing was more 

destructive to the Lacedromonians and Athenians, than that they 

treated as strangers those they conquered. So hivj says that the 

Roman power was increased, by taking enemies into the composition 

of the state. There are, in history, the examples of the Sabines, 

Albans, Latins, and others in Italy : until at last Cesar triumphed over 

tlie Gauls; and he who did this gave them votes, Corialis says, in his 

oration to the Oauls, in Tacitus, You yourselves for the most part 

command our legions; you govern those provinces; nothing is kept from 

you or barred agaifist you; and further: Do you then further and culti" 

vate peace and safety which we conquerors and conquered alike hold by 

the same right. At last, by a very remarkable law * of the Emperor 

Antonine, all the inhabitants of the Roman empire were made Roman 

citizens, as Ulpian tells us; and so^ as Modestinus says, Rome was 

the common country of all. 

IV. 1 Another kind of moderated rictory is, to leave to conquered 
kings or peoples the authority which they had. So Hercules pro- 
fesses, in Seneca, to hare done to Priam; so he gave Neleus the 
kingdom of lus father Nestor; so the Persian kings let conquered 
kings keep their kingdoms: so Alexander did to Porus. Seneca 
praises this taking from conquered kings nothing but glory. And Poly- 
bius celebrates the goodness of Antigonus, who, having Sparta in his 
power, left them the constitution and liberty of their forefathers; 
and on this account obtained great praise through all Greece. 

2 So the Romans allowed the Cappadocians to have what consti- 
tution they liked ; so Carthage was left free ; so Pompey left some 
conquered nations free. And Quintius, when the Etolians said that 
peace could not be lasting except Philip were deprived of his king- 
dom, told them they forgot the Roman habit of sparing the van- 
quished : and added that great men were mild to conquered enemies. 
So Zorsines is treated in Tacitus. 

V. Sometimes, while authority to govern is granted, provision is 

* A very bad Uw, says GronoTiuB; as if anj one were to declare all mstics to 
b^noblea. 

394 BESTRAINTS RESPECTING CONQUEST. [BookIH 

made for the Becurity of the conquered. So QaintiuB restored Co- 
rinth to the Achoeans, but with the resenration, that there should be 
a garrison in Acrocorinthus : and that Chalcis and Demetrias should 
be kept, till the anxiety about Antiochus was past. 

YI. The imposition of a tribute often has reference^ not so mudi 
to the restitution of the expenses incurred, as to the future security 
both of the victor and the vanquished. So Cicero says of the cities of 
Asia, that they owe their security, to the Roman empire, and ought 
to be content to pay taxes for its support, as the price of peace and 
ease. So Cerialis, in Tacitus, tells the Gauls, that the Romans^ though 
80 often provoked, had only taken the means of keeping peace : for there 
is no quiet among nations vnthout armies; no armies wiihotU pay; 
no pay ivitJunU taxes. To this pertains what we haye elsewhere said 
of unequal leagues, where one party gives up fleets, fortressesy &c 

VII. 1 That the yanquished should retain their power of gorem- 
ing, is often, not only a measure of humanity, but of prudence. Numa 
directed that the rites of Terminus should not include blood in their 
celebration : implying, that to keep our own boundaries, is the way to 
live in peace. So Florus says. It is more difficult to retain provinces 
than to make tJtem ; they are gained by forcey they are kept by right. 
So Livy : It is easier to gain them one by one than to keep M, And so, the 
saying of Augustus in Plutarch ; that ordering a great government is a 
greater work than acquiring it. So the ambassadors of Darius to 
Alexander. 

2 This was what Calanus, and before him (Ebarus, expressed 
by the similitude of a dried hide, which rises in one part, when you 
tread down another : and T. Quinctius, in Livy, by the comparison of 
a tortoise, which is secure against blows when gathered within its 
shell, but exposed and tender when it puts out any member. So 
Plato applies Hesiod's half greater tlian the whole. And Appian notes 
that many peoples, which wished to be under the Roman empire, 
were rejected : while others had kings set over them. At the time 
of Scipio Africanus, in his judgment, the possessions of Rome were so 
wide, that it was greedy to wish for more ; and happy if they lost 
nothing. And he altered the lustral lay which was sung on the 
taking of each census, and which prayed the gods to make Rome's 
fortunes better and greater; so that the prayer was made to be, 
that they might be kept ever free from harm. 

YUI. The Lacedocmonians, and at first the Athenians, claimed 
no authority over the cities which they had conquered: only they 
required them to have a constitution like their own ; the Lacedsemo- 
nians, an aristocracy, the Athenians, a democracy, as we leam from 
Thucydides, Isocrates, Demosthenes, and Aristotle. Of these two 
characters who constantly disturbed Greece, Aristocracy and Demo- 
cracy, an old .comedian, Heniochus, speaks, as women. So Artabanus, 
in Tacitus, established an aristocracy at Soleucia. Whether such 

Chap. XV.] RESTRAINTS RESPECTING CONQUEST. 395 

changes add to tho victoria secarity, is not a matter for our con- 
sidoration. 

IX. In the cases in which it is not safe to abstain from all autho- 
rity over the conquered, still the portion assumed may be limited, so 
that some authority may be left to them, or their kings. Tacitus 
speaks of it as the custom of the Romans to have kings as the in" 
Btruments of their rule: and calls Antiochus the richest of subject kings. 
So Musonius [in Stobsus, see J. B/s note], Strabo, Lucan. So among 
the Jews, tho sceptre remained in the Sanhedrim, even after the con* 
fiscation of Archelaus. So Eragoras of Cyprus was willing to obey 
the Persian king, as one king another. And after Darius was con- 
quered, for some time Alexander offered him tho condition that he 
should gorem others and obey Alexander. We have spoken else- 
where of mixed empire. In some cases, a part of the kingdom is left 
to the Yanquished, as a part of the lands to the old possessors. 

X. Ercn when all authority is taken from the yanquished, they 
may be allowed to retain their own laws with regard to public and 
prirate property, their own customs and magistrates. So in Bithy- 
nia, which was a proconsular province, Apamea had tho priyilego 
of governing itself in its own way : as we learn from Pliny : the 
Bithyniane have their own magistrates^ their own senate. So the Ami- 
seni in Pontus, by the good office of Lucullus [from Appian, J. B.] 
Tho Goths left to the conquered Romans tho Roman law. 

XI. 1 It is a part of this indulgence, to permit tho use of their 
own religion to tho conquered, except so far as they are persuaded 
to change. And that this is both a great boon to tho conquered, 
and no harm to the conqueror, is proved in the oration of Agrippa 
to Caius, given by Philo. And both Joscphus and Titus object to 
the rebellious Jews, that they were allowed the practice of their own 
religion, so far as to be authorized to exclude strangers from the 
temple, even on pain of death. 

2 But if the vanquished profess a false religion, the victor will do 
well to take care that the true religion be not subjected to oppression : 
which Constantino did, when he had broken the party of Licinius ; 
and after this, the Frank kings and others. 

XII. 1 The last caution is this : that even in the most absolute 
and despotic government, the conquered are treated with clemency, so 
that their utility be joined with the utility of the victor. So Cyrus 
told the conquered Assyrians to be of good cheer, for they had only 
changed their king, and would keep all their rights and property, and 
be protected therein. So Sallust, of the Roman treatment of those 
they vanquished. So Tacitus says, that the Britons in his time paid 
their tribute readily, if no injury was added to it: they would be 
subjects, but not slaves. 

2 The Privemate ambassador, when asked what peace tho Romans 
might expect from them, answered, If you gim us a good 07ie, you will 

396 RESTRAINTS RESPEGTINa CONQUEST. [Book HI. 

have a faithful and perpetual one ; if a bad one^ a short one. And 
the reason was added, that nobody will stay longer than he can help, 
hi a condition which he thinks bad. So Camillus said, that the firmest 
gOTemment was that which the subjects were glad to obey. The 
Scythians told Alexander, that between master and slare, there is no 
friendship: eren in peace, the rights of war are kept up. Her- 
mocratus says, Tlie glorious thing is, not to conquer^ but to use 
victory clemently. The maxim of Tacitus is wholesome with refer- 
ence to the use of rictory : Those endings of wars are to be cuitnired 
which are brought al>out by granting pardon. In the epistle of the 
Dictator Cesar, we read. Be this a new way of conquering ; to protect 
ourselves with mercy and liberality. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Restraints as to things which, by tlie Laws of Nations, 
have not the right of Postliminium. 

Sect. I. Internal justice require* restored to those whom they 

that we should restore what had been, 

our enemy has taken in an V. By what lapse of time is 

unjust war, this obligation of restitution 

11. Examples, extingtiishedf 

IIL May a deduction be made 9 YI. What is to be done in a 

lY. Also subject peoples to be doubtful case 9 

I. 1 TTOW far thiogs, which are captured in a just war, hecome the 
Xl property of the captor, we have stated above. Of these 
things, those are to be excepted, which are resumed by right of Post- 
liminium; for these are held as not captured. But what is captured 
in an unjust war is to be restored, as we have said ; and not only by 
the captors, but by others, into whose hands it has anyhow come. 
For no one can transfer to another more of right than he himself pos- 
sesses ; as the Roman Jurists say : which Seneca briefly explains, No 
one can give what he has not. The first captor had not internal 
ownership, fjust ownership;] and therefore, that he cannot have, who 
had his title from him. Therefore the second or third possessor 
took an ownership which, for the sake of distinction, wo will call exter- 
nal; that iSy he took this advantage, that he is everywhere to be 
protected as owner, by the sentence and authority of the judge : but 
if he use this right against him who lost the property by an unjust 
act, he will not do rightly. 

2 The answer which was given by illustrious jurists, respecting a 
slave who, captured by robbers, had afterwards made his way to the 
enemy, [and was then captured from them, and exposed for sale. 
Chronov,^ namely, that it was true, that he had been stolen, and that 
his having been in the hands of the enemy, or having returned by 
postliminium, was no obstacle to that view ; is the same answer which 
we must give respecting him who, being captured in an unjust war, 
afterwards by just war, or in any other way, comes into the possession 
of another : for in internal justice, an unjust war does not differ from 
a robbery. And to this effect responded Gregory of Neocesarea, 
being consulted in reference to the case, when certain men of Pontus 
had received into their possession property of the citizens captured 
by barbarians. 

IL 1 Such property, then, is to be restored to them from whom 
it was taken : and we see that this has often been done. Livy, after 
mentioning that the Volsci and Equi were conquered by L. Lucretius 

398 RESTRAINTS AS TO THINGS WHICH. [Book HI. 

Tricipitinus, says that the booty was exposed three days in the Cam- 
pus Martius, that each person might know and take his own. And 
when he has related that the Vobcians were defeated by Posthumios 
the dictator ; he adds, The part which belonged to the Lcttins and Her- 
niei was given them back on their recognizing it:a part was sold by 
auction ; and cbe whore, Two days were given for owners to know and 
recover their property. And when lie lias related the victory of the 
Samnites [no, the Romans, J. B.] over the Campanians, he adds, the 
most joyful part of the victory was, that 7500 captives were reco- 
vered ; and a great booty of the allies : and by a public notii'e, 
owners were summoned to take back their own property. And soon 
after he relates a similar act of the Romans, at Intoramna, when they 
had conquered the Samnites. So at Uipa in Lusitania. So T. Grac- 
chus at Beneventum gave the owners of cattle thirty days to recognize 
their stock in the booty. 

2 So Polybius says that L. Emilius, when he had conquered the 
Gauls, restored the spoil to those from whom it had been taken. So 
Scipio did, when, having taken Carthage, he found there many pre* 
sents which had been made by the cities of Sicily and others, and 
carried thither. Cicero, in his oration against Yerres, speaking of 
the Sicilian jurisdiction, says that Scipio when he had taken Carihagti 
restored to the Sicilian allies whai had been taken by the Carthaginiatis 
at Himerctf thinking it right that, by the Roman victory^ they should 
recover their property. And he follows out this subject, this deed of 
Scipio's, in his oration against Yerres on the works of art. The 
Rhodians restored to tlie Athenians four ships of theirs, which had 
been taken by the Macedonians. So Phaneas the Etolian thought 
it just that there should be restored to the Etolians what they had 
had before the wars. And T. Quinctius did not deny that this 
would have been right, if the question had been of cities captured 
in war, and if the Etolians had not broken the truce. Even the 
treasures consecrated to the gods at Ephesus, which the kings had 
appropriated, the Romans restored to their ancient state* 

in. 1 But if such an article of property should have come into 
any one's possession by traffic, can he charge the person from whom 
it had been taken with the price which he has paid ? It is agreeable 
to the principles which wo have elsewhere laid down, that it may be 
charged, at such a rate as the recovery of the possession would be 
worth, considering that he may have despaired of such recovery. 
But if such expenses may be charged, why not also the estimated 
value of the labour and danger ; just as if any one should, by diving, 
recover a treasure belonging to another, which had been lost in the 
sea? Apposite to this question seems to me the history of Abraham, 
when ho had conquered the fi?e kings and returned to Sodom: Moses 
says (Gen. xiv. 16), He brought back all the goods, namely, those which 
he had before spoken of as being taken by the four kings, Chedorlao- 
mer, &c., and from the five kings of Sodom, &c. (v. 11). 

Chap. XVI.] BY THE LAWS OF NATIONS, &c. 399 

2 And to the same practice we must refer the conditionB which 
the king of Sodom proposes to Abraham, that he should give up the 
captiyes, and keep the goods for his labour and danger (y. 21). Abra- 
ham indeed, a man not only pious but magnanimous, refused to take 
anything for himself (t. 23): but from the property restored (for 
those are the goods spoken of) he gare a tenth to God, he deducted 
the expenses of the young men, and requested a portion to be giren 
to his allies. 

IV. As property is to be restored to its owner, so too are peoples 
and parts of peoples to be restored to those who had rightful autho- 
rity over them ; or to themselves, if they had been their own masters, 
before the unjust yiolence. Thus Sutrium was recovered and restored 
to the allies, at the time of Camillus. The Eginetans and Melians 
were restored to their cities by the Lacedasmonians : the Greek cities 
which had been invaded by the Macedonians were restored to liberty 
by Flaminius. And the same general, in his conference with the am- 
bassadors of Antiochus, urged that it was just that the cities in Asia 
which were of the Grecian race, and which Antiochus had recovered, 
should be made free ; for that Chreek colonies were not sent into jEolia 
and Ionia to he slaves to the king, but to extend the race, and to diffuse 
over the earth the Chreek nation, 

V. A question is sometimes raised, concerning the length of time 
by which the internal obligation of restoring a thing may be extin- 
guished. This question, between citizens of the same government, is 
to be determined by their own laws : (provided such laws recognize 
an internal [that is, an equitable] as well as an external [or strictly 
legal] right ; which is to be collected from the words and design of 
the laws, by a careful consideration of them :) but between those who 
are foreigners to each other, it is to be determined by a probable 
judgment as to dereliction : on which subject we have elsewhere said 
as much as is necessary for our purpose. 

VI. If the right of war be very ambiguous, it will be best to 
follow the counsel of Aratus of Sicyon; who in part persuaded the 
new possessors to accept money and give up the possessions; and 
partly induced the old owners to be paid for what they gave up, as 
more conrenient than to attempt to recover it. 

CHAPTER XVn. 

Of Neutrals in War. 

Sect. I. From par tie* at peace no- II. Eramples and preeepl* «/ 

thing ii to be taken veithout alitinenee. 

ejFtreme Xeceuitp, teith rt- III. The dutp qf Xeuirate tih 

ttitutian ^ the price. weardt Belligerent*. 

L TT may appear superfluous for us to treat of those who are ez- 

|_ traneous to the war, since it is CTident that there are no rights 
of war agiunst them. But since many liberties are often taken with 
them, especially when they are neighbours, on the pretext of neces- 
sity, we may here briefly repeat what we iiare already said : — that 
Necessity, in order to gire a person a right to another's property, 
must be of the eztremest kind ; — that it is further requisite, that there 
be not a similar necessity on the part of the owner; — that eren 
when the necessity is pliun, more is not to be taken than it requires ; 
that is, if keeping the thing is sufficient, it is not to be used ; if using 
it is sufficient, it is not to be destroyed ; if destroying it b requisite, 
the price is to be repaid. 

II. 1 When Moses was under an extreme necessity of passing 
with the people through the land of the Edomitos, (Num. xx. 17,) he 
says, first, that he will go by the king's highway, and will not turn aside 
into the fields or rincyards ; and that even if he have to drink of the 
water of the wells, he will pay the price of it The same was done by 
Greek and Roman generals, who are mentioned with praise. So the 
Greeks, in Xcnophon, who were with Clcarchus, promise the Persians 
that they will pass without doing any mischief: and that if they 
supply them with food to purchase, they will not take by force meat 
or drink. 

2 So Dercyllides acted, according to Xcnophon : Perseus in Phthio- 
tis, &c. ; Agis in Peloponnesus ; Sulla in Calabria and Apulia ; Pom- 
peius in Asia ; Domitian in the country of the Ubii ; Sererus in his 
Parthian expedition; the Goths, Iluns, and Alans of Theodosius's 
army, of which latter the Panegyrist says ; There was no tumult, no 
confunon, no plunder, as you might expect from Itarharians. If the 
supply of provisions was at any time more difficult, they bore the deficit 
eney with patience, and made up for the scarcity by spare diet. Claudian 
ascribes the same merit to Stilico, and Suidas to Belisarius. 

3 This was brought about by an exact care in the supply of neces- 
saries, punctual pay, and vigorous discipline, of which you find the 
rule in Ammianus : The lands of neutrals are not to he trampled : and 
in VopiscuB : Let no one take a fowl which is not his, or touch a sheep ; 

CuAP. XVII.] OF NEUTRALS IN WAR. 401 

or pluck a hunch of grapes ; or cut the com, or demand oil, salt or 
wood. So the same writer in Cassiodorus : Let the soldier live with the 
provincials according to the civil law, and shew no military insolence. 
The shield isjbr the protection of the countrymen. So Xenophon, in the 
Anabctsis, 

4 And hence we see Uie meaning of that which was said to soldiers 
hy a prophet, and one that was greater than a prophet (Luke iii. 14): 
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with 
your wages. And so Aurelian said, Let them live on the spoil of the 
enemy, not on the tears of the provincials. And we are not to think 
that this is fair talking, but what cannot be done in fact: for the 
inspired man would not exhort to such a course, and wise expositors 
of law enjoin it, if they thought it could not be done. And in short, 
we must allow that that can be done, which we seo is done. And on 
this account, we have adduced examples ; to which we may add that 
eminent case which Frontinus mentions, of Scaurus ; that an apple- 
tree which was Included within the lines of the camp, was found next 
day, when the camp was broken up, with its fruit untouched. 

5 When Livy speaks of the Romans, in tho camp at the Sucre, 
behaving irregularly [in the absence of S. Scipio], and some of them 
going on plundering expeditions into the neighbouring neutral ground, 
he adds, that everything was given up to a licentious and greedy 
soldiery, nothing done according to military rule and discipline. 
And again, in the same writer, where the passage of Philip through 
the land of the Denthelatse is described, it is said that The army, being 
in great want, treated the country as if it had been an enemy's, plundering 
towns and villages ; mitch to the kinfs mortification, who heard his allies 
imploring him and the gods for help in vain. In Tacitus, the fame of Pe- 
lignus is tarnished by his preying upon friends rather than foes. Tho 
same writer speaks of the Vitellians, as, in all the towns of Italy, idle, 
and formidable to their friends only. So in Cicero against Verres ; 
You authorised the insulting and plundering of friendly towns. 

6 And here I cannot omit the opinion of theologians, which I 
think perfectly true ; that a king who does not pay his soldiers their 
wages, is not only bound to satisfy the soldiers for the damage so done 
them, but also to make compensation to his subjects and neighbours, 
whom the soldiers, under the impulse of want, have treated ill. 

III. 1 On the other hand, it is the duty of neutrals to do nothing 
which may strengthen the side which has the worse cause, or which 
may impede the motions of him who is carrying on a just war, as we 
have said above; and in a doubtful case, to act alike to both sides, in per- 
mitting transit, in supplying provisions, in not helping persons besieged. 
The Gorcyreans say, that it is the duty of the Athenians, if they will 
be neutral, either to prevent the Corinthians from raising soldiers in 
Attica, or to allow them to do so. To Philip king of the Macedonians 
it was objected, that the league was doubly violated by him: inasmuch 
as he had done injury to the allies of the Romans, and helped their 

DD 

402 OF NEUTRALS IN WAR. [Book UL 

enemies. The same is urged by T. Quinetiiis, in his conference with 
Nabis. 

2 In Agathias, wo read, that he is an enemy, who does what the 
enemy wishes : and in Procopius, that he is reckoned to be in the 
army of the enemy, who helps the enemy's army in matters which are 
properly of military use. So Demosthenes had said before. M. Acilios, 
in speaking to the Epirotes, who were accused of sending money to 
Antiochus, says that he does not know whether he is to regard them 
as enemies or neutrals. L. Emilius, Pretor, condemns the Teians, be- 
cause tliey had supplied the enemy's fleet with proTisione, and had 
promised it wine ; adding, that except they did the same to the Roman 
fleet, he should hold them as enemies. So Augustus siud that A city 
loit the rights ofpetMce when it received an enemy, 

3 It may be of use for a neutral party to make a conTontion with 
each of the belligerents ; so that it may be allowed, with the good will 
of both, to abstain from war, and to exercise towards both the com- 
mon duties of humanity. So in Liry. So Archidamus king of Sparta, 
when he saw that the Eleans inclined to the Arcadians, wrote to than. 
It ie well to be quiet. 

^ <k 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Of acts done hy Private Persons in a Public War, 

Sect. I. It U iawfui to harm an ene- 
my privately, by Natural 
Law, the Law of Nations, 
and Civil Law 9 
11. What is lawful by internal 
justice, to those who fit out 
troops or ships at their 
own expense, 
in. What, with respect to the 

state to which they belong, 
IV. What the rule of Christian 

charity requires of them, 
y. How private war is mixed 

with public, 
\l. To what is he bound who 
has harmed the enemy with- 
out a commission 9 

I. 1 T TTHAT we have hitherto said, pertains, for the most part, to 
V f those who either have the supreme authority in war, or 
hold puhlic offices. We must now consider what is lawful for priyato 
persons, according, rospectiyely, to Natural Law, Divine Law, and the 
Law of Nations. 

Cicero relates that Gate's son served in the army of Pompilius 
till his legion was dismissed : that he then remained with the army 
as a volunteer : and that Cato wrote to Pompilius, that if he wanted 
to keep him in the army, he must make him take the military oath 
again ; hecause the former oath heing cancelled, he could not law- 
fully fight with the enemy. He adds also the very words of Gate's 
letter to his son, warning him not to take part in the fighting. So 
we read that Ghrysas, a soldier of Gyrus, was praised, hecause, when 
he had raised his sword to cut down an enemy, he lowered it on 
hearing the signal for a retreat. So Seneca. 

2 But they are mistaken, who think that this rule comes from the 
external Law of Nations : for if you look at that, as any one has a 
right to seize an enemy's property, as we have shewn ahove, so has 
he a right to kill the enemy : for in the eye of that law, enemies are 
held for nobodies. And therefore Gate's doctrine comes from the 
military discipline of the Romans : of which the rule was, as Modes- 
tinuB has noted, that he who did not obey orders, should be capitally 
punished, even if the act turned out well. And he was understood 
not to have obeyed orders, who had, out of the regular ranks, without 
the command of the general, fought with the enemy; as the orders 
issued by Manllus prove to us : on this account namely ; that if such 
conduct were permitted, either posts would be deserted, or even, as 
the license went further, the army, or a part of it, would be implicated 
in casual combats, which was by all means to be avoided. So Sallust, 
speaking of the Roman discipline, says. In war those are often punished 
who, contrary to ordere, have/ought the enemy, or who, being ordered to 

DD 2 

404 OP ACTS DONE BY PRIVATE PERSONS [Book UL 

retreca, have been slow in doing so. The LaoedflBmoniaii who, when 
aboat to cat down an enemy, lowered his Bword, on hearing the signal 
for retreat, gare the reason. It is better to obey a commanding ojfieer 
than to kill an enemy. And Plutarch gires, as a reason why he who 
has left the army cannot lawfully kill an enemy, that he is not bound 
by that military law by which persons who engage in battle should 
be bound. And Epictetus, in Arrian, referring to the act of Chrysas 
just mentioned, says. So much better did he think it to do hie ojficer's will 
than his oum. 

3 But if we look to Natural Law and internal right or justice, it 
seems to be conceded, in a just war, to any one, to do any thing, which 
he considers will benefit the innocent party, within the just limits of 
warfare : but not to make captured property his own, because there 
is nothing owing him, except in the case in which he is exacting a 
just punishment by the common right of war. Which last, in what 
manner it is restricted by the Qospel Law, may be understood by 
what has been already said. 

4 A mandate of a commanding officer may be either general or 
special : general, as in a tumult among the Romans, the Consul said. 
Who are for the safety of the repMie fMow me. And sometimes, 
eren indiridual subjects hare the right giren of killing an enemy, 
eren when not in self-defense^ when it is expedient on public 
grounds. 

IL 1 A special command may be giren, not only to those who 
receive pay, but also to volunteers, who senre at their own charge, and 
who, what is more, support part of the charge of the war; as for 
instance, those who fit out ships, and support them at their own ex- 
pense ; and who are allowed, instead of pay, to appropriate their own 
captures, as we have elsewhere said. But how far this may be done 
without violating internal justice and charity, is a question not unwoi^ 
thy of discussion. 

2 The justice of the case has respect, either to the enemy, or to 
the state with which such contract is made. We have already said 
that from an enemy, any possession which may feed the war, may be 
taken away for the sake of security; but this, under the oniu of 
restoring it: and that the ownership may be taken, so far as com- 
pensation for what was either owing at the beginning of the war, or 
has become owing by some subsequent pact, to a state carrying on a 
just war; whether such possession belong to the hostile state, or to 
individuals, even innocent ones : and that the goods of guilty parties 
may, in the way of penalty, be taken from them and acquired by the 
captors. And thus, so far as the rights of the enemy are concerned, 
hostile property will become the property of those who carry on a 
part of the war at their own expense [Privateers], so far as the limit 
which has been stated is not exceeded ; which must be estimated by 
an equitable opinion. 

III. The internal justice of the case, with regard to the state for 

Chap. XVin.] IN A PUBLIC WAR. 405 

which the prirateer acts, is satisfied if the contract be an equal one : 
that is, if the expense and danger be equal in value to the chance of 
prixes. For if this chance is much more Taluablo, the surplus ought 
to be giren to the state ; as if any one had beforehand purchased a 
haul offish at an unusually low price. 

IV. But eren if justice strictly speaking be not yiolated, there 
may be an offense against the loring our neighbour, especially in a 
Christian Tiew: as if it appear that Buch priTateering will not hurt the 
general body of the enemy, or their king, or the guilty portion of 
them, but the innocent ; and will inflict upon them calamities which 
it would be cruel to inflict, eren on those who are personally indebted 
to us. And if, besides this, such a priyatoering warfare is not likely 
to conduce, either to the termination of the war, or to any notable 
damage of the enemy's public power, then it must be considered un- 
worthy a right-minded man, and especially a Christian, to make a 
giun in this way out of the unhappiness of the times. 

V. It sometimes happens, that a prirate war grows out of a public 
one ; as, for instance, if any one fall in with the enemy, and incur 
danger of life or goods ; in which case the rules are to be obsenred 
which we hare elsewhere stated, as to the lawfulness of defending 
one's self. Also public authority is often conjoined with prirate 
utility ; as if any one, haying suffered some great loss from the enemy, 
should obtain authorization to reimburse himself out of the enemy's 
property : and the right, in this case, is to be defined by what we 
hare said above ot pignoration. 

VI. But if any one, soldier or other, eren in a just war, sets fire 
to buildings of the enemy, wastes the land, and inflicts damage of that 
kind, without orders, and we must add, when there is neither any 
existing necessity nor any just cause, he is bound to make good the 
damage, as is rightly laid down by theologians. But I hare, for good 
reason, added a condition omitted by them, 1/ there he not any jtut 
eatue; for if there be such a cause, he may perhaps be responsible to 
his own state whose laws he has riolated, but not to the enemy to 
whom he has done no wrong. On this, hear what a Carthaginian 
replied to the Romans, when they asked to haye Annibal giyen up 
to them : Whether Sagunium was taken by public or by privcUe act^ 
ii not the pointy but whether it was taken rightfully or wrongfully. 
The question between us and our citizen is, whether he acted by his own 
motion or by our direction : the question between you and us is, whether 
what was done was lawful under our convention with you. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Of Faith between Enemies. 

Sect. I. Faith it due to all enemiet. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VL 

VIL 

vni. 

IX. 
X. 

That faith u not to be kept XI. 

with pirates and tyrants^ 

refuted. XII. 

The argument solved^ that 

they deserve punishment. XIIL 

Promise extorted. 

Oath added: XIV. 

Application to Subjects at 

war. XV. 

Difficulty of promise made 

to subjects. XVI. 

Such promises confirmed by 

oath, XVII. 

Or by interposition of a XVIIL 

third party. XIX. 

How a change of the public 

state takes place. 
The exception of fear does 
not apply to a formal war. 
Of fear recognized by the 
Law of Nations. 
Faith to be kept with the 
faithless. 

But not if conditions be un- 
performed. 

Or just compensation op- 
posed. 

Even arising from another 
contract. 

Or from damage done. 
Or punishment. 
How this holds in war. 

I. 

■w 

HAT is lawful in war, and to what extent, we hare said, is 
to bo considered, partly absolutely, partly with reference 
to antecedent promise. Having finished the former part of the subject, 
there remains the latter, namely the question of the faith of enemies 
to one another. The rule of keeping such faith inviolate, is praised 
by Silius Italicus, Xenophon, Aristides, Cicero. 

2 Public faith, as the elder Quintilian says, makes truces between 
armed enemies, and preserves the rights of surrendered cities. It 
is the supreme tie, as he elsewhere says. So Ambrose ; Augustine. 
In fact, those who are enemies do not cease to be men : but all men 
(who have the use of reason) are capable of having rights given 
them by promise. So amillus in Livy. 

3 Out of the common use of reason and language, arises the 
obligation from promise of which we speak. Nor are we to think 
that, because to tell a falsehood to an enemy may either be lawful, 
or at least, allowable, according to the opinion of many (as stated 
above), that by parity of reason this may also be true of faith giren. 
For the obligation of speaking the truth arises from a cause which 
was anterior to the war, and may perhaps, in some degree, be taken 
away by the war ; but a promise of itself confers a new right. Aris« 
totle saw this difference when he said. In speaking of Truth cU present 
we mean Sincerity, which is opposed to Pretence; not Truth or Good 
Faithy which applies to contracts, for this belongs to another Virtue, 
Eth. Nic. IV. 13. 

r 

Chap. XIX.] OF FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES. 407 

4 Pausanias says of Philip of Macedon, that he conld not be called 
a great general, for he was in the habit of breaking his promises on 
every occasion. So Valerius Maximus of Annibal. The Trojans in 
Homer reproach themseWes with having broken their oaths. 

II. I We hare above said, that we are not to accept that maxim 
of Cicero, that with Tyrants we have no community of intercourse, but the 
most entire separation; and also, a Pirate is not a regular enemy; with 
him we can neither have faith nor oath in common. So Seneca speaks 
of the society of human right being cat off with a tyrant. And from 
this source, flowed the error of Michael Ephesius, who, in his Commen-^ 
tary on Aristotle, says, that with the wife of a tyrant, adultery cannot 
be committed. And some of the Jewish masters, by a like error, 
hold this of strangers, whoso marriage they reckon as nothing. 

2 And yet Pompeius wound up the war of the pirates, in a great 
degree, by conrentions, in which he promised them their lives and a 
settlement in which they might live without rapine. And tyrants 
have sometimes restored liberty to their subjects, bargaining for im- 
punity. Cesar writes that the Roman generals treated with the bands 
of robbers and fugitives who were in the Pyrenean mountains : and 
who will say that, if a convention had been made, no obligation would 
have followed from it? It is true, such persons have not that special 
community of rule, which the law of nations has introduced between 
enemies, in a regular and complete war: but, inasmuch as they are men, 
they are under a common tie of Natural Law, as Porphyry explains ; 
whence it follows, that conventions with them are to be observed. So 
Lucullus kept faith with Apollodorus, the leader of the fugitives. 
And Augustus paid to Crocotas the robber, when he surrendered him- 
self, the reward which had been promised on his being taken, that 
faith might be kept. 

in. 1 But let us see whether any arguments, more specious than 
those which Cicero gives, can be adduced against such a rule. The 
first reason which suggests itself is, that atrocious criminals, who are not 
part of any state, may be punished by any man, if we merely regard 
Natural Law, as we have elsewhere explained : and they who may bo 
punished by loss of life, may be deprived of property and other rights; 
as Cicero rightly says. Now among other rights, is this Right bestowed 
by a Promise ; therefore this right may be taken from him as a pe- 
nalty. To this I answer, that the argument would hold, if the con- 
vention with him had been on the supposition of his not being a cri. 
minal. But when the treating with such a one has gone on with him 
as being such a one, we must suppose that the treaty included the 
remission of the penalty, so far as this matter is concerned : because, 
as we have elsewhere said, we must suppose such an interpretation, 
as provides against the whole act being null and void. 

2 In Livy, Nabis well says, when Q. Flaminius objects to him his 
being a tyrant : With regard to that name, I can answer, thai whatever 
I am, lam the tame with whom you, T. Qiuintius, have made a league of 

408 OP FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES. [Book IIL 

alUance. And again: I had already done tho$e things^ whatever their 
character he, when you made an alliance with me. He adds, If I had 
changed in anything, I should have had to give account of my inconsigt^ 
ency ; as it is, you owe an account of yours. There is a similar pas- 
sage in Pericles's speech to his citizens in Thucjdides: We shall 
suffer the cities in alliance with us to be free, if they were so when Ike 
treaty was made. 

IV. Again, it may bo objected that, (as we hare said already,) he 
who, by means of fear, caused the promise, is held to free the promisor, 
because he inflicted damage by injustice ; that is, by an act which is at 
yariance with the nature of human liberty, and with the nature of an 
act which ought to be free. But though we allow that this may some- 
times hold, it does not apply to all promises made to robbers. For, 
that he to whom a promise has been made, should be bound to liberate 
the promiser, it is necessary that he should hare caused the promise 
by unjust fear. If, then, any one hare promised a payment in order 
to extricate a friend from captivity, he is bound by his promise ; for 
he has not been put in fear, but comes and makes the contract of his 
own free will. 

y. Add to this, that even he who, under the influence of nnjast 
fear, has made a promise, may be bound if the sanction of an oath be 
added. For then, as we hare elsewhere said, man is not bound to 
man only, but to God also, towards whom fear is not an exception. It 
is howoTor true, that, by such a bond of itself, the heir of the promiser 
is not bound ; because what passes to the heir is only what belongs to 
human commerce, from the primeval law of ownership : and the right 
which belongs to God, as such, is not included among such things. 
And moreover we must again repeat what we have said above ; that if 
any one violate his faith given to a robber, either with or without an 
oath, he is not on that account liable to punishment at the hands of 
other nations ; inasmuch as, on account of the hatred borne to robbers, 
nations have agreed to overlook what is done against them, even by 
vicious acts. 

VI. What shall we say of the wars of subjects against kings and 
other supreme authorities ? That these, even when they have a cause 
in itself not unjust, still have not the right of acting by force, we have 
shewn elsewhere. But sometimes, in such cases, the injustice of the 
cause, or the wickedness of the resistance, may be so great, that it may 
be liable to heavy punishment. And yet if a treaty be conducted with 
persons, as with deserters or robbers, such liability cannot be opposed 
to the promise, as we have just said. Even to slaves, faith must be 
kept, according to the piety of the ancients ; and it was believed that 
the Lacedaemonians were visited by the divine anger, because, con- 
trary to convention, they had put to death the Trcnarians, who were 
slaves. And it is noted by Diodorus, that faith pledged to a slave in 
the temple of the Palici was never violated by a master. And the 
exception of fear imposed, may here also be cancelled by interposing 

Chap. XIX.] OP FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES. 409 

an oath ; aa M. Pomponius, tribune of the people, under the obligation 
of an oath^ kept the promise which L. Manlius had made under fear. 

YII. But beyond these difficulties a special difficulty arises from 
the right which die State possesses to make laws, and from its right of 
eminent dominion oyer the goods of the subjects ; which rights are 
exercised in its name by the supreme authority. For if that right 
extend to all the possessions of the subjects, why should it not extend 
to the right arising from a promise made in war ? And if this be 
grranted, it would seem that all conrentions must be of no force, and 
consequently, that there is no way of terminating a war but by tIc- 
tory. But on the other side, it is to bo noted, that that eminent right 
does not extend to ererything promiscuously, but so far as it is expe- 
dient, as a part, not of a mastoids authority, but of civil or royal autho- 
rity. And in general, it is expedient that such conventions should be 
observed ; to which point pertains what we have elsewhere said, of 
maintaining the present state of things. Add to this, that when the 
case requires the exercise of this eminent dominion, compensation is 
to be made, as will be explained more at length below. 

VIIL 1 Moreover, compacts may bo sanctioned by oath, not 
only by a king or a senate, but by the state itself ; as Lycurgus made 
the Lacedeemonians swear to observe his laws, and Solon, the Athe- 
nians, his ; and that the force of tho oath might not be broken down 
by the change of persons, the oath to be repeated every year. For if 
that be done, there must bo no going back from the promise, not even 
for the sake of public utility. For the state may give up what is 
clearly its own, and the words may be so plain as to allow no excep- 
tion. Valerius Maximus says to the Athenians, Read the Law to which 
you are bound by oath. The Romans called such laws le^^es saeratas : 
and by such, the Roman people itself, as Cicero for Balbus explains, 
was in conscience bound. 

2 There is a somewhat obscure dissertation on this subject, in the 
third Book of Livy, in which he says that, according to the opinion of 
many jurists, the tribunes were sacrosanct, but not the ediles, judges, 
decemvirs ; though if harm was done to any of them it was unlawful. 
The cause of the difference is, that the ediles and others were defended 
by the law only ; and while the law lasted, no one might act against 
it; but the tribunes were defended by the public religious engage- 
ment of the Roman people: for an oath had been administered, 
which those who had taken it could not set aside with a safe con- 
science. So Dionysius relates the rule established by L, Junius Bru- 
tus. And hence this law was called sacrata. And therefore good 
men condemned the act of Tiberius Gracchus, when he abrogated the 
tribuneship of Octavius ; and said that the tribunitian power has its 
sacredness from the people, not against the people. And therefore, 
as we have said, a state or a king may bo bound by an oath, even in 
the case of subjects. 

IX. But also, in such a case, a valid promise may be made to a 

410 OF FAITH BXTWEXS ESEMXES, [BookUL 

Hard persoci, wbo has noc imposed fesr. Sor^ to iarwm thii rale is con- 
tented, thaH we inquire closelj wiias are the fobdkici of th« Soman 
hkw. Tor by nature, u b the interest of all men, that legard ihonld be 
had to other men besides the pnrtzes. This when Philip made penee 
with the BomanSv be was deprxred of the power of pmrirfiing the 
llaeedonivis, who had revolted firom him. 

X. But also, since we hate prorcd elsewhere, that mixed states 
sometimes exist ; as we maj pass firom one pure state to another, so 
we nuT pass into a mixed state bj compacts ; so that ther who had 
been mbjecti, may begm to hare the supreme aothoritT, or at least 
a part of it ; and even with the libertr of defending that part bj 
force. 

XL 1 A regnlar war, that is, one, on both sides pnblie and 
declared, as it has other peculiarities which exist in exUgnal rights, so 
has it this ; tiiat what is promised in the course of snch a war, or for 
the porpose of ending it, is of snch Tslidity, that it cannot be rendered 
Toid br the allegation of fear onjostlr impressed, contrary to the will 
of the promiser. For as many other things, althongh not free from 
blame in general, are, in such a war, made lawful by the Law of Na- 
tions, so among them, is the fear which is in such a war impressed by 
each side upon the other. If this were not the acknowledged mle^ 
snch wars, which are rery frequent, could neither be moderated nor 
ended ; while yet it is the interest of the human race that they should 
be so. And this is to be imderstood to represent the rights of war, 
which, Cicero says, are to be kept with enemies ; who too says else- 
where, that an enemy in war has his rights ; that is, not only natural 
rights, but others arising from the agreement of nations. 

2 Bat yet it docs not follow from hence, that ho who has extorted 
such promise in an unjust war can retain what he has receired, with 
no riolence to piety and the doty of a good man: nor ercn that he 
can compel the other to stand by his compacts, made with or without 
an oath. For internally, and by the nature of the thing, it remains 
unjust ; and this internal injustice of the act cannot bo taken away, 
except by a new and truly free consent. 

XIL But when I say that the fear which is impressed in a regu- 
lar war is held to be just, I must be understood to speak of such fear 
as the Law of Nations does not condemn. For if anything be ex- 
torted by the fear of haying the chastity of women riolated, or by any 
other terror contrary to good faith, it is more true that the matter 
remains subject to Natural Law ; for the Law of Nations does not 
extend its countenance to such fear. 

XIII. 1 We ha^e above said, that faith is to be kept eren with 
the perfidious ; and Ambrose teaches tho same. And this is undoubt- 
edly to be extended also to perfidious enemies ; such as were the Car- 
thaginians, to whom the Bomans religiously kept their faith. T?ie 
Senate looked to iUelfy not to those to whom the performance woi made^ 
says Valerius Maximus. And Sallust says the like. 

Chap. XIX.] OP FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES. 411 

2 Appian says of the faith-breaking Lusitanians, whom Sergiua 
Qalba deceired by a new conrention, and so put to death, that he 
avenged ffrfidy hy perfidy ^ and, in a way contrary to the Roman dignity, 
imitated the barbarians. And on that ground, this Galba was after- 
wards brought under accusation bj Libo, the tribune of the people ; 
and then, as Valerius Maximus remarks. The question was not deter- 
mined by justice but by mercy ; and the acquittal which could not be given 
to his innocence, was granted out of regard to his children, Cato, in his 
Origines, had written, on this occurrence, that except he had had 
recourse to tears and children, he would have been condemned. 

XIV. But at the same time it is to be remarked, that there are 
two ways in which the promisor may be blameless of perfidy, though 
he does not perform what he had promised ; namely, by defect of the 
condition, and by compensation. 

By defect of condition, the promisor is not truly liberated from a 
promise, but the event shews that there was no obligation, since it was 
contracted only under the condition. And to this head is to be 
referred the case in which the other party has not fulfilled what, on 
his part, he was bound to fulfil For in a contract of that kind, each 
article implies the others in the way of condition ; as if it had been 
expressed by saying, I will do so and so if the other does what he has 
promised. So TuUus, answering the Albans, says that he calls the 
gods to witness that. Whichever people shall first reject and dismiss the 
ambassadors who come and ask for restitution, on it shall faU all the 
calamities of the war, IJIpian says. He is not to be held as an ally who 
renounced the treaty because some condition on which the alliance was 
agreed to was not performed. On this account, if the intention of the 
treaty bo different from this, it is usually clearly expressed, that if 
anything be done contrary to this or that part, the other parts still 
remain ralid. 

XT. Compensation, as to its origin, we hare elsewhere explained ; 
when we said that if there be anything which is ours, or which is 
owing to us, and which we cannot otherwise obtain from him who has 
it, or owes it, we may take a thing of equal yalue in any other shape. 
From whence it follows, that we may, still more, retain what we hare 
in our hands, whether corporeal or incorporeal. Therefore, that 
which we hare promised, we may be excused from giving, if it be not 
of more value than our property which is unjustly detained by ano- 
ther. Seneca says. So tJie creditor is often brought in debtor to his 
debtor, when he has taken away more in another shape than he seeks as a 
debt. The judge does not merely look at the single debt ; b%U says. You 
lent him money ; what then f you have plate* of his which you never paid 
for. Let a balance be strxtck, and you go away as a debtor, who came as 
a creditor, 

XVL The same will be the case, if he with whom the question 
isy owes me more, or as much, from another contract, and I cannot 

* Qrotiufl reads ageHum, Grononni, argentum. 

412 OF FAITH BETWEEN ENEBilES. [Boos m. 

get it any other way. In the court of justice indeed, as Seneca also 
says, actions at law are kept separate, and the mode of claiming one 
and the other are not mixed together. But such examples, as he 
there explains, are limited by certain rules, which it is necessary to 
follow. We must go the way the law points. But the Law of 
Nations does not acknowledge tiiose distinctions, that is, when there is 
no other hope of getting our own. 

XVn. The same must be .said, if he who urges our promise has 
not made a contract with us, but has inflioted a damage upon us. 
So Seneca, in the same place. Hie landowner is not to have the right 
of binding the farmer to him, even if the agreement be uneanceUed, if he 
trample down hie eom^ if he cut down the plants ; not because he hoe 
received what he agreed for, but because he has himself been the means of 
his not receiving it. And he adds other examples : You have driven of 
his cattle, you have killed his slave. And then : Let me compare what 
benefit any one has produced me, and what harm, and then pronounce 
whether more is owing to me or from me. 

XVUI. Finally, that which is due as penalty may be balanced 
against that which has been promised, whidi is explained at length in 
the same place, thus : Benefit demands recompenses injury, satitfaction : 
where both occur, I neither owe him recompense, nor he me satisfaction. 
We are quits with one another. Balancing the benefit and the injury, I 
shall see whether anything more is due to me. 

XIX. 1 But, as in the case where any agreement has been made 
between the two parties to a lawsuit, they cannot, during the suit, set 
against what was promised, either the original ground of action, or 
the loss and expense of the suit ; so while the war goes on, we cannot 
bring into the balance, either the original ground of the war, or any- 
thing which has resulted from the exercise of the usual belligerent 
rights. For the nature of the business shews that the conrention, in 
order that it may not be without any effect, must have been made 
setting aside the controversies belonging to the war itself. For other- 
wise there could be no convention which might not be eluded. To 
this we may apply a passage of Seneca : [which however is not very 
closely to the purpose. W.] 

2 What then are the matters, which may be balanced against that 
which was promised ? This for instance ; if the other, though from 
another contract, made during the war, owes us a debt ; or if he have 
committed damage during a time of truce ; or if he have violated the 
rights of ambassadors ; or done anything else which the Law of Na- 
tions condemns as between enemies. 

3 But it is to be observed, that compensation must take place 
between the same persons who are so bound to each other, and so 
that the right of a third party be not injured ; but still, so that the 
goods of subjects are understood to be bound for what the state owes, 
as we have elsewhere said. 

4 We must add this also ; that it is the part of a generous mind 

Chap. XIX.] OP FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES. 413 

to stand to agreements, even after an injury has been receired; 
on which grounds larchas, the wise Indian, praised a king who, 
haying been injured by a neighbour who was under league to him, 
did not Bwenre from the faith which he had sworn, saying that h^ had 
$wom 90 soUmfdy thai he could not hurt the other even after receiving 
the injury, 

6 The questions which commonly occur ^th regard to keeping 
faith with enemies, may almost all be solved, by applying the rules 
giren abore, concerning the force, botli of promises in general, and of 
oaths in particular, the effect of conrentions and securities, the rights 
and obligations of kings, and the interpretation of ambiguities. But 
that the use of what has been said may be the more manifest, and 
that, if there be any remaining controyersies, they may be discussed, 
we shall not hesitate to take the trouble of touching upon the more 
frequent and more celebrated of special questions. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Of the public Faith by which Wars are terminated ; and 
herein, of TrecUies of Peace ; of Lai ; of Combat by 
Agreement ; of Arbitration ; of Surrender ; ofHoetages; 
and of Pledges. 

Sect. I. Faith towards enemies di- 
vided. 

II. Jn a monarchy, it belongs 
to the King to make Peace, 

III. What if the King he a 
child, mad, captive, exiled 9 

IT. In an Aristocracy or De^ 
mocracy it belongs to seve- 
ral to make Peace. 

y. How the Empire, or a part 
thereof, or the property f^f 
the kingdom, may be alien- 
atedfor the sake t^f Peace. 

YL How the People or the suc- 
cessors are bound by a Peace 
made by the king. 
VII. The Property qf subjects 
may be conceded with the 
obligation of restitution. 
VIII. How, of things lost in war 9 

IX. ^0 distinction here between 
the Law of Nations and 
Civil Law. 

X. Public Utility to be held 
proved for the stronger. 

XI. General Rule to be interm 
preted in Peace. 

XII. Jn a doubtful case, the con^ 
vention to be understood, 
things remaining as they are. 

XIII. Of the convention, Quo Ante 
belltun. 

XIV. In that case, those who 
have subjected themselves 
are not restored. 

XV. The Losses suffered in the 
war to be supposed remitted 
in doubtful cases. 

XVI. But not Debts to private 
persons. 

XVII. Punishments due previously 
to be supposed remitted in 

XXI. 

XXII. 
XXIII. 
XXIV. 

XXV. 
XXVL 

doubtful eases. 

XVm. How qfthe right ofprivaU 
persons to Punishment 9 
Bights previously asserted 
andeonir&vertedj easily sup- 
posed remiited. 
Captures made qfier the 
Peace to be restored. 
Rules for restoration ^f 
Captures, 
Of the Produce. 
Of the Names qfRegi&ns. 
Of the relation to a pre- 
vious Pact, 
Of Delay. 

In doubtful ease, interpre- 
tation to be agtUnst the tw- 
poser. 

XXVIL Difference of giving new 
cause of War and breaking 
Peace. 

XXVIII. How Peace broken intrin- 
sically. 

What \f Allies apply force 9 
What if Subjects do 9 
What if Subjects bear arms 
under others 9 

XXXIL What if SubjecU are harm- 
ed 9 

XXXIII. What if Allies are 9 

XXXIV. How Peace broken ex- 
pressly 9 

XXXV. Are the Heads tfthe Trea- 
ty to be distinguished 9 

XXXVI. How if Penalty be added 9 
XXXVII. How if Necessity prevent 9 
XXXYUhThe Peace remains, if the 

injured party wishes it. 
XXXIX. How Peace broken spe- 
cially 9 
XL. What is Friendship? 
XLI. Is to receive subjects etndex" 

XXIX. 
XXX. 
XXXI. 

Chap. XX.] OF THE PUBLIC FAITH, &c. 

416 

iles contrary to friendship ? Lll. 

XLII. Of the end of War by Lot, 
XLIII. By Appointed Combat, LIII. 

XLIV. Do the acts of Kings never LIV. 

hind the Peopled LV. 

XLV. Who is to be reckoned con* 

queror $ LVI. 

XL VI. Of the End of War by Ar^ 

bitration, LVII. 

XLVII. Arbiters bound by Rights, 
XLVIII. Arbiters not to pronounce LVIIL 

concerning Possessions. 
XLIX. Force of Pure Surrender, LIX. 

L. Duty of the Conqueror in 

such case. LX. 

LI. Of Conditional Surrender, 

Who may and must send 
Hostages. 

Rights over Hostages. 
May a Hostage escape 9 
May a Hostage be retained 
for a new cause $ 
The Principal being dead, 
the Hostage is free. 
When the king is dead who 
gave the Hostage y is he free 9 
Hostages sometimes bound 
as Principals, 
What is the obligation of 
Pledges. 

When does the Right of 
having a Pledge cease 9 

I. /^ ONVENTIONS between enemies depend either on express en- 

\J gagements, or on tacit ones. An express engagement is either 
public or prirate. A public engagement is either one made by the 
supreme powers, or by inferior powers. An engagement made by the 
superior powers either puts an end to tho war, or is of force while 
the war goes on. In those which end tho war, we are to look at the 
principal matters, and at the accessories. The principal pacts are those 
which end the war either by their own act, as convention, or by 
consent having reference thereto, as lot, the event of a combat, the 
decision of an arbiter : of which the first is merely casual ; the other 
two, temper chance with the powers of the body or the mind, or 
with the exercise of judgment. 

n. To make conventions which terminate the war, is tho office 
of those who make the war ; for each person is the manager of his 
own affairs. Whence it follows, that in a war public on both sides, 
this is tho office of those who have tho right to exercise supreme 
authority. In a monarchical state, it is therefore the office of the 
monarch, provided he bo a monarch who has a right not impeded 
in such acts. 

ni. 1 For a king who is not of the age which implies maturity 
of judgment, (which age is, in some kingdoms, defined by law, in 
others, is to be estimated by probable conjecture,) or who is of weak 
intellect, cannot make peace. The same is to be said of a king in 
captivity, provided he received his sovereignty from the people ; for 
it is not to be supposed that they would bestow the power, to be 
used by a person who was not free. Hence, in this case, tho sove- 
reignty, not indeed as to its whole rights, but as far as exercise and 
guardianship, will be with the people, or him to whom the people 
commits it. 

2 But as to things which belong to himself, if a king, even in 
captivity, make any compact, it will be valid, according to the example 
of private conventions, of which we have spoken. But if the king be an 

--S-M^.^.- *■ 

416 OP THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book IIL 

exile, can he make peace ? Tes, if he ib under no constnunt ; other- 
wise, his condition differs little from that of a captire : for the custody 
of a captire is often lax. Regulus refused to dellyer his opinion in 
the Senate, saying that so long as he was under an oath to the 
enemy, he was not a senator. 

rV. In an aristocratical or democratical state, the right of mak- 
ing treaties will be with the majority, respectirely, of the Council, and 
of the Assembly of citizens who hare a Tote, as we hare elsewhere 
said. Therefore conrentions so made, bind them also who dissented. 
So Livy; Dionysius; Appian; Pliny. And those who are bound by 
the peace, also may shu*e its advantages. 

y. 1 Let us now consider what things may be the subjects of 
conyention. The royal authority, or any part of it, cannot be alienated 
by convention by kings, such as most kings now are, having their 
authority not as a patrimony, but as a life estate. Indeed before 
they received the royal authority, at which time the people was 
superior to them, there might have been a law made to render such 
acts invalid in all future time, so that they should not produce any 
obligation at all, even for compensation for non-fulfilment. And it is 
to be believed that the people intended this ; since. If the action was 
valid to the contractor for compensation, the goods of the subjects 
might be taken for the debt of the king; and thus, the provision 
against alienating the royal authority might be defeated. 

2 Therefore, that the whole royal authority nuiy pass in a valid 
manner, it is necessary to have the consent of the whole people; 
which may be effected by the representatives of different classes, 
whom they call the Orders or the Estates of the realm. That any 
part of the empire may be alienated, there is need for a double 
consent ; both of the general body, and of that special part which is 
under question ; since it cannot, without its own good-will, be separated 
from the body of which it was a part But the part itself may 
transfer to itself the sovereign authority, without the consent of the 
people, in an extreme and otherwise inevitable necessity ; because it 
is to be supposed that that power was excepted from the compact in 
such a case, when civil society was formed. 

3 But in patrimonial kingdoms, there is nothing which prevents 
the king alienating his kingdom. Still, it may be, that such a king 
has not power to alienate any part of the empire ; namely, if he had 
received the kiogdom as his property, with the anus of not dividing 
it. As to the valuables which are called the Property of the Crown, 
they may come into the king's patrimony in two ways ; either separa- 
bly, or inseparably with the kingdom itself. If in the latter mode, 
they may be transferred, but only with the kingdom ; if in the former, 
they may be transferred separately. 

4 As to kings whose kingdom is not patrimonial, they can hardly 
have the right of alienating the property of the crown ; except it ap-- 
pear plainly to be so, from a primeval law or uncontradicted custom 

Chap. XX] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 417 

YI. How far the king's succossors, and the people, are bound by 
his promise, we hare also stated elsewhere; namely, so far as the 
power of so obliging was included in the royal authority ; which is 
neither to be infinitely extended, nor too much narrowed ; but regu- 
lated by fair reasons. It is plainly another matter, if the king be the 
absolute master of his subjects, and hare receired a domestic rather 
than civil authority ; as in the case of those who reduce a conquered 
people to slarery; or if, without haying such dominion oyer their 
persons, they haye it oyer their goods ; as Pharaoh king of Egypt, by 
purchase ; and others, who have receiyed new comers into their pri- 
yate property. For here, another kind of right, added to the regal 
rights, produces a result which the regal rights of themselyes could 
not produce. 

Vn. 1 This is also a common question ; what may be done for 
the sake of peace, with the goods of individuals, by kings who haye 
no other right over the property of subjects than the regal right. 
We haye elsewhere said, that the property of subjects is under the 
eminent dominion of the state ; so that the state, or he who acts for 
it, may use, and even alienate and destroy such property ; not only in 
case of extreme necessity, in which even priyato persons haye a 
right oyer the property of others ; but for ends of public utility, to 
which ends those who founded civil society must be supposed to 
haye intended that private ends should give way. 

2 But it is to be added, that when this is done, the state is 
bound to make good the loss to those who lose their property ; and 
to this public purpose, among others, he who has suffered the loss 
must, if need be, contribute. Nor is the state relieyed from this 
onw, if, for the present, it be unable to discharge it ; but at any future 
time, when the means are there, the obligation which had been sus- 
pended revives. 

Yin. Nor do I admit, without distinction, what Vasquius says ; 
that the state is not bound to acknowledge the damage which is 
Inflicted by war, because the right of war permits such damage. For 
that right of war has regard to other peoples, as we have elsewhere 
explained ; and, partly at least, affects enemies in their mutual rela- 
tions, not citizens in theirs ; for since these are socially bound toge- 
ther, it is just that they bear in common the losses which happen for 
the sake of society. It may howeyer be established by the Civil 
Law, that a thing lost in war shall not give a citizen a right of reco- 
yery against the State; in order that each person may the more 
strenuously defend his own property. 

IX. There are some writers who make a broad distinction be- 
tween things which belong to the citizens by the Law of Nations, and 
things which belong to them by the Civil Law : so that with regard to 
the former, they allow a looser right to the king, so that he may take 
them without cause and without compensation; but not so with regard 
to the latter. Wrongly. For ownership, from whatever cause U 

EE 

418 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book HI. 

arises, has always its effects by Natural Law ; in so far that it cannot 
be taken away, except either from causes which belong to the rery 
nature of ownership, or arise out of the act of the owners. 

X. But this consideration, that the property of priyate parties is 
not to be giren up, except on the ground of public utility, regards the 
king and his subjects ; the other consideration, respecting compensa- 
tion for loss, regards the state and individuals. For as regards stran- 
gers who contract with the king, the act of the king is sufficient ; not 
only on account of the presumption of due authority which the dignity 
of Uie person implies ; but also from the Law of Nations, which allows 
the goods of subjects to be bound by the act of the king. 

XI. 1 With regard to the interpretation of conrentions of peaoe, 
yre must obsenre what has been delivered above that ; in proportion 
as any condition is more favourable, it is to be taken more loosely : 
in proportion as it is the contrary, more restrictedly. If we r^;ard 
mere Natural Law, the most favourable condition seems to be, that 
each shall obtain his own : and therefore the mterpretation of doubt- 
ful expressions is to be drawn to that sense ; that he who has taken 
up arms justly, shall obtain that for which he went to war, and recover 
his losses and expenses ; but not that he shall obtain anything under 
the plea of penalty ; for that is more odious. 

2 But since parties will hardly come to peace by one side confess- 
ing to being in the wrong, therefore that interpretation is to be taken 
which puts the parties, as much as possible, on an equality with 
respect to the justice of the war. And thb is done mainly in two 
ways ; cither that the possession which has been disturbed by war 
should be restored, as expressed by the formula in statu quo ante 
bellum : or that matters remain as they are, which is expressed by uti 
possidetis, 

XII. 1 Of these two rules, the latter is, in a doubtful case, to 
be preferred, as being the easier, and inducing no change. Hence 
the rule of Tryphoninus; that in peace, those prisoners only shall 
have postliminium for whom such a compact was made ; which, as we 
have shewn above, is the true reading. And thus, deserters are not to 
be given up, except this be agreed upon ; for we receive deserters by 
the laws of war : that is, by the laws of war it is lawful for us to admit 
and enrol in our numbers him who changes his side. Other things, 
on such agreement, remain with the person who is in possession. 

2 But this possession is taken not according to Civil but to Natural 
Law ; for in war, the fact of possession suffices, and nothing else is 
attended to. And we speak of lands, as in possession, if they are pro- 
tected by fortifications ; for a temporary occupation, or an encamp- 
ment, is not here regarded. Demosthenes says that Philip made haste 
to occupy what places he could, knowing that when peace was made, 
he would keep what he held. Incorporeal possessions are not held, 
except by means of the thing to which they adhere ; as the servitudes 
of lands ; or by the persons to whom they belong, provided they are 

Chap. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, Sic. 419 

not such as are to be exercised in the soil which had been the enemy's ; 
[for then they go with the soil]. 

XnL In the other kind of pacification, the ttahu quo ante beUwnf 
it is to be noted that the last possession which preceded the war is 
meant ; but in such a way, that prirate encroachments are to be set 
aside by an order of court, or sentence of a judge, when it can be had. 

XIV. But if any people, which is its own master, has, of its own 
free will, subjected itself to one of the belligerent parties, the restitu- 
tion is not to be extended to it, since the restitution applies to those 
things which are done by force or fear, or by some stratagem lawful 
towards an enemy. So when the Greeks made peace, the Thebans 
retained Plateca ; saying, that ther/ had not taken it by force^ nor by trea* 
cken/f but by the free wUl of those whose U was. And on the like 
grounds, Kissea remained in the possession of the Athenians. T. Quinc* < 
tiuB used the like distinction towards the Etolians, saying, that this 
was the law of captured cities : the ThesscUian cities have by their own 
will come under our authority. 

XV. If no other conrention is made, in erery war it is to be 
supposed to be settled, that the losses which hare been caused by the 
war are not liable to be recorered. And this is to be understood 
also of losses to prirate persons ; for these are the effects of war. For 
in a doubtful matter, the contracting belligerent parties are to be 
supposed to hayo intended that neither should be condemned as 
unjust. 

XVI. But debts which were due to prirate persons at the time of 
the war breaking out, are not to be supposed cancelled ; for these are 
not acquired by the right of war, but only prerented by war from 
being exacted. And therefore, when the impediment is remoTed, 
they retain their force. But though the right which existed before 
the war, is not lightly to be supposed to be taken from any one, (for 
on this account mainly were states established, that each person might 
baye his own, as Cicero rightly says), yet this is to be understood of 
rights which result from an inequality which requires to be balanced. 

XVII. Not therefore of a public right to a penalty. For that 
right, as far as it concerns the relations of kings and peoples, must 
be conceiyed to be remitted, on this account ; that a peace will be no 
peace, if the old causes of war are left standing. And here, demands 
which were not known of, will be included in the general words : as 
with respect to the Roman merchants who had been drowned by the 
Carthaginians, without the Romans knowing it. The best pcusifications 
are those which obliterate anger and the memory of ofenseSf as DionysiuB 
says. So Isocrates. 

XVm. The rights of priyate persons to a penalty, do not offer 
the same reason for being supposed to be remitted; because they 
might be exacted without the arbitrament of war. But still, since this 
right is not ours in the same way as one which arises from an inequa- 
lity, and punishment has always in it something odious, a slight impll- 

EE2 

420 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book III. 

cation of words will suffice to mako it understood that such penalties 
also are to he remitted. 

XIX. What we hare said, that the right which existed before the 
war is not lightly to be supposed to be taken away, is to be firmly held 
with regard to the rights of priyate persons. In the rights of kings 
and peoples, we may more easily suppose some condonation to take 
place, if there be any words, or fair conjecture, to countenance the 
suppositions : and this especially, if the right in question be not clear, 
but controTorted. For it is gracious to suppose that to have been 
done, which plucks up the seeds of war. So Dlonysius Halicamassus, 
whose concluding words are nearly taken from Isocrates in his oration 
on the Peace. 

XX. What is taken after the treaty is made, is to be restored ; 
for the right of war was preyiously extinguished. 

XXL In agreements concerning the restitution of captures made 
in war, in the first place, those articles are to be interpreted more 
widely, which are mutual, than those which are one-sided; in the 
next place, those which treat concerning men are to be taken more 
fiiYOurably than those concerning things ; and amongst those concern- 
ing things, those concerning lands, more fayourably than those con* 
coming moreables ; and those concerning things in public possession^ 
more fayourably than those which are in priyate ; and among those 
which are in priyate possession, those which direct the restitution of 
things possessed by a lucratiye title, more fayourably than by an 
onerous title ; and those which haye been acquired by purchase, more 
fayourably than those by donation. 

XXIL If a possession is conceded to any one in a pacification, 
there are conceded to him the fruits of the possession from the time 
of concession, but not backwards; a rulo which Augustus rightly 
defends against Pompeius; who, when Peloponnesus was granted to him, 
claimed, at the same time, the tribute which was due for the years 
which had elapsed. 

XXIIL The names of countries (proyinces and the like) are to 
bo taken according to the use of the present time; and the use of the 
learned, rather than of the yulgar ; for these matters are commonly 
treated by learned men. 

XXIV. These rules also are often applicable :— that as often aa 
reference is made to an antecedent or ancient conyention, so often 
the qualities or conditions expressed in the former conyention are to 
bo understood as being repeated ; — and that a party is to be under- 
stood as haying done what he wished to do, if his not doing it was 
occasioned by tho other party with whom the controyersy Is. 

XXV. What some say, that for a short time an excuse for delay 
is to be admitted, is not true, except an unforeseen necessity preyents 
the fulfilment. That somo canons fayour such excuses is not sur- 
prizing, since it is their office to moye Christians to such counes as 
are suitable to mutual charity. But in this question concerning the 

CuAP. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 421 

interpretation of conventions, we do not now require what is best, 
nor even what religion and piety demand of each party ; but what he 
can be compelled to : and the whole of this question belongs to what 
we call external right. 

XXVI. In a doubtful sense, the Interpretation is rather to be 
made agairist the party which drew up the conditions, which is com- 
monly the more powerful party ; (as Annibal says. He who gives, not 
he who €uks, mugt prescribe conditions of peace:) as in a sale, the inter- 
pretation is against the seller ; for he has himself to blame for not 
speaking more plainly: and the other party, if there are several 
senses to an expression, may fairly receive it in the way most useful 
to himself. Aristotle says. Where there is a friendship for the sake of 
utility, the utility of him who receives the advantage is the mecuure of 
what is due, 

XXVII. AJso the dispute constantly occurs, When a peace is to bo 
supposed to be broken: for which occasion the Qreeks have a special 
name ; for it is not the same thing to give a new occasion to war, and 
to break the peace. There is a great difference between the two, both 
as to the penalty incurred by the transgressor, and as to relieving 
from his engagements the other party. Peace is broken in three 
ways : either by acting against rules which are involved in every peace; 
or against that which was distinctly said in this peace ; or against that 
which ought to be understood from the nature of each peace. 

XXVIII. A person acts against rules involved in every peace, if 
he use warlike force ; that is, no new cause having arisen. If such a 
cause can be alleged with probability, it is better to presume that 
the injustice was committed without perfidy, than with it. (Thucy- 
dides says. They break the peace not who resist force, but who use force). 

This being laid down, we must see by whom, and to whom, force 
employed breaks the peace. 

XXIX. K those who have been allies in the war do anything of 
the sort, the peace is held by some writers to be broken. Nor do I 
deny that it may be agreed that it shall be so : not, properly, that one 
person shall be liable to penalty for another person's act ; but under 
a condition of the peace, partly potestative and partly casual. But 
a peace ought not to be assumed to be made in this way, except it 
manifestly appear; for such an interpretation is irregular and con- 
trary to the common intention of those who make the peace. There- 
fore if any have used force, the others not helping them, against them 
there is a right of war, but not against the others. This is contrary 
to what the Thebans said against the allies of the Lacedasmonians on 
a certain occasion. (Pans. ix. 1.) 

XXX. If subjects do anything by armed force without public 
command, it will have to be seen whether the private act can be said 
to be publicly approved. And to this, three things are requisite, 
knowledge, power of punishing, and neglect ; as may appear from what 
we have already said. Knowledge is proTcd by the facts being mani« 

422 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book m. 

feat, or being denounced. Power is presumed, except some reason 
for its defect appears. Neglect is prored by the lapse of such a time 
as, in each state, is commonly taken for punishing offenses. And such 
neglect is equivalent to a positire decree ; as Agrippa says in Josephus^ 
that the Parthian king will think that peace is broken, if his subjects 
proceed in arms against the Romans [without being restrained by 
him.] 

XXXI. It is often made a question, whether this holds, if the 
subjects of any sovereign do not take arms on their own account, but 
act in military service under others who are making war. Undoubt-* 
edly the Cerites in Livy excuse themselves, by saying that their 
citizens had joined the army by no public act : and the same defense 
was alleged by the Rhodians. And the better opinion is, that such 
service is not permitted, except it appear by probable arguments that 
some other line was agreed on; as we sometimes see in our days; 
[that persons of another country serve in armies which are carrying on 
war ;] following tho example of the old Etolians, who took service and 
gathered booty on both sides in any war, as Polybius and Livy say. 
In former times, the Etruscans, though they would not send lud to tho 
Yeientes, did not prevent any of their young men going as volunteers 
to the war. 

XXXII. 1 Again, the peace must be supposed to be broken, if 
armed force be used, not only against the general body of the state, 
but against its subjects ; that is, without new cause. For peace is con- 
cluded, that all the subjects may be in safety : peace is the act of tho 
state for the whole and for the parts. And even if a new cause do 
arise, it will be lawful, notwithstanding the peace, for the persons 
attacked to defend themselves and their property. For it is natural, 
as Cassius says, to repel arms by arms: and therefore we are not 
readily to believe that this right is abdicated between equals. But 
in such case, to exercise vindictive acts, or to recover by force what 
has been taken away, will not be lawful, except after judgment haa 
been denied. For satisfaction and recovery admit of delay, but self- 
defense does not. 

2 But if there be any portion of the subjects, whose malpractices 
are so perpetual, and so contrary to the laws of nations, that what 
they do, they must by all means be supposed to do contrary to the 
approval of their rulers ; and if they cannot be called before a proper 
tribunal, as for instance, Pirates ; from them it is lawful to exact satis- 
faction, and to recover property, as from persons surrendered to us. 
But to attack other innocent persons on that ground, is a breaking of 
tho peace. 

XXXUI. I Also armed force, exerted against allies, breaks the 
peace : but against those allies only who are comprehended in tho 
peace, as we shewed in examining the Saguntine controversy. So tho 
Corinthians urge, We all have sworn to you all. But if the idlies them- 
selves have not made the treaty, but others for them, the same rule 

Chap. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 423 

most be laid down, as soon as it appears that those allies hold tho 
peace to be good. For so long as this is uncertain, they are to be 
considered as enemies. 

2 With regard to other allies, and other parties, in any way re- 
lated to the principals, but who are neither subjects, nor nominated in 
the peace, the case is different ; nor can force used towards them be 
regarded as an infraction of the peace. But still, it does not follow, 
as we hare also said before, that war may not be undertaken on that 
ground ; but that will be a war from a new cause. 

XXXIV. The peace is broken, as we hare said, by doing against 
that which is set down in the peace : but under doing we include, not 
doing what we ought, and when we ought. 

XXXV. Nor can I admit the distinction of articles of peace, of 
greater, and of less importance. For ererything which is put in tho 
treaty is of importance enough to be kept. But yet goodness, and 
especially Christian goodness, will the more readily pardon the lighter 
faults, especially if there be penitence for them. But in order the 
better to provide for the permanence of the peace, it may be added to 
the less important articles, that if anything is done against them, tho 
peace is not broken : so that arbitration is to be had recourse to, rather 
than arms ; which was the case in the Peloponnesian league, as Thu- 
cydides relates. 

XXXVI. And I conceive that this must be understood to bo 
settled, if any special penalty bo added : not that I am ignorant, that a 
contract may be made, on this condition, that it shall be at the elec* 
tion of him who receives injury, whether he will have the penalty, or 
will recede from the transaction ; but that the nature of the business 
rather requires what I have stated. It is apparent, however, and has 
already been said by us, that he does not break the peace, who does 
not stand by covenants made simply [that is, without a penalty,] when 
the other party has sot him the example. For ho was only bound 
conditionally. 

XXXVII. But if any necessity be the cause why one party has not 
fulfilled what was promised ; for instance, if the thing demanded have 
perished, or been taken away, or the act have become impossible by 
any event ; the peace indeed shall not be broken ; for, as we have said, it 
does not commonly depend on a casual condition. But the other party 
must have the option, whether he will rather wait, if there be any hope 
that the promise can be fulfilled at a later period; or receive the 
estimated value of his loss; or be liberated by mutual concessions 
corresponding to that article, or of the like value. 

XXXVIIL Undoubtedly even after faith has been violated, it la 
open to the blameless party to observe the peace ; as Scipio did, after 
many perfidious acts of the Carthaginians ; because no one, by acting 
against his obligation, exempts himself from his obligation: and if it 
be added in the treaty, that in such a case the peace is to be under- 

42* OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book IU. 

stood to be broken, this is to be supposed added only for the benefit 
of the innocent party, if he choose to nse the liberty giren. 

XXXIX. Lastly, wo hare said that the peace is broken, by doing 
that which the special nature of the peace repudiates. 

XL. 1 Thus, acts which are against friendship, break a peace 
which was contracted under the law of friendship : for what, between 
others, the office of friendship only would require, is here also to be 
performed by the corenanted right. And to this case, but not to 
eyery peace whatever, (for there are leagues not for the sake of 
friendship, as Pomponius teaches us,) I refer many discussions which 
occur in lawyers, about injuries not by arms, and insults, and the 
like ; and especially that of Cicero : After the return inio goodwUU if 
any wrong is eommiUed^ thai must be considered^ not as a neglect hU as a 
ffiolationf and assigned not to oversight but to perfidy. But here also 
we must direst the fact of an odious character as much as possible. 

2 And hence an injury done to a person connected with or subject 
to another, shall not be supposed to be done to him with whom the 
peace was made, except it be openly done to insult him. And this 
rule of natural equity is followed by the Boman laws, in weighty 
injuries done to another person's serrants : so that adultery or riola- 
tion shall be imputed rather to lust than to enmity : and the seizure of 
another person's goods rather constitutes an act of new cupidity, than 
of broken faith. 

3 Atrocious threats, without any new cause preceding, are at Tari- 
ance with fnendship : and to this head I refer fortresses built on the 
border of a territory, for the sake, not of defense but of offense ; and 
unusual raising of troops, if it appear, by sufficient indications, that 
those are intended against the person with whom peace was made. 

XLI. I It is not against friendBhip to receive indiridual subjects, 
who wbh to migrate from the authority of one party to that of the 
other. For such liberty is not only natural, but adyantageous alao, as 
wo hare olsewbero said (B. ii. Ch. v. § 24. No. 3). Under the same 
head, I place refuge granted to exiles. For, as we have before said, 
the state has no right over exiles. So Perseus in Livy; and Aris- 
tides says, It is the common right of men to receive exiles. 

2 Towns, or largo bodies of men, which make an integral part of 
a state, it is not lawful to recoive, as we havo elsewhere said : nor those 
who, undor an oath or otherwise, owe ministerial offices or obedience. 
With regard to those who are slaves by the fortune of war, the same 
rule has been introduced by the Law of Nations, among some peoples, 
as we have said. Concerning the extradition of those who, not being 
exiled, fly from just punishment, we have spoken elsewhere. 

XLII. The practice of submitting the event of the war to the 
result of Lot, cannot always be lawfully adopted; but then only, when 
the matter in question is one over which wo have plenaiy dominion. 
For the state is bound to defend the life, chastity, and like possessions 

I 

Chap. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 425 

of its subjects, and the soTereign, to defend the good of the state, by 
ties too close, to allow him to pass by those reasons which are most 
natural, for the defense of himself and others. But if, in a reasonablo 
estimation, he who is attacked in an unjust war is so f&r inferior that 
there be no hope of resisting, it seems that the chance of Lot may be 
offered, that he may aroid a certain danger by an uncertain one : for 
this is the less of the eyils. 

XLIIL 1 Then follows a much agitated question, concerning Com- 
bats agreed upon to take place between a definite number, for the sake 
of ending the war ; for example, between one on each side, as Eneas and 
Tumus, Menelaus and Paris ; between two on each side, as between the 
Etolians and the Eleans ; [a mistake, J. B.] between three on each side, 
as the Horatii for Rome, and the Curiatii for Alba ; between three 
hundred on each side, as between the Lacedsemonians and Argiyes. 

2 If we only look at the external Law of Nations, it is not to be 
doubted that by it, of itself, such combats are lawful ; for that law 
permits the killing of all the enemy without distinction. And if the 
opinion of the old Greeks, Romans, and other nations were true, that 
each person is supreme master of his own life, then also internal jus- 
tice would not be wanting in such combats. But we haye already said, 
more than once, that this opinion is at yariance with right reason and 
the precepts of God. That he sins against the loye of his neighbour, 
who kills a man in order to keep things which ho can afford to go 
without, we haye elsewhere shewn, both by reason and by the autho- 
rity of the sacred writings. 

3 We haye now to add, that ho sins against himself and against 
God, who holds cheap the life that was giyen him by God as a great 
boon. If a matter worthy of a war be at stake, as the safety of 
many innocent persons, for it we must contend with all our powers. 
To haye recourse to a set combat, as a testimony of a good cause, or 
an instrument of diyine justice, is a vain fancy, and foreign to true 
piety. 

4 There is one circumstance, which may render such a combat just 
and pious on one side only; if otherwise it is to be confidently expected 
that he who maintains an unjust cause, will be yictorious with a great 
slaughter of innocent persons. For there is then no blame imputable 
to him who, in such a case, prefers the combat which gives him the best 
hope which is to be had. But this also is true, that some things 
which may be done without blame, cannot without blame be approved 
by others ; though they may be permitted that grayer eyils, which can- 
not otherwise be ayoided, may be avoided : as in many cases, usury 
and prostitution are tolerated. 

6 Therefore what we have said above, when we spoke of prevent- 
ing war; that if two persons between whom lies the dispute concerning 
a kingdom, are ready to fight it out in a combat, the people may 
allow it to be 80 decided, that the greater calamity which otherwise 
il[npend8 may be avoided; may be said here also, when the question is 

426 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BT WHICH [Book m. 

•boot tctmhiatiiig the war. In thii wmy» Crm fJuJlwiged the Avj- 
riaa king: and in DionjuoSy Metiot saji that it wooki not have been 
nnjotty that the leaden of the two peoples ihoold themieifet decide the 
matter bj a oombat, if the eontroTeny were oonoerning th«r own 
power or dignity, and not that of the peoples. So we read that 
Heraelios the emperor fooght Cosroes, the son <tf the king of the Pert 
siansy in a ungle combat. 

XLIV. Bat they who thos set the issue of the dispute oo the 
result of a eombat, may indeed forfmt th«r own right* if they have any, 
but they cannot so giro to another what they themseWes hare not, 
in those kingdoms which are not patrimoniaL Therefore that such a 
corenant may be ralid, it is necessary that there should be obtiuned 
also the consent, both of the people, and of those who are in exist- 
ence, who bare a right to the succession : and, in deh which are not 
free, the consent also of the lord or seignior of the fief. 

XLV. 1 In such combats, it is often a question which party is to be 
esteemed the conqueror. A party can be reckoned Tanquished, only 
whon either all its combatants have fallen, or hare been put to flight. 
In IAyj it is a mark of being conquered, when the party are driyen 
into their own boundaries or towns. 

2 In the three great historians, Herodotus, Thucydides, and Poly- 
bius, there are three controrersies concerning victory; of which tho 
first refers to a sot combat. But if any one examines well, he will find 
that in all the three, the parties separated without a real yictory. The 
Argivcs, in Horodotus, were not put to flight by Othryades, but went 
away on night coming on, thinking thcmsclvos Tictorious, and carried 
that news to thoir friends. Nor did tho Corcyreans in Thucydides 
put to flight the Corinthians ; but tho Corinthians, when they had car- 
ried on tho combat succesBfulIy, seeing the fleet of the Athenians 
approach in force, retreated without trying their strength with it. In 
Polybius, Philip of Macodon took indeed the ship of Attalus when it 
had been deserted by its crew, but was very far from haying put to 
flight his fleet ; and therefore, as Polybius says, he rather bore himself 
as victor, than thought himself victorious. 

3 Those proooodings, of collecting the spoils, granting the bodies 
of tho dead for sepulture, provoking the adversary to renew tho battle, 
which, in tho places just quoted, and in Livy, you sometimes find put 
forwards as signs of victory, of themselves prove nothing ; except so far 
as they go along with other indications to prove the flight of the 
enemy. Certainly ho who has left the field may, in a case of doubt, be 
supposed to have run away. But when there is no clear proof of 
victory, tho matter remains in the condition in which it was before 
tho battle ; and recourse must bo had either to war, or to new agree- 
ments. 

XLVI. 1 Of Arbitrations there are two kinds, as Proculus teaches 
us : one, in which, whether tho decision is just or unjust, we must sub* 
mit to it ; which is tho rule, he says, when we come to arbitration by 

i 

Chjlp. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 427 

a compromise; another, in which the matter is reduced to the decision 
of a fair man. Of this we have an example in the response of Cclsus. 
If a frudman^ he says, ha$ sworn to give <u many dayi work as his 
master ^uUl judge right, the master's decision is not valid except he judge 
/airly. Bat this mode of interpreting an oath, though it may be in- 
troduced by the Roman Uws, is not in agreement with the simple 
meaning of the words. Still it is true that an arbitrator may be taken 
in two different ways, either as a mediator only, as we read that the 
Athenians were between the Rhodians and Demetrius ; or as one whose 
decision is to be absolutely obeyed. And this latter is the kind of 
which we here speak, and of which we have already said somewhat, 
when we spoke of the means of obyiating war. 

2 For although, with regard to arbiters who are referred to by 
compromise, the Ciyil Law may direct, and does in some places direct, 
that it shall be lawful to appeal from them, and to complain of their 
wrong ; this cannot hare place between kings and peoples. For in 
their case, there is no superior power, which can either bar or break 
the tie of tho promise. And therefore they must stand by the deci- 
sion, whether it be just or unjust ; so that, as Pliny says, JVTicn you 
choose a person your umpirCf you make Mm your supreme judge. For 
the discussion of the office of an arbiter is one thing, and that of the 
duty of persons who make a compromise is another, 

XLYII. 1 In considering the office of an arbiter, we must consider 
whether he be elected into the place of a judge, or with some laxer 
power, which Seneca speaks of as the proper power of an arbiter : 
ITie judge is limited by rules of law : the umpire is left quite free, and 
call soften law and justice by kindness and mercy. So Aristotle says. 
That a fair man will rather go to an arbiter than to a judge, because the 
arbiter looks to equity, the judge to law. 

2 In this place, eqiUty does not mean, as elsewhere, that part of 
justice which interprets tho law by its general tendency and real 
purpose, (for this part also is committed to the judge ;) but it means 
ererything which is bettor done than not done, eren extraneous to 
the rules of justice, properly so called. Such arbiters are frequent, 
in cases between priyate persons and citizens of tho same empire ; and 
are especially commended to Christians by St Paul, 1 Cor. yi. ; but 
in a doubtful case, we are not to suppose that so much power is 
assigned to them. For in doubtful cases, we assume as little as may 
be. And this especially holds, between parties who hayo supreme 
authority ; for these, since they haye no common judge, are to be 
supposed to haye bound the arbiter by tho rules by which the office 
of a judge is commonly hound. 

XLVIIL This howeyer is to be remarked, that arbiters chosen 
by peoples or soyereigns ought to decide concerning the principal 
point, [right of ownership, for instance,] not about possession: for 
judgments concerning possession belong to the Ciyil Law. By tho 
Law of Nations, the right of possession follows the right of ownership. 

428 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book IU. 

Therefore while the case is undergoing inTesiigation, no innoration 
16 to be made [in the possesftion], both to avoid prejudice, and because 
recorerj of things so taken is difficult. So Liry 8a3rs, between the 
Carthaginians and Masinissa, the eommissionen did not change the 
right of pos$e$$ian. 

XLIX. 1 The reference to an arbiter is of another kind, when a 
person gives himself up to the enemy as his arbiter. This is a pure 
surrender, making him who so gives himself up a subject, and giving 
supreme power to him to whom the surrender is made. So the Eto- 
lians were asked, in the senate, whether they gave themselves to the 
Roman people as arbiters concerning them. And P. Cornelius Len- 
tulus, about the end of the second Carthaginian war, demanded that 
the Carthaginians should give themselves up entirely to the Romans, 
not as by treaty, but as by pure surrender. 

2 But here also we must make a distinction, as to what the van- 
quished party ought to suffer ; what the victorious party may do by 
right ; what other duties require of him ; and finally, what becomes 
him. The vanquished, after surrender, is liable to suffer everything : 
he is already a subject ; and if we look at the extreme right of war, is in 
such a condition that everything may be taken from him ; even his 
life ; even his personal liberty ; much more, goods not only public, 
but even private property. So in Livy, the EtoUam, having ntrren^ 
dered at discretion, (permisso libero arbitrio,) were afraid that even their 
persons would not be spared. We have elsewhere cited expressions, to 
the effect that the conqueror may take all : to the same effect is the 
passage of Livy, where ho says that, of old, the Romans were not sa- 
tisfied with anything short of a complete surrender on the part of 
their enemies. And we have shewn that those who have surrendered 
may sometimes lawfully bo put to death. 

L. 1 But the victor, in order not to do anything unjustly, ought 
first to consider that he is not to put any one to death except such a 
fate bo deserved by his own act. And within this limit, as far as our 
own safety permits, it is always praiseworthy to incline to clemency 
and liberality ; and sometimes, from circumstances and rules of man- 
ners, oven necessary to do so. 

2 Wo have elsewhere said, that a war is well ended, when it is 
finished by a pardon. So Nicolaus of Syracuse says, Tltey have sur- 
rejidered, relying upon our clemency, where/ore it would be a shame that 
they should be mistaken. And afterwards. Who ever of the Cheeks put 
to death those who gave tJiemselves up to the clemency of the victor f And 
Cesar says to L. Antonius, If you had come to treat, you ufould have 

found me a victor who has received wrongs ; but since you give yourself 
up entirely, you take away my anger and my power. I must consider, 
not only what you have deserved, Imt what is fit for me to do, and m.ust 
prefer the latter. 

3 Wo find, in the Roman historians, mention of surrendering to 
the faith, or the faith and clemoncy, of the adversary. See Livy, 

Chap. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c. 429 

concerning Perseus. But all these expressions mean nothing but 
mere surrender. Faith^ in such cases, means only the probity of thd 
yictor to whom the ranquished party commits himself. 

4 There is a celebrated history, in Polybius and Liyy, of Phaneas, 
the ambassador of the Etolians ; who, in his oration to Manlius the 
consul, went so far as to say that the Etolians gave themselves up to 
the faith of the Romans. Then, when the consul asked again, and 
he had repeated the assertion, the consul asked that certain persons 
who had been the moTers of the war should be given up. When Pha* 
neas had objected. We give ourselves up to your faiths not to slavery^ 
and that what was demanded was not according to Greek usage, the 
consul replied that he did not care for Greek usage ; that by Roman 
usage he had authority orer those who had surrendered deliberately ; 
and ordered forthwith the ambassadors to be thrown into chains. Do 
you^ he said, talk of duty and decorum, when you have given yourselves 
up to our faith f From which words, we see how much may be dono 
with impunity, and without Tiolating the Laws of Nations, by him to 
whose faith an adversary has surrendered himself. For the Romari 
consul did not use this power ; but dismissed the ambassadors, and 
allowed the Etolian council to deliberate afresh on this subject. So 
the Roman people answered to the Falisci, that it had learnt, that they 
had committed themselves, not to the power, but to the faith of the 
Romans; and of the Gampanians, we read that they came into faith 
with the Romans, not by league, but by surrender. 

6 But with reference to the duty of him to whom the surrender is 
made, we may apply what Seneca says : Clemency is not governed by the 
rules of lawt but judges fairly, and can absolve the offender, or tax the 
contest at what rate U pleases. Nor do I conceive that it makes any 
difference, whether he who surrenders, professes to give himself up to 
the wisdom, or moderation, or mercy of the victor. All these are 
merely soft words : the fact remains, that the victor is the arbiter. 

LI. There are also conditional surrenders, which secure the 
interests of individuals ; so that their lives, or liberties, or goods, are 
excepted; or of the whole body; and some such conventions may 
even give rise to a mixed authority between the parties ; of which we 
have elsewhere spoken. 

LII. Hostages and Pledges are accessories to conventions. Hos- 
tages, as we have said, are given either by their own will, or the will 
of him who has authority over them. For in a supreme civil sove* 
reignty, is comprehended a right over the actions of subjects, as well as 
their goods. But the state, or its ruler, will be bound to make compen- 
sation for the inconvenience to the person who suffers, or his near 
relations. And if there are several persons, among whom it makes no 
difference to the state which is the hostage, it appears proper that the 
matter should be settled by lot. A vassal, except he be a subject also^ 
is not liable to such a right on the part of the seignior : for the rever- 
ence and obedience which he owes his lord do not go so far as this. 

430 OF THE PUBLIC FAITH BY WHICH [Book IH. 

Lin. The putting to death a hostage is, as we hare Bud, lawftd 
by the external Law of Nations ; but not by internal rightness, except 
there be a corresponding crime on his side. Also hostages do not 
become slares : but on the contrary, by the Law of Nations they can 
hold property and leaye it to their heirs ; though by the Roman law, it 
is provided that their goods shall go into the public treasury. 

LIV. It is made a question, whether it is lawful for a hostage to 
make hfs escape. And it appears plainly that it is not lawful, if, either 
at first, or afterwards, he haye giren his word, in order to be in looser 
custody. Without such a condition, it would seem that the state had 
not the intention of binding its citizen not to escape, but of giring the 
enemy the power of keeping him as they chose. And in this way, the 
act of Clelia may be defended. But although she had not been in 
fault, the city could not 1*000170 and keep the hostage. 80 Forsenna : 
If thA hostage were not given up^ he UHJuld hold the treaty broken : and so 
the Eomans gave up the pledge of peace aeeording to the treaty. 

L V. Howerer, the obligation of hostages is odious ; both because 
It is against liberty, and because it punishes a person for what another 
has done. Therefore, in such cases, a strict interpretation is applicable. 
And thus, persons giren up on one account cannot be retained on 
another: which is to be understood with this condition. If anything 
else be promised without the stipulation of hostages. But if, in the 
other cause, faith hare been yiolated, or a debt contracted, the hostage 
may then be retained ; not as a hostage, but by that part of the Law 
of Nations by which subjects may be detained for the act of their 
rulers. But it may be proTidod that this shall not be done, by adding a 
covenant, that the hostages shall be given up, when that, on account 
of which they were given, has been fulfilled. 

LVI. He who is given as a hostage, only to redeem another who is 
a prisoner or a hostage, is liberated, on the death of that other. For 
in him, when he dies, the right of the pledge is extinguished ; as XJIpian 
said of a prisoner who is ransomed [and dies before the ransom is 
paid]. Wherefore, as in Ulpian's question, the price is not due, so here 
too, the person of the vicarious hostage is not bound. Thus Demetrius 
justly demanded of the Roman senate to be set free, as having been 
given up for Antiochus, and Antiochus being dead. This being so, he 
said he did not know whom he was hostage for. 

LVII. When the king is dead who made the convention, whether 
the hostage be still bound, depends on tho question which we have 
elsewhere treated, whether the convention is to be held personal or 
real : for accessory circumstances, such as hostages, cannot be a reason 
for receding from the rule, in the interpretation of the main articles. 
The accessories must follow the nature of the main business. 

LVIII. This however may be added in passing: that sometimes 
the hostages are not an accessory part of the obligation, but really a 
principal part ; as when any one, by contract, promises something to 
be done by another ; and, that not being performed is held to the 

Chap. XX.] WARS ARE TERMINATED, &c 431 

amount of interest inyolved in the agreement ; then his hostages are 
bound in his place ; which was the doctrine held in the Caudine con- 
Tention, as we have elsewhere stated. The opinion of those who hold 
that hostages are bound for one another's acts, eren without their own 
consent, is hard and unjust. 

LIX. Pledges have some points in common with hostages, some, 
peculiar. It is common to the two, that being given for one thing, 
they may be retained for another, except a stipulation to the contrary 
have been made. And it is peculiar to Pledges, that the covenant 
which is made concerning them, is not to be taken so strictly as that 
concerning hostages : for things are made, to be held as property ; 
men are not. 

LX. We have also said elsewhere, that no period of time can 
supersede the obligation of restoring the pledge, if that be done to 
secure which the pledge was deposited. For an act which has an old 
and known cause is not to be believed to come from a new one. 
Therefore the forbearance of the debtor [who deposited the pledge] 
is to be ascribed to the old contract, not to derelict ; except well- 
founded conjectures point to another interpretation : as if when any 
one wished to resume the pledge, and was prevented, he had passed 
it over for so long a time as to give room for a presumption of con* 
sent. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Of Faith while war continues ; of Truce ; of Safe Passage ; 

of Ransom. 

EOT. L 

What is a Truce ; Peace 

XVII. 

or War 9 

XVIIL 

IL 

Origin of the term. 

XIX. 

III. 

After Truce, new Deelaro' 

tion not needed. 

XX. 

IV. 

THme of TYucCf how com- 

puted. 

XXI. 

V. 

When doe* the obligation 

beginf 

XXII. 

VI. 

What it lawful in a Truce $ 

Vll. 

To retire ; to repair walls 9 

XXIIL 

VIII. 

Of occupying places. 

XXIV. 

IX. 

May a person return who 

is detained by force beyond 

XXV. 

the Trtieef 

X. 

Some special questions of 
Truce, 

XXVI. 

XI. 

Truce broken on one side,, 
the other may resume war. 

XXVII. 

XII. 

How, if there be a Penalty $ 

XIII. 

Truce, when broken by ac* 
tions of private persons. 

XXVIII 

XIV. 

Right of safe passage, how 
interpreted. 

XXIX. 

XV. 

Who are included in Sol- 
diers. 

XXX. 

XVL 

Going, Coming, Departing, 
how taken. 

Of extension to persons. 
To goods. 

Who are Companions and 
Attendants. 

Is the right of free-passage 
extinguished by death $ 
What, if it be given, to be 
at the will of the giver 9 
Is security due also without 
the territory 9 

The Favour of the Ransom 
of Prisoners. 

May Ransom be forbidden 
by Law 9 

Right over Prisoners may 
be ceded. 

The Price may be due from 
one to more. 

May convention be rescinds 
ed because the Prisoner was 
not known to be rich 9 
, What if the Prisoner's 
goods go with him 9 
Does the heir owe the Price 
of the Ransom 9 
Must he return who was 
dismissed to free another, 
he being dead9 

\ 

I. 1 TJl VEN daring war, the supreme authorities are wont to grant 
Pi certain kinds of intercourse among the hostile parties ; as 
Truce, Safe Passage, Ransom. Truce is a conrention, by which, the 
war remaining, the parties are for a time to abstain from warlike acts. 
I say, the war remaining ; for as Cicero says, between war and peace, 
there is no medium ; and war is the name of a state or condition which 
may exist, even when it does not exhibit its operations : according to 
Aristotle's distinction, of virtues or qualities which may continue to 
exist, even while they are not exerted. And so his commentators, as 
Andronicus, speak of a habit which exists without the act ; and Eus- 
tratius, who exemplifies it by a geometer in whom geometry resides, 
though ho be asleep. And so Horace. 

Chap. XXL] OP FAITH WHILE WAR CONTINUES, &c. 433 

2 And thus, as Gcllius says: A truce is not peace; for the war 
remains, thoitgh tlie fighting ceases. And in another : A truce is a suf 
pension of war. Which I mention to shew that if any conyontion bo 
mado which is to be valid in timo of war, it is valid also during a 
truce, except it plainly appear that, in the convention, it is not war 
which is looked to, but the operations of war. And on the other hand, 
if anything is said of peace, that will not hold for the time of truce : 
although Virgil calls a truce a sequestral peace, which Servius, on the 
passage, explains as a temporary peace. As also the Scholiast on 
Thucydides, an occasional peace, or a war in labour, Yarro calls it a 
camp-peace, a peace of a few days ; but all these are not definitions, 
but descriptions, and metaphorical descriptions. So too is that of 
Yarro, when ho calls a truce the holiday or vacation of war. He might 
have called it a slumber of war. So the holiday produced by the 
forensical ceremonies is called a peace by Papinius. Aristotle calls 
sleep the chain of the senses ; and adopting that image, you might call 
a truce the chain of war. 

3 In the exposition of Yarro's words which Donatus follows, Gcllius 
rightly reprehends his having added, ^ a peace of a few days ;" and 
he shews that truces were granted for hours. And I add further, tliat 
truces have been made for years, as twenty, thirty, forty, even a hun- 
dred ; of which we have examples in Livy, which shew the error of 
that definition of Proclus the Jurist: A truce is, when for a short and 
present time, a convention is made, that the parties are not to attack each 
other. 

4 It may however happen, that if it appear that the solo moving 
reason of any convention was the cessation of warlike acts, that then, 
what is said of the time of peace shall hold for a time of truce ; not 
from the force of the word, but from the clear inference of intention, 
of which wo have elsewhere spoken. 

II. The name Inducice does not come, as Gellius would have it, 
from inde uti jam ; nor as Opilius holds, from endoitu, that is, intro- 
gression ; but from inde otium, because from a certain timo thero is a 
cessation of acts. It appears also, from Gellius and Opilius, that the 
ancients wrote this word with the letter t, not c; and that though 
now it is plural only, it formerly had a singular. The old form was 
indoitia, for otium was then written oitium, from the verb oiti, which 
later became uti; as from |7otna (afterwards jKena) came punio, and 
from Poifio (afterwards Posnus) came Punieus. And as from ostia in the 
plural, ostia, ostiorum, a door, came the singular ostia^ ostias ; so from 
tho plural indoitia, indoitiorum, came indoitia, indoitice, and thence 
indutia, of which, as I have said, the plural only remains in use, 
though the singular formerly was used, as Gellius tells us. Donatus is 
not far from this etymology, when he says that Inducioe were so called 
because they give in dies otium, cessation for days. Inducice, or Truce, 
then, is a cessation of acts in war, not a peace \ and therefore tho 

FF 

434 OF FAITH WHILE WAR CONTINUES ; [Book IIL 

historians speak accurately, when they say that peace was domed, but 
truce granted. 

Ul. And therefore there Is no need of a new declaration of war 
after a truce: for the temporary impediment being remoTod, the 
state of war comes into play, as a matter of right; it was not dead, 
but only sleeping ; and revives, as the right of ownership or of pater- 
nal power rerives, in a man who recovers from a state of lunacy. 
Still we read in Livy, that in pursuance of the opinion of the Feciales, 
when the truce was over, war was declared: but in fact, the old 
Romans wished to shew, by those superfluous cautious, how much 
they lored peace, and by how just causes they were drawn into arms. 
Liry implies this : Truce was granted^ not peace made ; the last day of 
ike truce had passed^ and before that day^ they had resumed JiostUities ; 
yet the Feeialee were eentt and when they made their formal application, 
they were disregarded. 

IV. 1 The time of a truce is commonly defined by its length, as, 
for a hundred days ; or by fixing the end of the term, as, till the first 
of March. In the former case, the reckoning is to be made even to 
minutes : for that is the natural way. The cessation by civil days 
comes from law, or the customs of peoples. In the other case, it is 
often a doubt, whether the day or month or year to which the truce 
was to last is excluded or included in the truce. 

2 Certainly in natural things there are, two kinds of boundary ; 
the one, within the thing, as the skin is the boundary of the body : the 
other without the thing, as a river is the boundary of the land. And 
so, boundaries which are made by the will of man, may be settled 
either the one way or the other. But it seems more natural, that a 
boundary should be taken which is a part of the thing : a terminiis is 
the last part of a thing f as Aristotle says : nor is use against this. The 
lawyers say: If any one says that a thing is to be done before the 
day of his death, the day on which he dies is reckoned in, Spurina 
predicted to Cesar a danger which would not be protracted beyond 
the Ides of March. And when he was interrogated on the Ides them- 
selves, he said the Ides were come, but not gone. And therefore this 
interpretation is much the rather to be taken, when the prolongation 
of the time has a favourable effect ; as in a truce which spares human 
blood. 

3 But the day from which any measure of time is said to begin is 
not included ; because the force of the preposition from is to disjoin, 
not to conjoin. 

V. I will add this by the way, that a truce or any similar trans- 
action binds the contracting parties immediately, as soon as the con* 
tract is made : but that subjects on both sides begin to be obliged, 
when the truce has taken the form of a law, in which is inTolred some 
external publication: and this being done, it immediately begins to 
have force to oblige subjects: but that force, if the publication is 

Chap. XXI.] OF TRUCE ; OF SAFE PASSAGE, &o. 435 

mado at ono place only, does not operate through the whole gorem- 
ment at the same moment ; but in a time sufficient to carry the know- 
ledge to each place. Wherefore, if anything be in the mean time 
done by the subjects against the truce, they will not be liable to 
punishment : but nevertheless the contracting parties will be bound 
to make good the damage. 

VI. 1 What is lawful during the truce, and what is not, is given 
to be understood by the terms themselves which are employed. All 
acts of war, whether against persons or against things, are unlawful ; 
that is, everything that is done against an enemy. Everything of that 
kind is, in time of truce, against the Law of Nations ; as L. Emilius 
says in his speech to the soldiers in Livy. 

2 Even things belonging to the enemy, which have, by any chance, 
come into our hands, are to be restored ; and this, even if they had 
previously been ours : because, so far as regards external right, by 
which such things are to be judged, they have become theirs. And 
this is the purport of what Paulus the jurist says, that in time of 
truce, there is no postliminium ; because postliminium requires that 
the right of capture in war should precede ; which, in time of truce, 
cannot be. 

3 It is lawful to go and return on cither side, but with such appa- 
ratus only as shews that there is no danger. This is remarked by 
Servius upon Virgi), Mixtiqxie impune Latini: where he also relates, 
that when the city was besieged by Tarquin, and truce was made 
between Porsonna and the Romans, when the Circensian games were 
celebrated in the city, the leaders of the enemy entered and contested 
in a chariot-race, and were crowned as victors. 

VII. To retire into the interior of our own territory, as wo read 
in Livy that Philip did, is not at variance with a truce ; nor to repair 
the walls of fortified places; nor to raise soldiers, except there bo 
some more special convention. 

VIII. 1 To corrupt the garrisons of the enemy, and so to obtain 
possession of places which they hold, is undoubtedly in contravention 
of a truce ; for such an acquisition cannot be just, except by the right 
of war. The same is to be held, if suljects wish to revolt to the 
enemy. We have an example in Livy. Those of Corona and Haliartus 
being inclined to kings, sent ambassadors into Macedonia to ask for a 
garrison to defend them against the Thebans; to whom the king answered, 
that on account of the truce with the Romans he could not send a garri- 
son. In Thucydides, Brasidas took possession of Menda, which 
revolted from the Athenians to the Lacedaemonians during the timo 
of truce : but there is added the excuse, that he had things to com- 
plain of in return against the Athenians. 

2 It is lawful in time of truce to occupy what is derelict; provided 
it is truly derelict, that is, left with the intention of not being resumed 
by those to whom it had belonged ; not if it is merely unguarded ; 
whether the custody were withdrawn before the truce, or after the 

F P 2 

486 OF FAITH WHILE WAB COXTIXUES ; ^BooK IIL 

troce vaf ooocladed. For the ownenhip remainisz, makes the pos- 
ftcsclon of the other party uDJast. Aod bj this rule, the false plea 
of BclUarias azainit the Gothi is refuted ; for be. on such a pretence 
had seixed in time of trace placet stripped of their garrisons. 

IX. 1 It is made a qoestion, vhether he vho, l>eing prerented bj 
major force* from retreating, is caught vithin the boundaries of the 
enemj after the period of the truce has expired, has the right of 
retumin:^. If ve regard the external Law of Xations, I do not doubt 
that such a person is in the position of one vbo, haring come in peace, 
it, br the sadden breaking out of war, caught bv accident among ene- 
mies ; and we hare noticed before that such a one remains a prisoner 
till a peace. Nor is internal justice wanting for such a proceeding; so 
far as the goods and actions of enemies are bound for Uie debt of the 
state, and are taken towards its payment. Nor has such a person 
more ground to complain, than so many other innocent penons upon 
whom the calamities of war fall. 

2 Nor ought there to be urged, on the other side, the cases of mer- 
chandises which, by stress of weather, are carried past the place where 
dues are to be paid, and which nerertheloss are excused f; nor the 
case mentioned by Cicero, of a ship of war, forced by stress of weather 
into a port, where its entering was contrary to the law, and which the 
questor wanted to confiscate. For in these cases, the operation of 
major force excuses the party from the penalty : but in our case, tho 
question is not properly concerning penalty, but concerning a right 
[of war], which was quiescent only during a certain interral of time. 
But that to remit such rights is more humane, and also more gene- 
rous, admits of no doubt. 

X. There are also some things which arc unlawful during a truce, 
in consequence of the special nature of the conrention : as if a tnico 
is granted, only for the sake of burying the dead, nothing is to be 
changed ; and if a truce is giren to a besieged place, only that they 
are not to be assaulted, it will then not be lawful to admit aid and 
proTisions : for since such a truce is given as an advantage to one of 
tho parties, it ought not to damage the position of him who granted 
it. Sometimes also it is stipulated, that it shall not be lawful for 
persons to pass between the parties. Sometimes such passage is 
granted to persons, but not to things; in which case, if persons are 
hurt in resisting tho passage of things, the truce is not broken. For 
since it is lawful to oppose the passage of thinp, the security of per- 
sons is to bo referred to that which is principal, not to that which is a 
matter of consequential result merely. 

XL If tho faith of the truce bo broken on one side, there is no 
ground for doubting whether it be open to the other party to return 
to tho employment of arms, even without a declaration ; for tho 
Articles of tho convention are parts of tho convention, in the way of 

* Force majeure : force which cannot be effectually resisted. 
"Y So Gronoyius understands the case. 

Chap. XXI.] OF TRUCE; OF SAFE PASSAGE, &c. 437 

condition, as we said a little while ago. Ton may indeed find in 
history examples of persons who hare continued to bear wrongs 
even to the end of the truce. But on the other hand, war was 
made against the Hetruscans and others, because they did acts 
against the truce ; and this diversity is an argument that the right is 
as we say ; but that, to use or not to use such right, is at the option 
of the injured party. 

Xn. This is certain, that if the penalty agreed upon is de- 
manded and paid by him who has acted against the truce, there is then 
no right of going to war ; for the penalty is paid that everything else 
may remain unriolated. And on the other hand, if the war is resumed, 
it is to be considered that the claim of penalty is abandoned, since 
the option is given. 

XIII. Private acts do not touch a truce, except a public act bo 
added ; for example, an act of commanding the thing to be done, 
or of accepting it as valid when it is done; and these public acts 
are understood to be adjoined, if those who have ofifended are 
neither punished nor given up ; or if the things seized are not re* 
stored. 

XIY. The right of Safe Passage out of the time of truce, is a 
privilege ; and therefore in the interpretation of this right, the rules 
are to be followed which are given for privileges. This privilege, 
however, is neither hurtful to a third person, nor very burthensome 
to the giver ; and therefore within the propriety of the words, a lax 
rather than a strict interpretation is to be admitted ; and still more, 
if it be not a boon given on asking, but voluntarily ofifered : and more 
still, if, besides private convenience, some public utility is involved in 
it. Therefore the strict interpretation is to be rejected, even when 
the words imply it, except some absurdity would otherwise follow, or 
very probable conjectures of intention point that way. And on the 
other hand, a laxer interpretation, even not included in the propriety 
of the words, will be applicable, to avoid a similar absurdity, or upon 
very urgent conjectures. 

XV. Hence we collect, that Safe Passage, granted to soldiers, is 
extended, not only to subaltern officers as well as to common soldiers, 
but also to the highest in command : because the propriety of the 
words admits of that signification; though there is another stricter 
limitation of the expression. So under the title of Clerks, comes 
also a Bishop. Also sailors who are in fleets are included ; and all 
who are under the oath of military obedience. 

XYI. 1 In granting free passage for going, is included also re- 
turning ; and this, not from the force of the word, but to avoid an 
absurdity: for the boon ought not to be useless. And safe depar- 
ture is understood to extend till the person comes to a place where 
he is in safety. And hence, Alexander is accused of bad faith, who, 
having granted safe departure to certain persons, ordered them to 
be put to death on the way. 

43S OF FAITH WHILE WAH CONTIXUES; 'JRookUL 

2 Est h« wb*> Is alioved to d*piri, if xwi, nc'iMi jIt, ftlloved to 
return : kzyi L<; vho is allowed u> come Liaseif^ easaot Kod aacKber : 
nor 0:1 xh^ ooLimrr, e&n be vbo ii allovei to £«&i. cC'Se himself. 
For tbec^ are dliferexit ibings, Dor do» reason coape! as in this cue 
U> vabder bero&d th« vords ; bm ret so thai a mistake on this sub. 
je«, tboa:zh it do not pre a right, yet relieres the person from the 
peualtr if aor be added. Also be vLo is alloved to come, is allowed 
t/i come once, sot repeatedlj; except by the addiiicm of time, ground 
is siren to conjecture otherwise. 

XVII. The son is not aUoved to accompanr the fuher, nor the 
vife the but ban'!, anr otherwise than is alioved in the right of 
dwelling in the enemv^s territory: for ve are nsed to dwell with our 
£smi]iei, tut to trarel w-thont them. But one or two serrants. eren 
if it be not exprened, will be e apposed to be comprehended in the 
case of a person who cannot with decorum trarel without such 
accompaniment : for he who conce<ies any farour, concedes its ne- 
cessary consc^juenoes : and necessity is here to be understood 
morallr. 

XV^III. In like manner, goods of any kind are not comprehended 
in such a grant, but only such as you usually take on a journey. 

XIX. If companions be expressed, those are not to be under- 
stood, whfjte case is more odious than the person himself to whom 
the grant is made. Such are pirates, robbers, deserters, refugees. 
Tho expression of the name of the nation of the companions per- 
mittc-'i, shews sufficiently that tho permission does not extend to 
others. 

XX. The ri^ht of Safe Passage, since it proceeds from the force 
of power, in a dubious case is not extinguished by the death of the 
grantor ; as wo hare said elsewhere of grants made by kings and 
other governors. 

XXI. Disputes oftc'n arise on the point of grants made with tho 
expression, At long af I thaU think proper. And theirs is the sounder 
opinion, who hold that such a grant continues, even if a new act of 
willing do not intenrene ; because in a dubious case, that is presumed 
to continue to operate, which is necessary to tho effect of right ; but 
this Is not so, when ho who made the grant has ceased to be able to 
will, as happens by death. For the person being taken away, that 
presumption of duration falls to the ground along with it, as an acci* 
dent ends with the substance. 

XXII. Safe Passage implies safety beyond the territory of the 
grantor, as well as within it : for it is given against the right of war, 
which is not limited to the territory; as we have elsewhere said. 

XXIII. Tho Ransom of Prisoners is very favourably looked 
upon, especially among Christians, to whom the dirino law especially 
commands this kind of mercy. The Ransoming of Captives is a great 
and excelling office of justice, are tho words of Lactantius. So Am- 
brose. And ho defends tho act of himself and the Church in break- 

Chap. XXL] OF TRUCE ; OF SAFE PASSAGE, &c. 439 

iDg up, ercn the consecrated yessels of tho church, in order to redeem 
captives. The ornament of the 8<»craments is the redeeming 0/ captives; 
and much to the same effect. 

XXIY. 1 These considerations prevent me from approving, 
without distinction, of those laws which forbid the ransom of captives, 
as we learn that the old Roman laws did. No city holds its captive 
citizens more cheap than we do, says some one in the Roman Senate. 
And the city is called, by Livy, little indulgent to its captives, from 
early time. So Horace calls the ransom of captives a foul condition, 
and an example leading to evil, loss added to shame. But in fact, 
the blame which Aristotle casts upon the Lacedaemonian institution is 
also ascribed to the Roman; that everything has reference to war, 
as if the safety of the state depended on that alone. But if we 
consider the interests of humanity, it would often be better that tho 
right which is sought in war should be lost, than that a great num- 
ber of men, our relations or fellow-countrymen, should be left in a 
condition of the deepest calamity. 

2 Therefore such a law does not appear to be just, except it 
appear that there is need of such rigour, that more or greater evils, 
otherwise inevitable, may bo averted. For in such a necessity, as 
the prisoners themselves should, by the law of charity, bear their lot 
patiently, so may this be enjoined them ; and others may be directed 
not to do anything to the contrary ; according to what wo have else- 
whcro said of surrendering a citizen for the public good. 

XXV. According to our habits, those taken in war do not be- 
come slaves: but I do not doubt that the right of exacting the 
amount of the ransom may be transferred, by the person who has 
the possession of the prisoner, to another person : for nature permits 
even incorporeal things to be alienated. 

XXVI. And the same person may owe the amount of ransom 
to more persons than one, if, when he has been lot go by one, and 
the price is not yet paid, he is captured by another : for these are 
different debts from different causes. 

XXVIL The agreement concerning the amount of ransom, can- 
not be rescinded on account of the prisoner being discovered to be 
richer than he was supposed to be ; because, by the external Law of 
Nations, which is the subject of our present enquiry, no one is com- 
pelled to give more than he promised in a contract, at a price different 
from the current price, if there has been no deceit : as may be under- 
stood from what wo have said about Contracts. 

XXVIIL From what we have said, that prisoners with us are not 
slarcs, it follows that there is an end of that acquisition of a right 
over all that belongs to the person, as well as the person ; for that this 
is a mere accessory to the power over the person, we have elsewhere 
said. Therefore nothing else becomes the property of the captor, 
but what he specially takes possession of. And therefore, if the 
prisoner has anything secreted with him, that is not acquired by the 

440 or FAITH WHILE WAB COXTKUES ; l«r. [Book IIL 

eaptor, because it was nerer in his potsession. So Panlus the jarist 
gare his opinion against Bmtns and Manilios, that he who came into 
possession of a piece of land, did not acquire possession of a treasoro 
which he did not know to be there ; because not knowing of it, he 
could not be the possessor of it. From which it follows, that property 
so concealed may be applied to furnish the amount of ransom ; the 
ownership haring been retained bj the prisoner. 

XXIX. 1 This is also a frequent question : whether the ransom 
agreed upon, and not paid before death, be due from the heir. The 
answer appears to mo to be obTious, if the prisoner die in captiTitj, 
that it is not due : for the promise was, on the condition that the 
prisoner should be liberated, and a dead man is not liberated. On 
the other hand, if he dies when he is at liberty, it is due ; for he 
had already got the thing for which the price was promised. 

2 I undoubtedly confess that the agreement may bo made other- 
wise, so that, from the moment of the contract, the price may bo abso- 
lutely due, and the prisoner may be retained, not now as a prisoner 
of war, but as a pledge given by himself : and on the other hand, that 
it may be corenanted that the payment of the price shall take places 
if on a certain appointed day, he who is captire^ be alire and free. 
But such conditions, as being less natural, are not to be presumed, 
except upon manifest cTidonco. 

XXX. This question also is propounded : whether ht ought to 
return into capti?ity, who was set free, on the compact that he should 
cause another to bo liberated, who, by dying, prevented that beiug 
done. We have clscwhoro said that the liberal promise of a third 
person is fulfilled with sufficient exactness, if nothing be omitted on 
tho part of the promisor ; but that in onerous promises, the promisor 
is obliged to an equivalent. And therefore in the question proposed, 
tho person liberated will not bo bound to return himself into cap- 
tivity ; for that was not tho agreement, and the favour which is to bo 
shown to liberty, does not allow us to suppose it tacitly understood ; 
nor ought ho to take his liberty, as a gain, without a consideration ; but 
ho must give tho estimated value of tho thing, which itself ho cannot 
give. For this is more agreeable to tho simplicity of nature, than tho 
rulos which tho Roman jurists give, in speaking of an action on a pro- 
mise made in formal terms ; or a suit when a thing is given for a causo, 
and tho causo does not follow. 

I 

CHAPTER XXn. 

Of the Faith of subordinate Powers in a War. 

Sect. I. 

The kinds of Commanders, 

U. 

How far their conventions 

VIII. 

oblige the sovereign^ 

IX. 

III. 

Or give occasion <](f obliga^ 

Hon, 

X. 

IV. 

How, if any thing be done 

* 

against commission. 

XI. 

V. 

In such case is the other 
party bound 9 

VI. 

What military commanders 
or magistrates may do to^ 

XII. 

wards inferiors. 

XIII. 

VII. 

To make Peace is not the 
business of military com* 

manders. 

Is it 80 to make a Truce 9 

What security of peace and 

war they grant. 

Such pacts to be strictly in* 

terpreted. 

How is a surrender made 

and accepted^ to be inter* 

preted 9 

How J the proviso, if it 

seem good to the sovereign 9 

How, a promise to give up 

a toum9 

I. 4 MONG Public Conventions, Ulpian places this class : When Gene* 
j\^ rats make agreements. We hare said that, after faith is pledged 
by the supreme powers, we must consider that which the subordinate 
powers pledge to one another or to others: whether those subordinate 
powers are those nearest to the supreme, as Generals properly so called, 
(with regard to whom we must understand the expression of Livy, We 
know no General except him who conducts tJie war;) or those farther 
removed, of whom Cesar thus speaks, A Brigadier has one duty, a 
General another ; tJte former is to execute his orders ; the latter to act 
freely with regard to the whole posture of affairs, 

n. The promises of Officers of this kind give rise to two kinds of 
considerations: Whether they bind the supreme authority; and 
whether they bind themselves. The former question is to be decided 
by what we have said ; that we are bound by his acts whom we have 
selected as the minister of our will, whether that will be specially 
expressed, or be collected from the natiu'e of the command committed 
to him. For he who gives the means of acting, gives, as far as 
depends on him, the means which are necessary to such action : which, 
in moral matters, is to be understood in a moral manner. Therefore 
there are two ways in which subordinate authorities bind the 
supremo authority by their acts : either by doing that which, on pro- 
bable grounds is conceived to be included in their office ; or beyond 
that, committed to them by some special assignment of authority, 
known to those whose interests are dealt with. 

ni. There are also other ways in which the supreme authority 

442 OF THE FAITH OF SUBORDINATE [Book UL 

h bound, in virtue of an antecedent act of its ministerB, but so that 
that act is not, properly speaking, the cause of the obligation, but the 
occasion ; and that, in two ways ; either by consent of the superior, 
or by the thing itself. Consent appears by sanction of the act ; not 
express only, but tacit also ; that is, when the supreme authority knew 
what was done, and allowed it to be done ; and in this case, if no other 
reason [besides consent] can be probably assigned, we have elsewhere 
stated what course the matter must take. The superior authority are 
obliged by the thing itself to this extent; that they are not to be 
made better off by the loss of other persons ; that is, that they are 
either to fulfil the contract by which they wbh to obtain an adrantage, 
or are to giye up the advantage ; a case of equity which we have 
elsewhere discussed. And so far, and no further, acts which are 
performed so as to bring utility to us, are to be said to be valid. On 
the other hand, they cannot be excused from the charge of injustice, 
who, while they condemn the compact, retain that which without the 
compact they would not have: as when the Roman Senate neither 
could approve the act of On. Domitius, nor would rescind it : of which 
kind of occurrence we have many in history. 

IV. 1 We must also repeat what we have said before, that he 
who placed a person in a command, is bound, even though the person 
so placed acts against secret orders ; at least, within the limits of bis 
public function. This rule of equity was rightly followed by the 
Roman Pnetor, in the action against an Agent ; for it is not everything 
done by the Agent which obliges the Principal, but such things only as 
are contracted in the matter for which his agency was employed ; but 
he concerning whom public notice was given, that contracts with him 
would not bo held good by the Principal, does not stand in the place 
of the PrincipaL But if notice were given, and were not publicly 
known, the Principal is bound. Also the condition of the agency is 
to be observed ; for if the Principal directed the contract to be made 
on certain rules, or by the intervention of a certain person, it is just 
that the contract should be valid on these conditions. 

2 From which it follows, that some kings and peoples may be more, 
and others less bound, by the contracts of their generals, if their laws 
and rules are sufficiently known. If these are not commonly known, 
the interpretation must be followed which conjecture dictates; ia 
such a way that that is understood to be conceded without which 
the functions which belong to a person's duty cannot be conveniently 
carried out. 

3 If a subordinate authority has exceeded the bounds of his com- 
mission, ho will be bound, if he cannot perform what it has promised, 
to an estimated equivalent : except some law sufficiently known pre- 
vent that also. But if deceit be added, that is, if he pretended to an 
authority greater than he had, he will then be bound, both for the 
damage done by his fault, and as a criminal, to the penalty corre- 

Chap. XXH.] POWERS IN A WAR. 443 

sponding to hiB guilt. On the first ground, his goods are liable, fmd 
if they are insufficient, his hibour, or his personal liberty: on the 
second ground, his person also is liable, or his goods, or both, accord- 
ing to the quantity of the transgression. What we hare said of deceit, 
will hold, even if the person so acting made an attestation that he did 
not intend himself to bear the obligation ; because the debt due for 
the damage, and the penalty due for the crime, are connected there- 
with, not by a voluntary, but by a natural tie. 

y. And since, in all cases, either the supreme power is bound, or 
its minister, it is therefore certain that the other party is bound also : 
nor can it be alleged that the contract is one-sided. 

We have considered the relation of subordinates to superiors ; let 
us now see what power they have over inferiors. 

VI. I hare no doubt, that a General can bind soldiers, and 
a Magistrate, citizens, within the limits of those acts which are cus- 
tomarily done at their command : in other cases, consent is necessary. 
On the other side, the compact of a general or magistrate will give 
advantages to their inferiors absolutely, in things simply useful ; for 
that was sufficiently comprehended in their power: also in those 
things which have an onus annexed to the utility, within the limits 
of their customary command, absolutely : and out of those limits, if 
they accept the compact ; which agrees with what we have delivered 
concerning stipulations for a third party on grounds of Natural Law. 
These general principles will become plainer by examining specific 
cases. 

VII. To negociate concerning the causes and consequences of the 
war, does not belong to the general of the army ; for it is not a part of 
the conduct of the war, to end the war. Even if he bo appointed to 
the command with the greatest powers, those are to be understood as 
relating to the conduct of the war. The answer of Agesilaus to tho 
Persians was, that, To make peace w<u a matter for the State, Sallust 
says, The peace which A, Atbinua had made with JugurtJia, untJunU the 
authority of the Senate, the Senate rescinded. And in Livy : How can 
that pecu^e be valid which we have made witJiout the authority of the 
Senate^ and the command of the Roman People f So the convention of 
Caudsd, so that of Numantia, did not bind the Roman People, as wo 
have elsewhere explained. And so far that dictum of Posthumius is 
true. If tJie people can be bound to anything^ it can be bound to every- 
thing; that is, of those things which do not pertain to tho conduct of 
tho war : for that this is the application of the words, is shown by 
what precedes; of surrender; of engagements with regard to giving 
up or burning a city ; of change of the state. 

VIII. To grant a Truce, is the business of a general ; and not 
only of the supreme general, but also of subordinate ones ; namely, 
to those whom they besiege or blockade, as far as concerns them- 
selves and their forces. For such truces do not bind other generals 

444 OF THE FAITH OF SUBORDINATE [Book IIL 

of equal auihorit J ; as the hUtorj of Fabius and MarccUns in hirj 
declares. 

IX. 1 In the Bamc waj, it is not the businesB of generals to gire up 
men, conquests, lands, obtained in war. Bt this rule, Svria was taken 
from Tjgrancs, though Lucullus had giren it to him. Of Sophonisba* 
who had been taken prisoner in war, Scipio says that the judgment 
and decision of the Senate and People of Rome was to determine ; and 
that therefore ^lasinissa, though the general bj whom she was taken, 
could not giro her libertv. That over other things which are taken 
as prize of war, a certain disposal is conceded to persons in authority, 
we hare seen ; not so much from the force of their power, as finom the 
customs of each people: on which subject we hare already spoken 
sufiicientlr, 

2 It is howcTer in the power of generals to grant the possession 
of tilings not yet acquired : because towns sometimes and men often 
surrender themselres in war, on condition of Utos being spared, or 
liberty, or property ; among which concessions generally, the state of 
things does not allow tho decision of the supreme authority to be 
asked. And by parity of reason, this right is also giren to commanders 
who are not the highest, within the limits of the matters which are 
committed to them to execute. Maharbal had given to some Romans 
who had escaped from the battle at Trasimenum, Annibal being absent 
for so long a timo as to leave room for this, not only his pledge for 
their lives, but, if they gave up their arms, tho liberty of departing 
each with a single suit of apparel But Annibal retained them, 
allci^ing that it was not in the power of Maharbal to pM'je himself, 
ivithout consulting him, to those who surrendered, that they should be free 

from harm and penalty. The judgment of Livy respecting this act 
follows : This pledge was observed by Annibal with Punic faith. 

3 And thcrcforo wo must take what Cicero savs, in tho case of 
Rabirius, as coming from an advocate, not a judge. He maintains 
that Saturninus was lawfully put to death by Rabirius, having been 
drawn from the Capitol by C. Marius on his faith given. How, ho 
says, coidd faith be given without a decree of the Senate? And ho 
reasons as if Marius alone woro bound by such a pledge. But C. Ma- 
rius had received from the Senate the commission of acting so as to 
preserve tho empire and tho majesty of the Roman people : and in 
that power, which was tho highest, according to Roman custom, who 
can deny that there was comprehended the right of granting impunity, 
if in that way all peril might be averted from the commonwealth ? 

X. But in theso pacts of generals, because they act concerning 
the affairs of others, so far as the nature of contracts allows, tho 
interpretation is to be limited ; namely, so that the supremo power is 
not bound by their act more than it intended, and so that they do not 
suffer damago by undertaking their ofiico. 

XI. And thus ho who is admitted to a pure surrender by tho 

Chap. XXTT.] POWERS IN A WAR. 445 

general, is understood to bo accepted on the condition that the 
victorious people or king is to determine his fate : of which examples 
are to bo found in Gentius the Illyrian, and Perseus the Macedonian, 
of whom the former surrendered himself to Anicius, and the latter to 
Paulus. 

XU. The condition added, This to be valid \f tJie Roman People 
80 judge^ which you often find in conrentions, will produce the effect, 
that if that sanction do not follow, the general is held to nothing, 
except so far as he is himself bettered by the transaction. 

XIII. Also they who have promised to give up a town may dis- 
miss the garrison ; as we read that the Locrians did. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Of Private Faith in War. 

Sect. L Thci Priraie Penons art X. 

noi bound bf an engafft- 
meni to an enemjf^ refuUd. 
That they are bound even XL 

io a firate and a robber^ 
shewn. 

A Minor it not txcepted. XII. 

Doet Error fret ut 9 
The objection from public 
UtUitp tolved. XIII. 

Application to a promise to 
return into prison : XIV. 

To a promise of not return^ 
ing to a certain place ; of XY. 

not bearing arms : 

Of not escaping. X V L 

A prisoner cannot give htm- 
self to another. 

IL 

III. 
IV. 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 
IX. 

Art priraie persons to be 
compelled bg the state to do 
what theg have promised 9 
What interpretadon is to 
be applied in such com- 
pacts. 

How the words, life, dothes, 
aniral of help, are to be 
taken. 

Who is reckoned to have 
returned to the enemy. 
What is just assistance tn 
conditional surrender. 
Points relating to execu- 
tion do not make a condition. 
Of Hostages for the per- 
formance of such compacts. 

I. rrillE dictum of Cicero is sufficiently well known ; — Even if »n- 
I dividuaU under tJie pressure of the time ha^je promised anything to 
the enemy, faith also is to he observed in that : individuals meaning either 
solders or ciTilians : for it makes no difference which they be, as to 
the obligation of good faith. It is strange that there should hare 
been found masters of law who taught that pacts made publicly with 
onomieSy bind us to good faith; but that those which are made by 
private persons, do not. For since priv^ate persons hare prirate 
rights which they can subject to obligation, and since enemies are 
capable of acquiring rights, what can there bo to impede the obliga- 
tion ? Add, that except we establish this rule, there is giTen occasion 
of bloodshed, and impediment to liberty; for if the faith of private 
persons be removed, the former can often not bo prevented, nor the 
latter obtained by prisoners. 

11. Indeed, not only is our word binding when given to an enemy 
whom the Law of Nations acknowledges as such, but even to a robber 
or a pirate ; as we have said above, in speaking of public faith. There 
is this difference, that if an unjust fear, impressed by another, has been 
the force impelling to the promise, he who made the promise may 
seek restitution ; or if the other will not give it, may take it by his 
own power. This does not hold in the case of fear proceeding from 
a war public according to the Law of Nations. But if an oath be 
added, ho who promised must by all means perform what ho has 
promised, if he wishes to escape the crime of perjury. Yet such a per- 

Chap. XXIIL] OP PRIVATE FAITH IN WAR. 447 

jury, if committed towards an enemy, is commonly punished by men; 
if it be committed against robbers or pirates, it is commonly orcr- 
looked, in consequence of the hatred borne to such persons. 

m. In this case of prirate faith wo do not eicept a Minor, 
who is in such a condition that he understands the act. For the 
allowances which are made to minors are made by the Civil Law. 
And we are now considering the results of the Law of Nations. 

IV. With regard to Error, we have elsewhere said that there is a 
right of receding from a contract, if that which was by error given in 
trust have, in the mind of him who entrusted it, the force of a con- 
dition. 

V. 1 How far the power of private persons, to make agreements, 
extends, is a more difiicult question. That what Is public property 
cannot be alienated by a private person, is sufficiently plain : for if 
that was not even permitted to generals, as we have proved just now, 
much less is it to private persons. But it may be questioned concern- 
ing their own actions and property ; because it may seem that these 
also cannot be conceded to the enemy without some damage of the 
party: whence it may seem that such pacts with the enemy are 
unlawful for citizens, on account of the eminent jurisdiction of the 
state ; and for regular soldiers, on account of their military oath. 

2 But it is to be considered that those pacts which are made in 
order to avoid a greater or certain evil, ought to be reckoned more 
useful than hurtful to the public also ; because the lesser evil assumes 
the nature of a good. Nor does fidelity to the state or his superior, 
since by this the person does not abdicate his power over himself and 
his property ; nor does the public utility alone, without the authority 
of law ; produce such an effect, that what is done, even if it be done 
against duty, shall be void and destitute of jural effect. 

3 Law indeed may take from subjects, either perpetual or tem- 
porary, their power : but the law does not always do this ; for it is 
tender of the interests of citizens. For human laws, as we have else- 
where said, have then, and then only, a binding force, if they are made 
in a humane manner, not if they impose burthens which are repug- 
nant to reason and nature. And therefore special laws and precepts 
which have, upon the face of them, anything of this kind, are not to bo 
held as laws : and general laws are to be interpreted indulgently, so 
as to exclude cases of extreme necessity. 

4 If an act, which was interdicted by a law or precept, and de- 
prived of its validity by prohibition, could be interdicted with reason- 
able right, the act of the private person will be void ; but at the same 
time he is liable to punishment for having promised what was not in 
his power, and especially if he did it under oath. 

VI. The promise of a prisoner to return into captivity is rightly 
allowed : for it does not render the condition of the prisoner worso 
than it was. And therefore Regnlus, in doing what he did, acted not 
gloriously only, as some think, but also as he ought. BeguluSf says 

♦4 '5 OF PRIVATE FAITH K WAR. 'Bees IIL 

% 

li^.x 'J\%*2F^ '^ ^tkc.ri 'J usryn^. Nor 2S h A icc=ri oc^mojo. ibss. M 
}:vri.t^ bLji, £>!; kij^-v UK v^rtcref vlj^ ftvihai Lis: f^>r vbsi he 
'^rtt \iA yrr,zL^a0t £« KLfcw how Hkfzlj th^ vj«. Asd io vhh resud 
t/^ v>; ur::. p.*iKA(eTi, M Q*s21jm UsJi \zjt narj ocs of oil amLors; 
Av7^^* »3^i tM( buy i^id iho rv;U t& fgjfinw ♦'■*■■*, jyr tiey liid by ti^ir 

VIL 1 Aiio priMCien often pmczkiK doc to retcm to a certain 
pLvy;:, or Dot to bear arski aeaiost him who hac tiiem in his jiowet. 
W'; Lar^ an ezaaple of the fonner caie in Thncrdides; wfaen the 
lu.fju/jtz^ promiie the Laoedaemooians tha: they will quit Pel<^K>nne- 
tu«y arid nerer mum. The latter kind of engagement is nov eoxnznon. 
We liare an old eiample in PoljhiBft, when the XnmidiaDs are do- 
n.\hk0A br AmUc^f oo condition of nerer bearing arms against the 
Carthagiiuani. Procopioi in hii Gothic hiitorr has a similar pact. 

2 fy>me moralists pronouioe thb pact Toid, because it is againsl 
the dutj which a person owes to his eomttrr. But what is against 
dutv, is not neeessarilr and of eoone roid : as we hare alreadr ex- 
pl lineal. And in the next place, it is not against duty to obtain one's 
liberty by promising that which is already in the enemy's power. For 
tbe cause of the country is not worsened by sach an act; for he who 
is a captiTe has ceased to be of any ralne to that cause. 

VIIL Also some promise not to make their escape. They are 
>^j»und by tbis promise, eren though they were under restraint when 
they promised ; coutrary to the opinion of some moralists. For in this 
way, men's lives are sared, and their captirity made less harsh. If, 
however, a j^erson, having ma/le such a promise, is afterwards put in 
ch{iiri«, he will W liberated from his promise, if he made it to avoid 
}j4i\ui[ put in chains. 

IX. A question is raised, idly enough, whether he who is captured 
can hurrendcr liimself to another than the captor. For it is abund- 
antly certain that no one can by a compact of his take away a right 
from another. And the captor has already acquired a right, either by 
the rij;lit of war, or partly by the right of war, partly by the conces- 
sion of the superior authority which makes the war ; as we hare ex- 
plained al/ovc. 

X. With regard to the eflfects of compacts, there is a noted 
queHtion, whether private persons, if they are negligent in fulfilling 
their engagements, can be compelled by their own authorities. And 
the sounder opinion is, that they are compellable only in a regular 
war, on account of the Law of Nations, by which the belligerents are 
bound to fulfil the rules of justice to each other, oven with regard to 
the acts of private persons ; as for instance, if ambassadors had been 
violated by private persons. So Cornelius Nepos, as Gellius informs 
UH, had written, that many of the senators were of opinion, that those 
of the ton captives who wore unwilling to return, should be sent to 
llunnibal under guard. 

Chap. XXIIL] OF PRIVATE FAITH IN WAR. 449 

XI. With regard to Interpretation, the rules are to be obserrod 
in this case also, which we hayo seyeral times mentioned ; that we aro 
not to recede from the propriety of the words, except in order to 
ayoid an absurdity, or for some other good probable reason: that in 
a doubtful case we are rather to interpret the words against him who 
gaye the law : and the like. 

XII. He who has coyenanted for his life, has not a right to his 
liberty also. Under the name of clothes, arms are not included : for 
they are different in kind. Aid is said to haye arrired, if it bo in 
sight, though it be doing nothing; for the presence of it has an 
efficacy. 

Xni. But he cannot be siud to haye returned to the enemy ac- 
cording to his promise, who returned secretly in order to go away 
again immediately : for ho was to be understood to mean by return, 
that he was again to be in the power of the enemy. The contrary 
quibbling interpretation is called by Cicero silly cunning, inyolying 
fraud and perjury. And this interpretation is called by Gellius a 
fraudulent cunning; and those who had employed it were noted as 
ignominious by the censor, and made incapable of giying eyidencc, 
and disreputable. 

XIV. When an agreement is made for surrendering a city except 
proper sAd arriye, such aid is to be understood as makes the danger 
cease. 

XV. This also is to be noted, that if any coyenant is made as to 
the mode of executing the conyention, that does not become a condi- 
tion of the agreement : as, if it were said that it is to be discharged 
in a certain place, which place afterwards changes its master. 

XVI. With regard to Hostages, what wo haye said aboye is to 
be obseryed, that in general, they are accessories to the principal act : 
but it may be coyenanted that the obligation shall be disjunctiye ; 
that either something shall be done, or the hostages retained. But in 
a doubtful case, we must hold to the most natural supposition, that 
they are only accessories. 

GG 

CHAPTER XXIV 

Of Tacit FaiOu 

£i/.i. L U^m Fmtih u U U tmsali^ wmmaa. imt Mtf hmrm tU 

m&nj0rfU4. 

FmnefKT. 

IL 

Eammj^ f • ««« v4«. «u4c» 

V. 

rjf^,^SifMhm,mJ6cmMi 

<4 (< tecnb vakdlrr £ir yr^ 

i9<m,z^mA^ 

U/^6tm ^m. 5^m>rrt^. 

TL 

Of tmeii Jpfrmmi ^f m 

IIL 

tjf ^me wU mj^M fw w 

Sp^mmm. 

fmi% « PmwUj. 

111. 

Of tmeit Mfmimm tf ^^ 

IT. 

Smck « Mf My mmJk€ md> 

■itlTBf 

L TT is veil aid bj Jaroleniify tliat fome thinfi arc a^ned upon in 

X ul^oee. Thii fa^vpcitf in pablie oooTCcuong, mad in pmmte, and 
in mixed* TIk eaoie if tfaif ; that eoofent, boverer indicated and 
aeeepted, hai the force of transfeiring ri^t. Bat there are other 
fi|;ns of eonfcnt, hende* words and leuen, aa ve hare more than 
ODfOe indicated. 

IL 8oaie are b j nature inherent in eertain aco. For an eiample, 
take faim who coming from the enemj, or &om stzai^eiB» girea him- 
•elf into the hands of another people or king. For that fodi a per- 
son tacitlj binds himself not to do anjthing against that state in which 
he fte«ks refa^o, cannot be doubted. Wherefore thej are not to be 
follower], who saj that the act of Zoprrns was iree from blame : for 
his fidelity to bis king docs not excuse his perfidy towards those to 
whom he fle^l. The same must be said of Sextos; the same of Tar- 
quin who went orer to Gabii. Tirgil speaks of Sinon's treachery and 
crime. 

IIL So he who cither asks for or grants a parley, tacitly promises 
that it tball be without rlamagc to the parties parleying. When ene- 
mies are harmed under pretence of a colloquy, Liry says that tho 
law of nations is riolated : adding, Colloquium perfide violaiutn. So 
Valerius Mazimus, of On. Domitius, who had drawn in Bituitns, 
king of tho Arremi, under pretence of a colloquy, and had then 
thrown him into chains: Too great greediness of glory made him perfi^ 
dious. And hence we must wonder why the writer of the eighth Book 
of Cesar's Gallic War, whether it be Hirtius or Oppius, relating a 
similar act of Labicnus, adds : He judged, that his (Comius's) faith-' 
lessness might be s^ippressed without perfidy; except wo are to look upon 
this as tho judgment of Labicnus, not of the writer. 

IV. But this tacit will [or promise] is not to be drawn beyond tho 
limits which I baTo stated : for provided the collocutors suffer no harm, 
to turn away the enemy from warlike measures by the appearance of 

Chap. XXIV.] OP TACIT FAITH. 451 

a colloquy, and in the mean time to push on our own dcBigns, has no 
perfidy in it, and is reckoned among good stratagems. And thus 
they who complained that Perseus was deceiyed hy the hope of 
peace, took account, not so much of right and of good faith, as of 
magnanimity and glory : as may be understood by what we hare said 
of stratagems. Of the same kind was the trick by which Asdrubal 
saved his army from the Ausetanian jungle; and by which Scipio 
Africanus Major learnt the situation of the camp of Syphax : both 
which stories are told in Livy. And these examples are imitated by 
L. Sylla, in the social war at Esemia, as we read in Frontinus. 

y. There are also certain mute signs which have a signification 
from custom, as formerly fillets and oHye-branches ; among the Mace- 
donians the raising of spears; among the Romans the placing the 
shields on the head, the sign of a suppliant surrender ; which imme- 
diately obliges the persons to lay down their arms. As to him who 
signifies that ho receiyes the surrender, whether he be obliged, and 
how far, is to be determined by what we haye said aboye. At present 
a white flag is a tacit sign of asking for a parley; and binds the askcrs 
as much as if they used words. 

YL How far engagements made by generals are to be supposed 
tacitly approyed by the people or the king, we haye also discussed 
aboye ; namely, that it is so to be understood, when the act is known, 
and anything is done, or not done, of which no other reason can be 
assigned but the will to approye the conyontion. 

VII. The remission of a penalty cannot be collected merely from 
silence. It is necessary that there be added some act, which either 
of itself shews friendship, or a league on the ground of friendship, or 
an opinion of the existence of yirtues which may giyo rise to a condo- 
nation of preyious acts ; whether that opinion be expressed in words, 
or by means of things which by custom are appointed to conyey such 
meaning. 

a a2 

CHAPTER XXV. 

The Conclusion^ with admonitiona to Good Faith and 

Peace. 

Sect. I. AdnumiHon qf keeping IV. This is useful to the Con^ 

Faith, quered ; 

IL In War Peaee is always V. And to the Conqueror, 

to be kept in view ; Y I. And to those whose affairs 

IIL And embraced even with are doHbtfui. 

iossj espedaUy by Chris- TIL Peace made to be reUgiously 

tians, observed, 

YIII. Aspiration,and Conduskm, 

I. 1 A ND here I think that I may make an end ; not that I hare 
Xx. B&i<l ftll that might be said, but that enough has been said to 
lay the foundations ; on which, if any one will erect a fairer auperstruc- 
ture, he will be so far from being the object of any grading on my 
part, that I shall be grateful to him. Only before I dismiss the reader, 
as when I spoke of undertaking a war, I added admonitions on the duty 
of ayoiding war as much as possible, so now I will add a few admo- 
nitions which may tend in war, and after war, to the presenration of 
good faith and peace ; and of good faith, both on other accounts, and 
that the hope of peace may not be destroyed. For not only is each 
commonwealth kept together by good faith, as Cicero says, but that 
greater society of which nations are the members. If Faith be taken 
away, as Aristotle says, the intercourse of men is abolished, 

2 Therefore Cicero rightly says, that it is atrocious to break that 
faith which holds life together ; the holiest good of the human hearty as 
Seneca speaks. And this, the supreme rulers of mankind ought to 
be more careful of preserving, in proportion as they hare more 
impunity for their violations of it : so that if faith be taken away, they 
will be like wild beasts, whose strength is an object of general horror. 
And in other parts of its sphere, justice has often somewhat that is 
obscure ; but the bond of good faith is manifest of itself, and indeed 
is used to remove obscurity from all other matters. 

3 And therefore it is especially the office of kings, to cherish good 
faith ; first, for the sake of conscience, and then, for the sake of good 
opinion, by which the authority of kingdoms stands. Let them be 
certain therefore that they who instil into them acts of deceit, are 
themselves the deceivers they would make them. Doctrines cannot 
long work well, which make man unfit for society with man; and 
wo may add, hateful to God. 

II. In the next place, a mind serene and trusting in God 
cannot be retained in the whole administration of a war, except it 

Chap. XXV.] THE CONCLUSION, &c. 453 

always look to peace. As Sallust most truly says. Wise men cany 
on war for tJie sake of peace : and to this the opinion of Augustine 
agrees; and of Aristotle. It is a ferine force which is prominent 
in war; and must be tempered with humanity, that we may not 
cease to be men, by imitating brutes. 

in. If therefore a peace sufficiently safe can bo had, it is not ' 
ill secured by the condonation of offenses, and damages, and ex- ' 
pcnses: especially among Christians, to whom the Lord has given ' 
his peace as his legacy. And so St Paul, his best interpreter, exhorts ' 
us to lire at peace with all men. As Sallust says, A good man takes 
up the boginning of war reluctantly, and does not follow its extremes 
willingly. 

IV. This of itself ought to bo enough ; but often human Utility 
draws men the same way : those first who are the weakest ; for a long 
struggle with a more powerful adversary is perilous ; and as in a ship, 
we must ayert a greater calamity by some loss, putting away anger 
and hope, fallacious advisers, as Livy says. So Aristotle. 

y. But also this is for the benefit of the stronger : for as Livy 
also says, To them peace, if they grant it, is bounteous and creditable, 
and better than a victory merely hoped for. For they must recollect 
that Mars is on both sides. So Aristotle. And so in the oration 
for peace in Diodorus. And there is much to be feared from the 
courage of despair, like the dying bites of a wild beast. 

YI. If the two parties reckon themselves equal, then, as CsBsar 
holds, is the best time for treating of peace, since each trusts in 
himself. 

Vn. Peace made on any conditions whatever is, by all means, 
to be kept, on account of the sacredness of good faith, of which we 
speak ; and care must be had to avoid, not only perfidy, but anything 
which may exasperate the mind of the other party. For what Cicero 
says of private friendships, you may adapt also to public ones ; that 
as all such connexions are to bo maintained with the utmost con- 
science and good fiuth, so especially those in which a reconciliation 
has taken place of a previous enmity. 

Yin. May God write these lessons^ He who alone cannon the 
hearts of all those who have the affairs of Christendom in their 
hands : and may he give to those persons a mind fitted to understand 
and to respect Rights, divine and human ; and lead them to recollect 
always that the ministration committed to them is no less than this ; 
— that they are the governors of Man, a creature most dear to God I 

/> 

#* -. • * > I 

»:♦ 

p. 

I 
r 

I 

LATIN AND GREEK INDEX 

OF SUBJECTS AND WORDS CONTAINED IN THE WORK. 

The first Number marks the Book; the second, the Chapter; the third, the Section; the 
fonrth, the Article or Division of the Section: except *&>* be inserted, for then the 
following Number is also the Section: prol, denotes the Prolegomena. 

Abdicari regnnm an possit. ii. 7, 26 
Abdicate filio an quid debeatnr. ii. 7, 7 
Abitus tutus quomodo sumatur. iii. 21, 16 
Abrahamus bello a^juyit extraneos a fide. iL 

15, 9, 6 
Abrahamus res hostiles sibi acquisitas judicat 

et dedicat. iii. 6, 1, 1 
Abraham! filii ex Cethuranon habuemnt par- 
tem hereditatis. il. 7, 8, 3 
Absentes an partem pnede ferant. iiL 6, 

17,6 
Absentium jus prsBsentibus accrescit. ii. 5, 20 
AbsoWere cur satius quam condemnare. iL 

23,6,1 
Absolutio a juramento, nnde Tim habeat. ii. 

13, 20, 2 
Abstinentite in solo pacatorum exempla. iii. 

17,2 
Absurda nemo credendus est velle. il. 16, 22 
AbsurduB intellectns, litandus. ii. 16, 2, & 

Acceptatio pro altero facta quid operetur. ii. 

11, 14, Si 17 
Acceptatio an pnecedere alienationem possit. 

li.6,2 
Accessionis jus quale, ii. 8, 11, et seqq. 
Accipi plus potest quam quod nostrum est, 

sed sub onere restituendi quod excedit. iii. 

1,4,1 
Accusare an Christiano couTcniat. ii. 20, 

16,16 
Accusatores ex officio pnblicoconstitni melius. 

ii. 20, 16 

Achsi dolls abstinebant. iii. 1, 20, 3 

Acquiri bello non possunt que penes hostes 
sunt. Sed non hostium. iii. 6, 6, & 26, 1. 
Acquinintur bello quoad jus externum qu» 
hostis noster bello acquisiverat. iii. 6, 7, 1 

Acquisitio naturalis in bello. iii. 6, 1, 1, 2. 
Rerum originaria. ii. 3, 1. Acquisitiones 
improprie dictie juris gentium, ii. 8, 1 

Actio injuriaa an Christiano conveniat. iL 20, 
10, 1, 2 

Actionum injnstarum gradus. ii. 20, 29, 1, 3 

forensium et belli iidem fontes. 

ii. 1, 2, 1 

Actor ut bellum yitetur re dubia potins ce- 
dere debet, ii. 23, 11 

Actus homini inevitabiles an puniri poisint. 
ii. 20, 19. Qui humanam societatem non 
spectant, puniendi non sunt. ii. 20, 20. Ex 
more communes nemini prohibendi. iL 3, 
22. Intemi an punibiles inter homines. iL 
20, 18. Imperfecti an puniantur jure gen- 
tium, ii. 20, 39. Contra conscientiam illi- 
citi. ii. 23, 2. Publici et privati in bello 
publico. ilL 6, 10. Bcneficl ii. 12, 2. Per- 
mutatorii. ii. 12, 3. Diremtorii. ibid, Com- 
municatorii. ii. 12, 4. Mixti. ii. 12, 6. Po- 
sitiyi et negativi quantum differant. ii. 16, 
17, 2. Communes a dividuis disting^endi 
circa restitntionem. iii. 10, 4. Contra ju- 
ramentum factus quando sit yitiosus tan- 
turn, quando et irritus. ii. 13, 19. Uumani 
quotuplices. ii. 12, 1. 

*A6€(rroTa. ii. 8, 7 

Admiralitatis natura. ii. 12, 26. Contraotoi. 
iL12,4 

456 

INDEX BERUM PR-ECIPUARUM, 

AdomA a regno exheredatos. it. 7, 25 
AdopUUns ex eonjectnrs TolmiUria nieeedit. 

fi. 7, 8, 1 
Adopthri Don mccedont in rtgou a popnlo 

delatk. ii. 7, 16 
Adnlter et adnltera ad qnam restitationem 

teneantor. ii. 27, 15 
AdTocatis jus. L 3» 21« 3 
if\dificare in littore an lieeat et qnatenns. iL 

2,15,2 
.Sdificatioin man ant littore. iL 3, 9, 2 
.£qnalitM exigendi in eontractn qnalii re- 

qnirator, et qnare. iL 12, 11, 1. In con- 

tractibas reqniiita qnotnplez. iL 12, 8. 

B«i in contractitms qnalit. iL 12, 12, 1 
JEqoiTOcatio. iiL 1, 10. Vide Locntio am- 

blgna. 
JEm et aormn didnd poanint. iL 8, 21 
iEtas eit qnid penonale. iL 7, 18; 2 
^tolomm mot. iiL 20, 31 
Afromm mot drca prsdam. iii. 6^ 14, 3 
Agamemnonis Jnramentnm de re illidta. iL 

13,6 
Ager poteit rendi menrara nominata, non 

tamen ad mensuram. iL 8^ 12 
Agri difif i, sire anignati rire limitati : men- 

fora comprehensi, arcifinii sire oocnpatorii. 

ii. 3, 16, 1. Capti qoando intelligantar. iii. 

6, 4. Capti publici fiant. iii. 6, 11, 1. 

Capti : de his Hebrasortim, Lacedsmonio- 

mm, et Romanonun mos et coosaetudo. 

iiL 6, 11, 2. PriTati in dubio non censentor 

arcifinii. ii. 8, 12, 1. Pottliminio recipion- 

tur. iiL 9, 13, 1 
Agricolis parcendam, iii. 11, 11, 1 
Ager Boeotus secundum fines qui ante bellnm 

erant intelligendus. ii. 16, 6 
Agesilai dictnm. iii. 1, 6, 2 
'Ayif. ii. 21, 14,2 

Agnatica successio linealis. ii. 7, 23 
Alapam occidendo altemm arcere an lieeat 

jure natar», an evangelico. ii. 2, 10, 1 
Alendi liberi, etiam Tolgo quaesiti : etiara ex 

incestis, quod jus Romannm sprevit. iL 7,4, 2 
Alexander latro et pnedo diclns. ii. 1, 1, 3 
Algerienses prsdones. iii. 8, 19, 2 
Aliena res occnpari potest, ad vitandum pe» 

ricnlnm. iii. 1, 2, 2. Ad debiti consecntio- 

nem accipi qnando possit. ii. 7, 2, 1, 2. 

Alienam rem accipere pro debito non licet, 

ubi debitam per judicium consequi datur. 

ibid, Restituere unde et quatenus tene- 

amor. ii. 10, 1, 2. Reddens, prsemium in- 

^entionis non recte petit, ii. 10, 1, 5 

Alienandi sna jns natorale. S. ^ 1, 3 
Alienati imperii exemfria. L 3, 12, 3; 6 
Alienatio reqnirit actnm externum et 

tionem. ii. 6, 1, 2 
Alienatioiiit reqnisita quedam mere wbb^ 

juris drilis. ii.6, 1 
AJieDontiqBomodolioeat.n. 2,6,1; 7; 11 
qoi ntitnr in neeeiBtate, tenetor ad 

restitntionem. iL 2, 9 
debito nemo (Migatnr natmalitcr tM 

ha*res. n. 14, 10; iL 21, 19; iiL 2, 1, 1 
AUmenta an liberis ddwantnr, et quo eeoaa. 

U.7,4,1,3 
'AXi|6opKcIy. ii. 13, 13 
Allodialia regna qnam snecessionem aeqaan- 

tur. ii. 7, 20, 1 
AUnvio cujns natmaliter. ii. 8; 11, 13 
— qnando eedat proximomm pnedionm 

dominis. iL 8, 12, 2, & 13, & 15 
AWei mntatio an fines immnteC n. 3; 16, 1 ; 17 
Alvens siccatns cnjns natmraliter. iL 8; 9. 

Privatis qnando oedaL iL 8^ 13; 1& O^ 

jnre gentium, ii. 8, 9 
'Afidpnifia quid. HL 11, 4, 3 
Amens promittendo non obligatnr. iL 11,5^1. 

Amenti falsnm dicere, non est mendadnm. 

iiL 1, 12, 1. Amentes populi, an dimiiniiim 

habeant. ii. 22, 10 
Amici qui sint in jure postliminiL iiL 92, 1. 

Amicorum causa bellum recte snscipitnr. 

ii. 25, 5. Amicitia non ex sola indigentia 

nascitur. ii. 1, 9, 3. AmidtisB conrentio in 

pace quid operetur. iii. 20, 40 
AmmonitiB nee fo&derati, nee perpetui hostes 

Ilebrseorum. ii. 15,9,5 
*Afi<f>ifio\ia apud Rhetores. ii. 16, 4, 1 
Animantia muta alunt sobolem. ii. 7, ^ 2. 

Animantibus quie ruri inserriunt parcen- 

dum. iii. 12, 4, 4 
*Av6po\ri^la quid. iiL 2, 3, 1 
Angaristus sequi quo sensu a Christo jube- 

atur. L 2, 8 5 
Anglis regni succesuo. ii. 7, 30, 3. Anglia 

jus circa prsBdationes que contra legem 

fiuDt. U.17, 20, 2 
Animus Titiat actiones sua natura licitas. iL 

15, 9, 9 
Aiini (centum) tres ferme states, ii. 4, 7 
Antiochus an jus habuerit in Uebneos. i. 4, 

7,5 
'Ai/dptatroirad^iai figura. ii. 13,3, 3 
Anthropophagi, ii. 19, 2, 1 
Aodis factum quale, i. 4, 19, 4 
'A4>0apaia quid. iL 2, 2, 1 

AC VEBBORUM. 

467 

!4'rX<>rnv quid. ibid. 

'Airorrepeiv, ii. 20, 39, 3 

Apostolomm judicatio qaalis. ii. 22, 14, 1 

Aptitude juris species, quid. i. 1, 7; ii. 17, 2, 2. 

Horalis non fiicit nasci obligationem rest!- 

tntionia. ii. 17, 2, 2. £t proprie debitum, 

bene distinguenda ubi concnrmnt. ii. 7, 3^ 

4, 1 ; ii. 17, 2, 2 
Aqua profluens qusBnam dt ii. 2, 12 
Aquas corrumpere in bello an liceat iii. 4, 17 
Ara MiserioordiaB apud Athenienses. iL 21,5, 2 
Aratori boTi parcendum. ii. 12, 4, 4 
Arbiter de bello lectus de possessione pro- 

nuntiare debet, iii. 20, 48. Arbitri officium 

quod. iii. 20, 47. Inter reges toI judicet. 

ilnd. Arbitrorum genera, iii. 20, 44 
Arbor scientiie boni et mali, cujus rei sjmbo- 

lum. iL 2, 2, 2 
Arbor yits, cujus rei symbolum. ibid, 
Ardfinii agri, sive occupatorii. ii. 3, 16, 1 
'ApxtftxToinKn Aristoteli quae. i. 3, 6, 2 
Argumentis paribus pars utra pneferenda. 

ii. 23, 5 
Argumenta, qualia in judicandis moralibus. 

ii. 23, 3, 4 
Arma apud Roman, postliminio cur non re- 

cepta. iii. 9, 14, 2 
— hosti alicujus subministrare hostis est. 

iii. 1, By 2 
Armis hoetium uti licitum. iii. 1, 8, 4 
Armorum vox quid sigpificet. ii. 16, 5 
Arragonica successio. ii. 7, 36 
Arrogatio. ii. 5, 26 
Artium Tocabula quomodo accipienda. iL 

16,3 
Arx quid. ii. 16, 3 

AsiiB mos circa pnedam. iiL 6, 14, 3 
Asmonaei. Vide Maccabsei. 
Assecurationis contractus, ii. 12, 3, 5. Na- 

tura. ii. 12, 23 
Assertio a promissione multum distat. iii. 

1, 18, 1 
— — uiera futuri quid, et quam yim ha- 

beat. ii. 11, 2 
Asylonim jura quibns prosiut, quibus non. 

ii. 21, 5 
Atticum jus de captiris redemptis. iii. 9, 10,3 
Auctores belli injusti ab aliis discemendi. iii. 

11, 5, 1 
Aves quorum sint. iL 2, 6 
Auxilia ab una parte promissa intellignntnr 

sumtu petentis. L 16, 12, 3 
Auxilium mittere quis exousetur. ii. 16, 27,1 
I venisse quando dicatur. iii. 23, 12 

B. 

Barbari male a Grecis pro hostibns habit!. 
iL22.23 

Barclaii sententia de jure resistendi, quod 
sit penes populum, vel m^jorem ejus par- 
tem. L 4, 7, 4 

Bellandi pro alio just® causas. ii. 25, 1, 1 

jos inferioribus potestatibus quibns- 
dam concessum. i. 3, 4, 2, & 5, 1 

Bellantium extra territorium quae capiuntur 
an jure belli acquirantur. iii. 6, 26, 2 

Bellare quidam lege Tetantur. i. 5, 4 

Bellum a natnra quo sensu. L 2, 1, 5. Juris- 
gentium quo sensu. L 2, 4, 1. An Tetetur 
lege qu8B data est Noae. i. 2, 5, 2. An Te- 
tetur lege CTangelica. i. 2, 6, 1, Sf7, 1, &8, 1 

Belli definitio. L 1, 2, 1. Yocis origo. i. 1, 2, 
2. Bellum an justum aliquod jure naturae, 
i. 2, 1, 1, 2. Aliud priyatum : aliud publi- 
cum: aliud mixtum. i. 3, 1, 1. Priratum 
an licitum post constituta judicia, et quibus 
casibus. i. 3, 2, 1. Priratum aliquod lege 
Mosis permisBum. L 3, 2, 2. An cum eran- 
gelio pugnet. L 3, 3, 1. Ambrosii et Au- 
gustini dicta contra illud. i. 3, 3, 2. Justum 
ac solemne quid. iiL 3, 1, 1. £x edicto. 
iii. 3, 5. Cn. Manlli in Galatas an justum. 
i. 3, 5, 4. Caii Caeaaris in Germanos an 
justum. i 3, 5, 4. Octavii et Decimi an 
justabella : Cassii quoque bellum an justum. 
L 3, 5, 5. Publicum, solemne rei minus 
solemne. i. 3, 4, 1. Gerere resenratum ha- 
benti summum imperium. i. 3, 5, 3. Quan- 
do et quatenus ab inferioribus potestatibus 
geri possit: et an tale bellum publicnm 
dicendum. L 3, 5, 1. £t an geri possit ab 
illis ex conjectura Toluntatis superioris. i. 
3, 5, 3. An civile sit pejus tTrannide. L 4, 
19, 3. Pro sociis, et pro amids. iL 25, 4, 5. 
Susdpi potest pro quibusris homlnibus. ii. 
3, 5, 6. An licitum pro subditis et alienis. 
iL 25, 7, 8. Geri potest per homines im- 
probos. ii. 26, 5; iiL 1, 22. An lidtum in 
eos, qui in naturam delinquunt. ii. 20, 40, 1. 
An licitum, ut cogantur aliqui fieri Chris- 
tiani. ii. 20, 48, 1. Ad injustum obligatur 
nemo, i.3, 23; iL 11, 8; iL 13, 7 ; ii. 15^ 13, 1. 
Pro solo offenuTO quando sumendnm. il. 
16, 13, 3. Non lidtum ob nimiam poten- 
tiam Tidni tantum. IL 1, 17, 1. Justum 
aliunde yitium habere potest, ii. 22, 17, 1. 
An utrinque justum detur. ii.23,13. Omit- 
tendum saepe nostri et nostrorum causa. IL 
24,4, 1. Ob poenam snsdpere debet 

4.» 

Dn>£X BEEUM PE^CIFUASriC, 

t^MM eKUM^ frcrebdnxL. L 1, I : aL 2^, 2. 

^Ewa p(««« VI xMdKSKB tat. a. ^IX 

^ IpfMBSy reeic and ' 

«lS?>bRr' ai. 1^ ft. Pi 

j«0ta, taywn^ *&bu n. 1, 1, 4. De- 

«tj«itMini!B, et prmtofrtM^ QflH, li. 1, 1, 1, IL 
b^arti cffwtai agosd. tl, 10, 3. Viadkta 
■ n iliM «xi«»dcre b<v& de&«ct. uL 11. 1« 2. 
5«i jvati «ai 
fiiL 11««, 1. Jon qi 
fi^ CkKMltf* «t OcodL 
BdS dcBUMUAdi fomolc, BL ^ 7. Cire» 
B«Oi iadactioocai muritTrta cirijia. liL 3, Sw 
BeUoiMD todifCtoaaca^UespcothiiBfiaot. 

B4rllo eaf^ jnrt gcptium acquifiujuir. HL 6, 
2^ If 3u Cajw jure ipto gectiain fiaxit. iii. 
6^ 2, 4 7. fMognlomm fieri freqoens tea- 
Ustk. tiL6,8,9 

BcIlonoD drUiiuD crwMHMM, m, 7, 5, 3. 
Bcllo iojiuto capts aa rcsUtoeoda ab eo 
qui oepit. tiL 10, 3, /^. £t aa restitaenda 
ab eo qui 'letinet. iii. 10, C, 1. Cum retti- 
tnuDtur, an quid d«tra>ii f^juit. iii. 10, C, 2. 
hi etrnwutnUk tint, U/iue fidei poftfteisor non 
reatitoit. iii. 10, C, 2 * 

Bello cirili r«a qucmiodo acquirantnr. iii. 6, 27 

— turn ftolcinni rea quoroodo acquirantnr. 
Iii. 6, 27 

. quarftita qoiedam Regis propria fiaot. 

i. y, 12, ;i 
■ injutt/j txtfirium aecata pace an ref>eti 

ptmh. ii. 17. 19 

— (ex) irregu-aritaa. ii. 24, 10 

— (in) quje capi et non capi poirant. iii. 
13, 2, 3, 4 

Bellonim mala. ii. 24, 10, 1 . Pro alien is sub. 
ditia suacept^irum exempla. ii. 20, 8, & 
cap. 20, 40, 2. 

Bella publica, tine causa, injnsta. ii. 1, 1, 3. 
Pro aliis per naturam licita et probata, i. 
A, 2, 1. Bello an peti possint persecu tores 
Chriitianismi. ii. 20, 49, 2. Bella sine ullU 
caosis, feritas. ii. 22, 2. £x causis sua- 
aoriis, non justificis, pra^datoria. ii. 22, 3. 
An snscipienda ob delicta in Deum. ii. 20, 
44, 1. Pro subditia Justa et an necessario 
■Ofcipienda. ii. 26, 1, 2. Ob leves caosaa 

a. 12, 21 
BonnoB (paLiicnai) ptiiato 

Bona arita ia 

Bonter qiaestia. a. 7, 9, 1, & 10. 

aataralitcr reBeta eaueaatar. n. 7, 9. Ko- 

TTter qojealta 

rdJcta. iL 7, 10,1,2. 

stnt pro debito capL a. 18^ 9. Svhdatorwm 

cs facto rapesiomm oliligaatar ex jam 

gentium, in. 2, 2, 1, 3. Jore anB. aafc 

jure gentium quanta asqae alienantur in 

pace. iL14.S; iii. 20, 9 
BovXtvT ucii qujB AristotelL L 3, 6^ 2 
Brabantorum lex contra liberoa ex secoDdii 

naptiis. ii. 7, 8, 2 
Brasidje dictum, ii. 16, 6 

C. 

C. Cx'saris bellum in Arioristum quale. iS. 

3,10 
Canan»is se dedentiba? parcere potueniDt 

Israelits. iii. 13, 3, 4 
Canones quid constitnant circa populationea. 

iii. 12, 4, 4. De serris quomodo intdii* 

gendi. iii. 7, 6, 5 
Capere bello quomodo sit contra caritatenL 

iii. 13, 4, 1. Homines in bello quatenns 

liceat. iii. 14, 1, 1 
Capienda non sunt bona innocentiom, si ex 

debitoribus principalibus nostrum conseqni 

possumus. iii. 13, 4, 3 
Capita rerum. iiL 11, 5, 1, & 6, 1 
Capitalia qus&dam delicta post erangeliom 

pranlicatum. i. 2, 7, 13 
Capitales cognitiones cur defugerint Chri^ 

tianL i. 2, 9, 4 

^ 

AC VERBORUM. 

459 

Cmpti qnando posaiot inter0ii. iil. 11» 16, 1 
Captio RomaDorum adTenas Cartbaginien« 

ses. ii. 16, 15 
Captionum exempla. ii. 16, 5, 6 
Captinis idem plaribns pretium debere po- 
test, iil 21, 26. An redire debeat, mortuo 
eo quem redimere debebat. iii. 21, 30. 
CaptiTi promissum de reditu in carcerem 
Talet iii. 23, 6. Res, nisi appreheDse, non 
acquirantur. iii. 21, 28. Quonim in potes- 
tate nunc sint iii. 7, 9, 2. Occidi belli jure 
poesunt. Ui. 4, 10. An quovis tempore oc- 
ddi possint ibid, De CaptiTis et rebus cur 
specialiter conveniri debeat. iii. 9, 4,3. Cap- 
tiyorum redemtio, permutatio. iii. 14, 9, 1. 
Quam favorabilis. iil 21, 23. Posteri, senri. 
iii. 7, 5, 2. Redemtionem qusB Tetant leges, 
an justae. iii. 21, 24. Rona Romano jure 
fisco cednnt, si heres nullos sit. iii. 9, 10, 4 
Captus alii se dedere non potest, iii. 23, 9. 

In bello justo an licite fugiat. iii. 14, 7 
Capta aetu bellico quorum sint. iii. 6, 14, 1. 
Bello quatenuB conscientia pura acquiran- 
tnr aut retineantur. iii. 13, 1, 2. Ii\justo 
non fiunt capientium jure intemo. iiL 16, 1. 
Prioribus dominis reddita. iil 16, 2. Post 
pacem initam reddenda. iii. 20, 20 
Capti bello senri fiunt etiam citra delictum, 
iii. 7, 1, 2. Censentur, qui intra praesidia 
ducti sunt. ibid. Gratis dimissi. iiL 14, 9, 
2. QuibuB acquirantur. iii. 7, 5, 4. Cap- 
torum bello liberi et posteri, an serri, et 
quatenus. iii. 7, 2, & 5, 2. Captis parcen* 
dum in bello. iii. 11, 13, 1,3. Exceptiones, 
qu89 Tulgo contra adferuntur. iii. 11, 16, 1, 
5. Quid faciendum, ubi senritus in usu non 

est. iii. 14, 9 
CaptiTitatis jus etiam injuria didtur. iii. 7, 6, 

4. Non est jus gentiup uniTcrsale. iil 7, 

8. Quale his temporibus. iil 7, 9, 1 
CapuflB dvitatis interitus. ii. 9, 6 
Caritas nos obligat sape, ut clare loquamur. 

iii. 1, 10, 3. Multa vetatquae ex jure stricte 

sumto fieri possunt. iii. 1, 4, 2, & cap. 4, 13 
Camifex quomodo de jusUtia sententiie in- 

struendus. ii. 26, 4, 9 
Caro imbecillam corporis conditionem signifi- 

cat. i. 2, 8, 14 
Carthago, cives an urbem significet ii. 16, 15 
Castellffl regni successio. ii. 7, 22, 1, & 30, 3 
Castigatio utilis ei qui castigatur. ii. 20, 7, 2 
Casus improvisi conductorem non liberant. 

U. 12, 18 
Catonis Censorii dolus, iil 1, 13, 2 

Causae injustas, et inasoriaB, et exempla utri- 
usque, ii. 1, 1, & cap. 22, 1. Impellentes quae 
peccatum excnsant. ii. 20, 29, 1. Abstrahen- 
tes a peccato quae, il 20, 30. Dispensandi 
intrinseca);etextrin8ec8B.ii.20,25,&26. Sub- 
nascentes in bello. iii. 1, 3, & cap. 13, 3, 1 
Celare quid sit in contractibus. ii. 12, 9 
Cepisse bello rem quando quia dicatur. iiL 

6,3 
Certamen singulare an permittendum ad hel- 
ium yitandum. ii. 23, 10 
Certamina certo numero an lidta. iil 20, 4^ 

1,5 
Certus non est certiorandus. ii. 12, 9, 3 
Chirographi Thessalorum controversia. iiL 

8, 4, 2, & cap. 9,.9, 1 
ChristuB non est tantum interpres legia per 

Mosem datae. i. 2, 6, 3 
Christi facta non omnia nos ad imltationem 

obligant. I 3, 3, 8 
Christiani non restitemnt malis Imperatori- 
bus, etiam cum praetextus esset prohabilis 
resistendi. i. 4, 5. Jurarunt per res creataa 
cum respectu ad Deum. ii. 13, 11, 2. Etiam 
sine armis militant, ii. 26, 5, 2. Tenentur 
auxilio esse Christiania periditantibna ob 
religionem. ii. 15, 12 
Christianis an resistere superioribua permit* 
tatur in summa necessitate, i. 4, 6, & cap. 
4, 7, 8. Yeteres etiam in summa necessitate 
non restitemnt, cum possent. i. 4, 7,9, & 14 
Christianorum fosdns inter se; ejus obligatio. 
ii. 15, 12. Yeterum sententia de juramento. 
il 13, 21, 1, 4, 6. Mos circa captos. iii, 
7,9,2 
Christianos an deceat ex praeda quaestum fa- 
cere, iii. 18, 4 
Circumddi Christiani an potuerint. iii. 1, 

8,3 
Circumcisio ad quos populoa pertinuerit. L 

1, 16, 5. Olim multia populis cur necesaaria. 

i. 1, 16, 3. Ab extraneis sponte suscepta, 

et qnare. I 1, 16, 6 

Citatio in lods non tutis. iii. 3^ 14. In ra- 

pressaliis. iii. 2, 7, 3 

Civis eorum capi potest, qui nostrum drem 

injuria detinent. iii. 2, 3, 5. Innooena an 

juste dedi poaait, ut exddium Titetur, IL 

25, 3, 1, 4 

Cinum et aerrorum differentia, iii. 8, 2 

Cives Romani quo sensu dicantur qui in orbe 

Romano viTunt. ii. 9, 11, 2. Qnando Jus 

damni repetendi habeant in magistratna. ii. 

17, 3. An abscedere a dvitate poaaint. iL 

460 

INDEX RERUM PRJSCIPUARUM, 

2, 5, 34, 1, 3. Civitatem indenmem qao- 

modo pnestent. ii. 6, 24, 2 
CiviUs qaomodo diyidator, et quo effeetu. ii. 

9, 10. Bello Ticta an desioat dvitaa ease. 

liL 8, 2. Injnsta non desinit dvitas esse. 

iii 3,2, 1, 2. A piratamm coeta quid dis- 

tet. iH. 3, 2, 1 
CiTitates foBderaUe imperio distincts. L 3, 7, 

2. Immortales quo sensa. it 9, 3, 1, 2. 

Deaeisoentes recipere contra amidtiam est. 

iii. 20, 41, 2 
Ciritatis res belli jure acqnimntnr. iii. 8, 4, 1, 

2. Jos in dves. ii. 5, 24, 2. Jos in magis- 

tratns qnale. ii 17, 3 
Clarigatio. iii. 3, 7, 1 
Classisqnid. u. 16,3 
Clansnla, ui cetera tamen rata tnanetmt. iii. 

20,35 
»— si populut vein, quid operetur. iii. 

22,2 
Clemens Alexandrinus pro poenis et militia, 

i 2,10,1 
dementia in bello. iiL 11, 7, 1, 5 
Qlerid bello arcentnr, et qoatenas. t 5, 4 
Clerids interdicta est militia, i. 2, 10, 4 
Clero olim exdusi qni post baptismum mili- 

tassent, aut magistratum gessissent L. 2, 

10,10 
Co^'mtio an lidta. ii. 2, 24 
Cogendos ad rdigionem Christianam nemo. 

ii 20, 49, 1 
Cogere pugnat cum statu inferioris. i. 3, 17, 

1; ii. 14,6,2 
Cognatica successio linealis: et ejus funda- 

men turn. ii. 7, 22, 1 
Collegio destructo an res maneaut eorum, 

qui aliis supersunt ii. 9, 4 
ColonisB naturaliter non subsunt dvitati ma- 

trici. ii. 9, 10 
Colloquium postulans ad quid oblig^tur. iii. 

24, 3. Colloquio durante res suas pro- 

moTere licet, ibid, CoUoquii usus ad yi- 

tandum bellum. ii. 23, 7 
Comites legatorum an sint inyiolabiles. it 

18,8 
Commeandi jus qualem interpretationem re- 

dpiat. iii. 21, 22. Securitas etiam extra 

territorium dantis porrigitur. iii. 21, 14 
Commeatus an ad bona extendatur. iii. 21, 

18. Morte dantis an exsting^tur. iii. 21, 

20 
Commeatu (in) comites qni. iii. 21, 19 
Comminatio nemini jus dat. ii. 13, 3, 4 
Commissiones. Vide Dimicationes. 

Commerdorum Hbertas. iL 2, ld| 5 
Commodatarius ad quid teneator. ii. 12,13^1 
Commodator quando intra pnedSctom ten- 
pus rem repetere potsit. IL 16^ 17, 1 
Communio an durare posait. IL 2, S, L 

Quibus ex causis oesaaTerit. ibid. 

quomodo introdoota, qnsqnejm 

dederit. i. 2, 1 ; ii. 2, 2. Duplex est, vdcx 

dmplidtate, Tel ex charitate. iL 2, 2 
Compensari non potest id, quod bello oaona 

dedit, aut jure gentium factum est. iS. 19, 

19,1 
Compensatio debetur snbditis, qaamm bsn 

pace alienata sunt. iii. 20, 7, 2 
Compensatione non est Isedendnm jis tsria 

iii. 19, 19, 3 
Compensatur cum promisso res injoste ds- 

tenta. iii. 19, 15. Debitom. tMl Daa- 

num datum, et poena, iii. 19, 19 
Compromisd usus ad bellum fitandam. & 

23,8 
Conoessio immunitatis a rectigaHbos et tri- 

butis quomodo intelligenda. ii. 16^ 27, 1 
Concessum an morte concessoris intereat & 

21,20 
Conciliis (in) Christianis uide alil affis fOh 

cesserint. ii. 5, 21 
Concubinatus quidam species matrimooS ni- 

turalis. ii. 5, 15, 1 
Concupiscere in decalogo quid. iL 20, 39, 3 
Condicere. iii. 3, 7, 1 
Condictiones. ii. 1, 2 
Conditio non impleta liberat fidem. iiL 19^ 

14,1 
— ^— si res maneant eodem loco, qoaado 

tadte insit. ii. 16, 25, 2 
Conditiones contra eum, qui elocntns ca^ 

potius interpretandiB. iii. 20, 26 
Conditionem deferentis an acdpientis TcriMi 

plus Taleant. iL 16, 32 
Conjecture ad interpretationes. IL 16, SO, 1 

Extendentes. ibid, 2. Restringentes. & 

16,22 
Conjunctomm locus ad interpretatioDea. 

ii. 16, 7 
Conjugium. Vide Matrimoninm. 
Consensus solus indudt obligationem. fl. i, 

1,2; iii. 2,2,2 
■ populi in rebus modicis sequi h- 

dlius prsBsumitur. ii. 6, 11 
Consib'a et praecepta interdum indistifieti 

efferuQtur. L 2, 9, 4 
sapientnm quantum Taleant. IL S9^ 

8,4 

AC VERBORUM. 

461 

Oonsfliaiii Regain qnomodo oblig^ntur ex 

beUo injnsto. iii. 10, 4 
Consita an solo cedant. ii. 8, 22 
Constantin debitnm quale, ii. 11, 3 
Conatantinopolitani nulliun jus ad eligendum 
Impwatorem habuerunt, quod non depen- 
deret a popnlo Romano, ii. 9, 11, 2 
Constitnens non semper superior constituto. 

i.3,8, 13 
Consaetudo quomodo introducatur. ii. 4, 6, 2. 
Pro consensu populi in jure conceden- 
damm jurisdictionum. ii 6, 10 
Consnetudo horum temporum de mobilibns 
bello captis. iii. 9, 15. De redpiendis de- 
ditis. iii. 11, 14, 2 
Coosamens nummos fnrtiTOS ad restitutionem 

tenetur. ii 10, 2, 2 
Ccmsortia impiorum ritare, sapiens monitum. 

IL 15, 9, 10 
Contrahendum (ad) nemo metu impellendns. 

fi. 12, 10 
Contractus quid. ii. 12, 7. Contractuum di- 
▼isio. ii. 12, 2, 3. Contractus innominati 
qui, et unde dicti. ii. 12, 3, 3 
Contractu populi facto cum liber esset, Bex 

postea factus tenetur. ii. 14, 12, 2 ' 
Contractus Tergens ad pemiciem publicam 

an obliget. ii. 14, 12, 4 
Contractus Begum secum ferentes aliena* 
tionem pecuniae populi, regni, partis regni, 
patrimonii regalis an Taleant. ii. 14, 12, 5. 
Contractus regis an actionem pariant. ii. 
14, 6, 2; & §§ 4, 5, 9. Subditis jus cogendi 
non dant. ii. 14, C, 2 & 2, 2. An leges di- 
cendl. ii 14, 9, 1 
Contractus et leges misceri possunt ibid, 
... perfectus sine scriptura. ii. 10, 

80 

- regum et populorum an interpre- 

tandi ex jure Bomano. ii. 16, 31 
Contractu! extrinseca non sunt indicanda. ii. 

12,9,2 
Contractibus (in) vitium rei indicandum et 

quare. ii. 12, 9, 12 
_ (de) leges Bomanorum et Hc- 

bneomm. ii. 12, 13, 2 
.,^_— inyasorum siye tyrannorum po- 

pnli non tenentur. ii 14, 14 
Contractuum natura repudiat ambignas locu- 

tiones. iii 1, 10, 3 
Contumelia quo sensu ab injuria distingnatur. 

i. 2, 8, 7 
CouTcntio de redemtlone an rescindi posset 
ob lesionem. iii. 21, 27 

Conventionum diyisio in pnblicas et priyatas. 

ii. 15, 1 ; iii. 20, 1. Publicarum dirisio. y. 

15,2 
Conventiones. Vide Contractus et Foedera. 
Convictus cum impiis et contumadbus qua- 

tenus sit illicitus, qualis prohibeatur. ii. 15, 

9, 10, & 10, 3 
Cornelias mansit Centurio post baptismnm. 

i 2, 7, 9 
Cornelia lex pro heredibus eorum, qui post- 

liminio rodierunt. iii. 9, 10, 4 
Corpus ad serritutem obligari potest, ii. 15, 

16,4 
-^— — naturale idem quamdiu dicatur. ii. 9, 

8,1 
2,2 

ex terra ortum terrs debetur. ii. 19, 

humanum bestiis dan miserandum. 

ii 19, 2, 4 
Corpora hominnm debent dissolvi extra oon- 

spectum. ii. 19, 2, 5 
Corcyrensis controversia inter Athenienses et 

Corinthios. ii. 16, 13, 3 
Corraria quid. iii. 6, 12, 2 
Credens pecuniam patri ad alendum filium 

actionem habet in filium. ii 10, 2, 3 
Creditor tenetur de perceptis fructibus supra 

nsuram. ii. 10, 4 
Culpa sine dolo sufflcit ad restitutionis obli- 

gationem. iii. 10, 5, 2 
.^— - media inter injuriam et infortunium. 

iii. 11, 4, 1 
Curatores regni summum imperium habere 

possunt. i 3, 11, 2 
Cure dericis interdictae. i. 2, 10, 10 
Cjri et ArsicflB controversice. ii. 7, 28 

D. 

Damnum quid, et unde dictum, ii. 17, 2, 1. 
Contra honorem et famam datum, ii. 17, 22. 
Fadendo quomodo detur. ii. 17, 6, 7. Non 
fadendo quomodo detur. ii 17,8,9. Damni 
directe dati, et in consequentiam distinctio. 
ii 21, 10, 1. Causa qui dicantur. ii 17, 10. 
Dati consequentia que censeantur. ii. 17, 
11. Damna in dubio pace remissa censen- 
tur, iii 20, 15. Damnum datum ob oausam 
turpem retineri potest, ii. 10, 12. Datnm 
ob rem honestaro, sed alioqui debitam, an 
retineri possit. ibid. 

Darid quomodo et quatenns Sauli restitit i. 
*. 7, 4, 6 

— — res acquirit jure belli, iii. 6, 7, 1 

4Si 

UJLiOL 

ZfvSb0Kasaan 

VLX^i ^ 

ai. 1, 

I 

P»t>M» 4» yini»a» w>Ait<»!fiti. iH. Ci, 1, 1 
Ifiiiif »K r«(i«f»tat as drii ■ttfios. &. 21, 

4,7 
U^ifitf iift* (K«Kiisk)oe sa «xifi pciwiiit- m. 

4,12 
Ita>4it»» cxAfitkMUta, et ^vg tBteum. fi. IS, 

IMitI qa»»4<> pr/Mut imVa^fn. m. 11, 1<^ 1. 

JUfOpi^wil m, ]], 14. Dedhas pure qtud 

fMieivSuxn vit, vUto«i>4airi a n^, mot m 

p'/pui'i. lii. ^^, 1 J . UtAjt/zrum '/jjpid* m- 

eeo^i [x/Mutit iur« \fv)]i, in. 5, 1 
iMxliti^^ ]tun. iii. I''/, 4>'>, 1, & 2, .S, 31 
~~-^— antequam xrjarain aiin percn»erit. 

iii. ]1,]4, 2 
D«f«o4«re inntfotnimn an teDeamar, et qnan- 

d/>. JL 25, 3, 1 & cap. 4, 8. 2 
T>«feiklerif •« non opu« habet clenoDtiatione 

Jura riaturtr*. iiL 3, 6 
Defennio an jui det in tertiam, qui non inra* 

dit fl. 1, 4. Uerum, an jua det occideodi. 

fl. ] , 1 ] . Lifita in ag^^retaoris adjutores. iii. 

1,3; HI. l,r>,3 
DafennionU actus pacem non minpit. iii. 20, 

?iO, & 38 
Defoniio in !>«]]{■ pablicit qua?, et qoalis. ii. 

J, 10. In his, qui liello causam dederunt, 

non lldU. ii. 1, 18 
Deflcirator Virginia ad quid teneator. ii. 17, 

10 
Dofunctit gratia rcdditur inliberis. if. 7, 9, 2 
Dejectua dicitur, qui Tetltus est accedere. ii. 

10» 12, 1 
Dolatio condltionis ante acceptationem non 

obllgat. ii. 10, 32 

2.2 

12, 5,1 

Despoliado qmd, uL 6, 14, 7 

Detis prcmineodo obligator. S. 11, 4, 1. Ii 
jtmtmcnto t&sds et nltor. 2. 13, 10. Plro- 
barit jcs prcdc. iiL 6, 1, 2. NoeentilMf 
parcit iDDocentnm causa, m. 1, 4;. 3. Qvo 
jure eSciat, ut peocata poatcria noceant 
ii. 21, 14, 1, 3. Quo seosa heater motare 
consilium, et pcenitentia docL n. 13,9^4* 
Qoando dicatnr improprie dos fiaHere. Hid. 
Populo cladem immittit ob R^mn £Mti. 
ii. 21, 17. AvTo^vnr quo aensQ. 11.20,4,1 
Propter se omnia feciase qao sensn dieatnr. 
ibid. An non poasit agere, niai ob fineft 
u. 20, 4, 2 

Dei jus in homines, iii. 1, 4, 3. Lenitas ii 
novo foedere. iL 20, 11, 1. Honor ubi ^i* 
tur, clare loquendum. iiL 1, 10, 3. FaeCO 
circa liberos peccantinm cur hominUnis aoa 
imitandum. ii. 21, 14, 1, 3 

Deo mendacium non conrenit. iiL 1, 15^1* 
Magis qnam hominibna obediradmn ag>* 
noscunt et philosophi. L4,l, 3; ]L26,^1 

Dictatoris potestas aliquando aamma. L^ 
11,1 

Diem, (ad eum) exclosiTe, an inclosiTe inlal* 
ligendum. iL 21, 4 

AC VERBORUM. 

463 

I}ierum tox in foederibns qnomodo intelli- 

genda. ii. 16, 6 
Diis asBcripta qua juriB sunt gentinm. ii. 19, 

1,2 
AucateifiaTa, i. 1, 9, 2 

AucaaTiKij qns Aristoteli. i. 3, 6, 2 

Diligendorum gradus. i. 2, 8, 10 

Dimtcatio nngularis qnibns casibnB licita. lii. 
1,15 

IMmicationes sine fructn illicits. iii. 11 , 19 

IMmidium naTiam de integris intelligendom. 
y. 16, 6 

Direptio pnedfe qnalis. iii. 6, 18 

PireptioniB concedendie aat negandsB ra- 
tiones. ili.6, 18, 2 

Ditciplina xnilitam Romana. iii. 18, 1, 2 

Dispensandi in leg^ pcenali causse quic. ii. 20, 
25,26 

Dispensatio disting^tnr ab seqoitate. ii. 20, 
27 

Diasimnlatio an licita. iii. 1, 7 

Divisio rerum ad bellum yitandom. iL 1, 2, 
5, & 2, 8, 1 

DiTortia olim licita, Christianis prohibita. ii. 
5,9,2 

Do lit des. ii. 12, 3, 1 

Dolor non dat josoccidendi. iii. 11, 16, 5 

Dolus bonus quis. iii. 1, 6, 3. An ex genere 
semper malorom. iii. 1, 6, 4. In bello an 
licitns, et qnis. iiL 1, 6, 1, 2. Doli mall 
TOX. ii. 10, 2, 2. Dolo contrahens ad qaam 
restitntionem teneator. ii. 17, 17. Res 
hostiuni capere licet, iii. 6, 12, 2. Dolis 
abstinere generosum. iii. 1, 20, 1 

Domanii fructus distingnendi a domanio. ii. 
6,12 

Domanium. Vide Patrimonium popnli. 

Dominatio pauoomm ad regnum accedit. iii. 
15,8 

Dominium externum, iii. 6, 3, 1. Naturaliter 
et per alium acquiritur. iii. 6,9, 1. Furiosi 
unde. ii. 3, 6. Infantis unde. ibid, Con- 
ditionatum. ii. 3, 16, 1. Rerum, que pon- 
dere, mensura, et numero constant, quando 
transeat. ii. 10, 12. Externum sine intemo. 
iii/ 7, 6, 1,3 

Dominia quomodo intereant snblato snbjecto. 

iL 9, 1, & 2, 1, 3, & 1, 4, 1 
Dominus rei pneferendus ei, qui deposuit, et 
quare. ii 10, 1, 4. Qui denunciarit, ne 
servo crederetur, tenetur de peculio aut In 
rem Terso. ii. 10, 2, 2 

Dominum rei, quam possidet, ignorans, ne- 
mini tenetur. ii. 10, 11 

Domini rerum, que de navi jacts sunt, par- 
tem ab aliis repetunt. ii. 10, 9, 2 

Domos incendere inhumanum. iii. 12, 2, 2 

Donare pro transigere. ii. 16, 5 

Donatio an acceptari possit mortuo donatore. 
ii. 11,17 

Donationes a magistris militum faotsa. iii. 6, 
17,6 

Atopo<f>6poi servi unde. iii. 14, 5, 3 

Dubitare quis potest contemplative, non ac- 
tive, ii. 26, 4, 2 

Dubitans subditus an recte militet ii. 26, 1, 
4, 8. De jure quid facere debeat. it 23, 3, 
4. Quomodo ad judicandum dirigi possit. 
ii. 23, 2,2; u. 23,5,1 

Duellum. Vide Dlmicatio singnlaris* 

Dux proprie quis. iiL 22,1. Milites quatenns 
obliget. iiL 22, 6. De belli causis trans- 
igere non potest, iii. 22, 7. Inducias dare 
potest, iii. 22, 8. Homines, imperia, agros 
jam acquisita concedere non potest, iii. 22, 
9, 1, 2. Condonare potest nondum quas- 
sita, etiam qui snmmus dux non est. ibid. 

Ducis belli jus eximium in prasda. iii. 6, 17, 3 

Duces belli dispensatores pnedn apud Ro- 
manos. iii. 6, 15. Romani quomodo se 
gesserint circa pnedam. iii. 6, 16, 1, 2. 
Quidam de preda nihil decerpserunt. iiL 6, 
16, 1, & 17, 4. Quomodo obligentur ex bello 
injusto. iii. 10, 4 

Ducum pacta quam recipiant interpreta- 
tioncm. iii. 22, 11 

Duratio rei naturam non mutat. L 3, 11 

E. 

Ecclesia jus an habeat in infideles. ii. 229 

14,1 
'ExdiKtlif quid apud Paulnm Apostolum. i. 8^ 

5,6 
Elpnvri quid. ii. 15, 5, 3 
Eleazari factum, iii. 4, 18, 2 
Elig^ns indignum reipublicas tenetur. ii. 17, 3 
Emens rem alienam restituere earn venditori 

non potest, ii. 10, 10 
Ementi pignus a creditore tenetur quLoppig- 

noravit, etiam si res sit aliena. ii. 10,2, 2.yi 
Emtor rei capte bello injusto an quid im« 

pendii deducat. iiL 16, 3 
''EifavTio<f>dveta, ii. 16, 4, 1 
'Ev^xvpiaafioL iii. 2, 1, 2 
'Bm-oXat, i. 1, 9, 2 
'EirielMia. ii. 16, 26, 1 

464 

INDEX RERUM PR-fiCIPUARmf, 

^Eirttuctta. fontes et regnls. Und, 

'E-riiiaxla, iL 15» 6, 2 

'Etriopjcfiv. iL 13, 13 

Episcopomin coniilui circa bella. ii. 23^ 4, 2 

'B^oxaL ii. 3, 10, 1 

Eqai et eqiue qns postliminio apnd Bomanot 

recepta. iii. 9, 14, 1 
Errana hotti obligatur ex pacto. iii. 23, 4 
Errantes in partem Chriatiaus religionii an 

poniendL iL 20, 50 
Error an irritnm actum faciat. ii. 11, d, 1 
Eneni non jorabant. iL 13, 21, 4. 5 
Erangelii prooepta an contineantnr in jnre 

natoralL i. 2, 6, 1, 2 
E6op«c«iv. ii. 13, 13 
*E^atprro¥. iiL G, 17, 3 
Exceptionem liabenii jns habet ad pecnniam 

redaotam ex bonis luis yenditii. iL 10, 2,/I 
Execntionii ad modnm qnod pertinet, condi- 

tionem non facit. iiL 23, 15 
Exeroitoria actio unde. ii. 11, 12, 13 
Exercitores an teneantur in lolidum ex facto 

magiatri. iL 11, 13 
Exerdtus quid. iL 16, 3. Justus, ibid. 
Exhsredato filio an quid debeatur. ii. 7, 7 
•E^if . iL 9. 3, 1 
Eidtus liber cum itinere libero intelligendns. 

ii. 10, 5 
Exploratores graviter pnniendi causa, iii. 4, 

18, 3 
ExBulea non tenentnr imperiis civitatis. ii. 5, 

25 
Exteri quomodo de rebus bello captis judi- 

care debeant. iii. 6, 25 
Exteris quomodo jus nascatur ex lege ciyili. 

ii. 2, 26 
Exterorum res retinentur pro jure nostro, 

aut ciyis nostri. iii. 2, 3, 5, & 5, 2 
Extern! testari non prohibentur jurenaturalL 

iL 6, 14, 2. Juris qualis efficacia. iii. 7, 7 
Externum dominium sine interne, iii. 7, 6, 

1,3 
Extrinseca contractui non sunt indicanda. ii. 

12, 9, 2 

F. 

Facio at facias. iL 12, 3, 1, 5. Ut des. ibid, 

Facinorosi an sepeliendi. ii. 19, 4 

Facultas, juris species, quid et quotuplex. L 

1, 4, 5. Eminens, quid. L 1, 6 
Facultatis (mersc) quae sunt, an tempore amit- 

tantur. iL 4, 15 

Falsnm dicere amenti, et infinti, non crt 
mentiri, stricte sumta Toce. iiL 1, 12 

Fato fieri qne dioantor. iiL 6, 12, 1 

FaTor in promissis. ii. 16, 10 

FaTorabilia in dubio realia. iL 16, 16, 1,8. 
Quomodo interpretanda. iL 16, 12, 1, 3 

Fecialinm nsos Roms. iL 23^ 4 

Federatus an defendendos contra fedflratnm. 
iL 15,13,1; ii. 25,4,1 

Fedos quid. iL 15, 3, 1. Qoando renoTatom 
censeatur. ii. 15, 14. An doret parte rio* 
lata. ii. 15, 15. Antiquios qnaodo pna- 
ferendnm. ii. 15, 13, 3. Cum popnlo reakii 
ii. 16, 16, 1. Cum rege non aemper per- 
Bonale. ii. 16, 16, 2. Jos dat regi qui regno 
pnlsna est. ii. 16, 17. Com populo, ant 
justo rege, invasori siTe tyranno non prod- 
est iL 16, 18. Ineqnale proprie jnris- 
dictionem non dat. L 3; 21, 2, 3. fnff>qnal< 
quod. L 3, 21, 1 

Federe inaequali qui tenetor popnloa, ISber 
esse non desinit i. 3, 21, 1, 3 ; ii. 18, 2, 2. 
Inaequali qui tenetor rex potest aommiiB 
imperium retinere. L3,21, 3. (in)taperior 
quis dicatur. i. 3, 21, 2, 8 

Federis rumpendi materia odioea. ii. 16, 13, 1 

Federa qnaedam idem statuont, quod jos na* 
tune, et quare. ii. 15, 5, 1, 3 

Federis princeps imperium in qaibus rebns 
habeat. i. 3, 21, 8. Ina&qualis pericula nnde. 
i. 3, 21, 10 

Federa inaequalia contrahuntur etiam nbi bel- 
lum non fuit. ii. 15, 7, 4. An contrahi 
possint cum liis, qui alieni sunt a yera reli- 
gione, quae, et quatenus jure naturae, jure 
Hebraeo, jure eyangelico. ii. 15, 8, & cap. 9, 1, 
& cap. 10, 1. Cum quibusdam populis yetita 
lege Hebraea. ii. 13, 4, 2. Quae £syorabilia, 
quaeodiosa. ii. 10, 16,3. ^qnalia.tum pads, 
tum sodetatis. ii. 15, 6, 2. Inaequalia. iL 
15, 7. ^qualia de commerciis. iL 15, 6, 2. 
Personalia, ii. 16, 16, 1, 3. Realia. ibid. 

Federati inaequales an jus legandi habeant. 
ii. 18, 2, 2 

Federum dirisio. ii. 15, 4, 5. Inaeqnaliom 
divisio. ii. 15, 7, 1. Distinctio circa jns 
postliminii. iiL 9, 18, 3 

Feminae captiyae. Hebraeonim lex pro iUis. 
iii. 4, 19, 2. Snccedunt in regnis patrimo- 
nialibus. ii. 7, 11, 1. Quomodo obnoxis 
bdlico juri. iii. 11, 9, 1 ; 3 

Feminis parcendum. ibid. 

Ferae quorum unt? lex, quae eas regi addkit, 
non injusta. ii. 2, 5. In sjlyis priyatb pon 

% 

AC VERBORUM. 

465 

gunt nullins. ii. 8, 2, 3, 4. Sunt Principum 
in Germanio. ii. 8, 5 
Feras an dominos amittat si aufugerint. ii. 

8,3 
Femiminatio non focit confusionem. ii. 

8,21 
Feuda Franca, sito libera, i. 3, 23, 2. Lon- 

t^BOwtL posacssione acquimntur. ii. 2, 10, 3 
Feudale jus in personam, et in rem. i. 3, 23, 

1,2.3 
Feudalis obligatio non tollit summnm im- 

perium. i. 3, 23, 2 
Feudalia regna qua successione defcrantur. 

ii. 7, 20, 21 
Feodum ligium. i. 3, 23, 2 
Fides in bcllo. iiL 19, 1. Praedoni, et tyranno 

debetur. iii.19,2,1,2. Pcrfido an servanda. 

iii. 19, 13. Compensando quomodo libere- 

tur. iii. 19, 15. Tacita qu». iii. 24, 1, 4, 5. 

Commendata in bello. iii. 2o, 1. Quo) vim 

habeat juramenti. ii. 13,22 
Fide (in) esse quid. i. 3, 21, 3. (bona) rem 

alienam qui emit, pretium an repctat. ii. 

10,10 
Fidei bellicsB partitio. iii. 20, 1 
Fidei (bonce) et stricti juris discrimcn an va- 

leat inter populos diversos. ii. 16, 11 
w~-^ possessor non tenetur de re qns 

periit. ii. 10, 3 

si rem alii 

teneatur. ii. 10, 7, 4. Si rem Tendiderit, an 
et quando teneatur. ii. 10, 8 
__——»- an natural! ter fructus 

suos faciat. ii. 8, 23 

. ad rei restituUonem te- 

netur. ii. 10, 1, 3 

recto impendia repetit, 
et que. ii. 8, 23 

— (male) possessor quale jus tempore ac- 
qairat. iii. 7, 6, 2 
— ^ — . an speciem pcrdat. ii. 8, 

20 

impendia repetit 2, 8, 

24 

Fideicommissum familie relictum quem ordi- 
nem sequatur. ii. 7, 24 

Fideicommisso obnoxia longevo tempore ac- 
quimntur. ii. 4, 10, 3 

Fidejubens et soWens pro aliquo contempla- 
tione tertii actionem habet in eum qui 
Hberatus est. ii. 10, 2, 2 

Fidejnssio qualis actus, ii. 12, G 

Fidejussor ad mortem obligari non potest, 
ad ezlliam potest, ii. 21, 11, 2, 3 

Fidejnssoris obligatio, immediate unde. ii. 21 
11,1 

Filia fratris majoris an pneferenda fratri mi* 
nori in regni successione. ii. 7, 32 

Fillus an debeat accusare patrem proditorcm. 
a 18, 4, 7, & cap. 26, 3, 2. A patre rege in 
regno exheredori an possit. ii. 7, 2o. Natua 
patre jam rege an preferendus ante nato. 
ii. 7, 28 

Filio abdicato et exheredato an quid debefttur. 
ii. 7, 7 

Filii natnrales an succedant patri, et adoptori 
possint. ii. 7, 8, 2 

Finitivus status rhetorum. ii. 16, 3 

Flacci dolus, iii 1, 13, 2 

Flumen totum interdum ripam alteram seqni- 
tur. ii. 3, 17, 1, & 18, 1. Idem quo sciisu. 
ii. 9, 3, 2 

Flumina quomodo occupentur. ii. 3, 10, 1 

Fluminis cursu mutato an imperii fines mu- 
tentur. ii. 3, 16, 17 

Fccdus. Vide Fedus. 

Fa'nus nauticum. iii. 12, 5 

Funeraria actio cujus untune, ii. 10, 9, 2 

Francic'i juris successio in regni<«. ii. 7, 21 

Francorum imperium distinctum a Komono. 
ii. 9, 11, 3. Regni divisio in oricntale et 
occidentale. ibid, Regum successio ollm 
aliquatenus a populi voluntate pependit. 
ii. 9, 11, 3. Jus do postliminio extra bellum 
publicum, iii. 9, 19, 2. Jus circa servos, 
iii. 7, 8. Mos circa praedam. iii. 6, 16, 2 

Frater minor an preferatur fratris majoris 
filio. ii. 7, 31 

Fratris filius an ])atmo regis pneferendns in 
successione. ii. 7, 32 

FHAudantes rectigalia ad quid teneantnr. iL 
17,16 

Fructus ut imi populo vendantur pactio an 
liciU. ii. 2, 24. Qui restituendi. ii. 10, 4, 
6. Industriales rei non debentur. ii. 10, 4. 
Consumpti an restituendi. ii. 10, 5, In 
pace qui concessi intelligantur. iii. 20, 22. 
Cum re restituendi. ii. 10, 1, 6, Resti- 
tuendi ex damno dato. ii. 17, 4 

Fur ad quid teneatur. ii. 17, 16 

Furis noctumi et diurni distinctio quo Jure 
nitatur. ii. 1, 12, 1 

Furiosus promittendo non obligatur. iL 11, 5 

Furtum contra jus naturale. i. 1, 10, 4 

G. 

Gabaonitarum controversia. ii. 13, 4, 2 
allicum jus de preda maritima. iiL 6, 24, 8 

nil 

466 

INDEX RERUM PR-ECIPUARUM, 

GalluB jas circa pnedationea que contra le- 
gem pablicam fiunt. ii. 17, 20, 2 
Gelricmn jna de iniula ct alluTione. ii. 8, 14 
Generia nomen sepe adhsret ipecieL iL IG, 9 
Germaoi una uxore contenti antiquitus. ii. 

Germania non fuit pan Rom. Imperii iL 9, 

11,1 
Germanonun Tetemm latrocioia. iii. 3, 2, 3 
GigBDtam etas. iL 2, 2 
Gladiiun accipiens gladio peribit, quo seiiia 

dictum, i. 3, 3, 7 
Gladioa geiserunt Apostoli quidam. L 3, 3; 4 
Tywfiti Aristoteli quid. iL IG, 26, 1 
Gothorum moderatio in bello circa res sacras. 

iiL 12, 6, 3 
Gradiis in Levitico prohibit!, an et nunc ma- 

trimonia impediant. iL 5, 19, 1. Qui in 

Leritico per interpretationem prohibit! cen- 

seantur. iL />, 13, 4 
Grsd aliquando plnres nxores habnere. ii. 5, 

9,4 
Gracomm mos circa prsdam. iii. G, 14, 2 
Gratia mortuis qaomodo reddatur. iL 7, 9, 2 
Gratiam referre prius quom beneficium con- 

ferre. ii. 7, 9, 2 
Gratia sapra modum cximenda a Terborum 

uniTcrsitate. iL IG, 27, 1 
Gnbemandi trcs forma;. L 3, 8, 9 

II. 

Uabitatio an conccdoiida externb, et quibos 

legibus. ii. 2, 17, 1 
Ilrurcs non tonetur ex \i sola juramenti facti 

a dcfuncto. iL 13, 17, I. An do pucna 

tcneatur. ii. 21, 19 
Ilffireticus Augiutino qui.s. ii. 20, 50, 4 
Harmonica proportio on in pocnis locum ha- 

beat. iL20,33 
Ilastomm crcctio. iii. 24, 5 
Hebnci jussi sacra gentium abolero. iii. 5,1,6 
UebrsDis an licuerit beneficia dare extroneis, 

aut ab lis occipero. ii. 15, 9, 3 
Hebrsorum lex pro focminis captivis. iii. 4^ 

19, 2. Mos do agris captis. iii. G, 11,2. 

De corona victi regis, iii. 6, 24, 4. Jus circa 

servos, iii. 7, 8. Lex, vide Lex. Jus in 

liberos. ii. 5, 5, 7. Lex de orboribus in 

bello. iii. 12, 2, 2. Pro servis. iii. 14, 6, 5. 

Logos in contractibus. ii. 12, 13, 2. Sen- 

tontia distinguena ea qum natura honesta 

sunt U. 14, 6, 1 

Heres. Vide Hcres. 

Herodis Magni liberomm controTersia. iL 7, 

23 
Hispanicnm jus de prasdis terrestribns et man- 

timis. iiL 6, 24, & Jos de postliminio, da 

comitatibos et arcibus. iii. 9, 13, 2. De 

navibus, qoas piratJB cepemnL iiL 9, 17 
HoUandie jos drca pnedationet piraticaa qua 

contra legem fiunt. ii. 17, 20, 1. Moa drca 

obligationet exercitomm. ii. 11, 13 
Hollandicum jus de agris inundatis. iL 8, 12, 

2. Circa insulas, et alveos aiccatoa. iL 8, 

10,2 
Homicida quid restituere teneatur. iL 17, 13 
Homicidas occidere ut liceat, nnde ortnm 

habeat i. 2, 5, 3 
Homo ad que jus habeat ii. 17, 2, 1. HominI 

instrumentum. L 5, 3; iii. G, 9, 1 
Hominum reddendorum pactum de Tivia in* 

telligendum. ii. 16, 5 
Honestatis generale prseceptnm in ETangelio. 

L2,8,4 
Uonestum quid et quotuplex. i. 2, 1, 4 
Uonoribns arcentur noccntum liberi. iL 21, 

16 
Hostis quid antiquis. ii. 15, 5, 2; iiL 3, 1, 1. 

Occisio, indistincta quo sensn licita. iiL 4, 

2, 1. An oifendi possit in solo pacato^ 

iii. 4, 8, 2. Subministrans res an pro hoste 

hal>endu8. iii. 1, 5, 1, 3 
Ilosti mentiri licerc qui scnserint iii. 1, G, 1, 

2, & 17, 1 
Uostem spoHarc an liceat Mile Spoliare. iii. 

5, 1 . Res ad Hostem missa* quando et qua- 

tenus intercipi possint. iii. 1 , 5, 1 , & 3 
Ilostes sepelicndi. ii. 19, 3, 1, & 2. (apad) 

esse possunt qui non hostili sint animo. iii. 

11, 3, 1, & 2. Qui. ui. 3, 1, 1; ii. 15, 5, 2. 

Sunt et qui pro parte summum imperium 

habent. iii. 3, 4. Fiunt etiam qui inosqua- 

liter fccderati sunt, ibid, 
Hostium subditi, hostes. iii. 3, 9, 3, 4, 6. 

Ubique offenduntur jure belli, iii. 4, 8, 1 

I. 

Jacobus Patriarcka probat jus ocqnirendi 

bello. iiL 6, 1, 1 
Jacobi filii ex ancillis ab ipso adoptati in jus 

succedendi. iiL 7, 8, 2 
Idololatras quos morte puniat lex HebraWft 

ii. 20, 47, 2, 4 
Idololatris species et gradus. iL 20, 9, 6 

AC VERBORUM. 

467 

Jehu factum quale, i. 4, 19, 4 

Jephthis controTersia cum Ammonitis. ii. 4, 

2,1 

Ignoscere an liceat inlerdum. ii. 20, 21. An 

liceat posita lege poenali ii. 20, 24 

Ignorantia que delictum minuat. ii. 20, 43 ; 
it 26, 1 

Illicita eximenda Terbomm nniyenalitate. ii. 
16, 27, 1 

lUjrrii pnedari soliti, triumphati. iii. 3, 2, 3 

Immemoriale tempus. Vide Tempus imme- 
moriale. ii 4, 7 

Immunitas rerum ad agriculturam pertinen- 
tium. iii. 13, 4, 4 

Impediens aliquem a petendo munere quando 
teneatur. ii. 17, 3 

Impendens in rem alienam receptu difficilcm 
Bumptus lervat. ii. 10, 9 

Imperator Romanus an imperium habeat in 
omnea. ii. 22, 13. Qua talis, unde jus suum 
habeat. ii. 9, 11, 4. Yicarium ei quis dare 
possit. ibid. Germanic qua talis, unde jus 
■uum habeat. ibid. 

Imperium acquiri quatenus possit. iii. 15, 1. 
In yictos accipi recte ad sui tutelam. iii. 15, 
2, 1. Bello acquiritur. iii. 8, 1. Ut in rego 

. imperante alio est bello acquiritur. iii. 8, 4, 
1, 2. Alienori potest a rege consensu po- 
puli. ii. 6, 3. Rumanum distinctum ab Im- 
perio Francorum, et regno Longobardorum. 
ii. 9, 11, 3. A Germania magna, li.9, 11, 1. 
£t roajcstatem conserrarc, quid? i. 3, 21, 2 

Imperii Komani nunc non sunt omnia quso 
olim fuerunt. ii 22, 13, 2. Summi jus tam 
populo, quam regi longa possessione ac' 
qniritur. ii. 4, 11. Subjecta persons et 
territorium. ii. 3, 4, 1. Pars pignori dari 
non potest, ii. 6, 9. Proprii exempla. i. 
3, 12, 3, 4, Summi partitio quomodo fiat. 
L 3, 17, 1, 2. Vox improprie sumta pro 
ductu, et pro postulato. i 3, 21, 8 

Imperio partito singuli imperantes pro sua 
parte jus belli habent. i. 4, 13 

Imperia magna difficulter custodiuntur. ii. 
22, 13, 1; iii 15, 7, 2. SuccessiTa non 
semper summa. i. 3, 10, 5. Non summa 
plene haberi, et in patrimonio esse possunt. 
i. 3, 14. Electira qusadam summa. i. 3, 10, 
5. Qusedam in patrimonio, et alienabilia. 
i. 3, 14. Quomodo intereant lublato sub- 
jecto. ii. 9, 1. Profanorum sponte non 
■ubeunde. ii. 15, 10, 4 

Xmpietatis auctores jure gentium punibilet. 
. ii.20, 47, 2, 4, & 50, 3, & 51, 1. 

Impossibilitas facti promissi excusat, no pax 
rumpatur. iii. 20, 37 

Insequalitas, qus inest contractu!, jure gen- 
tium non resarcitur. ii 12, 20, 1 

Incarcerans alterum injuste ad quid teneatur. 
i. 17, 14, 10 

Incestum jure gentium, ii. 5, 12, 3 

Incorporalia cum persona acquimntor. iii. 7, 
4, & cap. 8, 4, 2 

Indefinita pro uniTersali quando smnenda. ii. 
16, 12, 1 

Indi plures uxores habebant. ii. 5, 9, 4 

Indicium bcUum principi, simul indictum 
subditis et sociis. iii. 3, 9 

Indictio belli, iii. 3,5,& 6, & 7. Utrinque facta, 
iii 3, 7, 3. Specialis requiritur, si socii per 
se, et apud se bello impetantur. iii. 3; 10 

Indirecte licent quccdam qua) directe non 
licent. iii 1, 4, 1 

Inducise quid et unde diets, iii. 21, 2. Quan- 
do incipiant obligare. iii. 21, 5. Ad certam 
finem ; et earum effectus. ii. 21, 6, & 13. A 
ducibus dantur. iii. 23, 8 

Induciarum tempus an veniat sub belli an 
pacis nomine, iii. 21, 2. Tempus quomodo 
computandum. iii 21, 4 

Induciis finitis nova indictione non opus, iii 
21, 3. Earum tempore quid liceat. iii 21, 
6, 11. An dcficicntes et relictos recipere 
liceat. iii. 21, 8, 1. Elapsis, qui sine culpa 
penes hostem reperitur an capi posait. iii. 
21, 9. Ab altera parte ruptia indictione 
non opus. iii. 11, 11 

Inormibus porcendum. iii. 11, 10 

Infans promittcndo non obligatur. ii 11, 5 

Infantis dominium unde. ii 3, 6 

Infantium dominium quale, ii. 3, 6; ii. 5, 2, 2 

InfantibuB parcendum. iii. 11,9, 1, 2 

Infeudatio est alienatio. ii 6, 9 

Infeudationes regnorum irrits sine consensu 
populi. ibid. 

Infortunium et injuria quo distent, ii 21, 5, 
1; 3,11,3,1 

Infortunii et injuria) distinctio. iii. 11, 3, 1, 4 

Ingrati non puninntur. ii 20, 20, 1, 2 

Inimici sepeliendi. ii 19, 3 

Injuria quando alteri in persona alterius facta 
censeatur. iii. 20, 40, 2 

Injuriaa, culps, et infortunii discrimen. iii. 11, 
4, 1, 5, 6. Qutedam ferende, et quales. i. 
2,8,7 

Injustitia committi potest in bello josto. iii 
11, 1, 1 

Injustum quid. i. 1, 3, 1 

H H2 

468 

INDEX RERUM PRiECIPUARUM, 

InJnsU jodices, testes, acciuatom, ad qnid 

tenesDtar. ii. 17, 16 
loDocentem an teneamnr defendere, et qoan- 

do. ii. 2.7,2, & 3,1 
losignui regiJB potestatis concedmitiir prin- 

cipibns popnli liberi. i. 3, 10, 3 
Institoria actio nnde. ii. 11, 13, 12. Ex In- 

■titoris actu cor teneator qui enm prepo- 

rait. ii. 10, 2 
Instrnmenta rnrii pignori capi retita. iii. 12, 

4,4 

Insula qaomodo distinguatnr ab allarione. ii. 

8,14 
losnlaa cojas. ii. 8, 14, 1, & 9, 3 
Interpretadonis fontes. ii. 16, 1, 1 
Inteifectio. Vide Occisio. 
Interim pro interdom. ii. 13, 6 
Interpretandi regnls. ii. 16, 2 
Invasor imperii prseceptis snis qnatenns obli- 

get. i. 4, 15. Qaomodo possit inter6ci 

belli jnre. i. 4, 16. £t ex lege antecedente. 

i. 4, 17. £t ex aactori:ate jus imperandi 

habentis. i. 4, 18. Cor extra casns ex- 

ceptoa interfici a prirato non possit. i. 4^ 

39,1 
Infentionis titulns locum non habet in his 

quas jam possidentur. ii. 22, 19 
InToluntarium ex Toluntario habendum pro 

Toluntxirio. ii. 17, 18 
Inundati agri ciyus jure Romano, ii. 8, 8, 10, 

& 1,11,1 
Inundationis dus species, ii. 8, 8 
Inundatione dominium naturaliter non amit- 

titur. ii. 8, 10, 1 
Inundatus ager qnando derelictus habeatur. 

it 8, 10, 3 
Joannis Baptists et ChrisU doctrina quatenus 

eadem. 1.2,7, 5 
Josephus Judffus in legis expositione Ro- 

manis blanditur. iii. d, 1, 6 
Josepbi Patriarchfe dolus, iii. 1, 15, 2. Mo- 

nopolium. ii. 12, 10 
Ira quid. ii. 20, 5, 1 ; iii. 11, 4, 2. In Deo 

quatenus. ii. 13, 1, 3 
Irregularitas ex bello. ii. 24, 10 
Irriti actus quinam jure naturs. ii. 5, 10, 1. 

A lege drili non fiunt, nisi eorum qui sab-> 

sunt. ii. 5, 14, 2, 3 
Itus quomodo reditum comprohendat. iii. 21, 

16 
Judaei. Vide Hebrni. 
Judasorum opinio de necessiUte restitutionii. 

iii. 10, 3 
Judex quasi pater, ii. 20, 2, 1 

Jndicandi libertas homiiii ab homine quo- 
modo debeatur. iii. 1, 11, 1 

Judicare an possit de rcgni saccesaione, sire 
rex, tire populus. it 7, 27 

Judicium zeli. ii. 20, 9, 6 

Judicii ceoatio momentanea ant continaa. L 
3, 2, 1. Jure aut facto, ibid. 

Jndicia criminalia quare institota. iL 20^ 14^ 
15. Capitalia an permisaa Christiailis, non 
sunt affectanda. ii. 20, 14, 16. Apod 
Hebrsos qusedam regis potestati exemta, 
i. 3, 20, 2 

Jurans non datumm se, potest repetitionem 
erepti omittere. ii. 13, 5. Pr»doiil datum 
non recte repetit. ii. 13, 15, 3. Rcdire ad 
hostem, si clam redeat non aatisfadt. ii. 13, 
15, 3. Tenetur ex animo jnrare, et ra 
implere quod juraviL ii. 13, 2, & 1, 13, 2. 
Quando Deo tantum obligetur, qnando et 
homint ii. 13, 14. Non tenetor, n is coi 
jnratum est eum liberet. ii. 13, 18. Implera 
debet contractum cni inest insequalitas. fi. 
13, 16, 2. Deliberato animo ae non obli- 
gandi, tamen obligatur. ii. 13^ 3 

Jnrantis Terba quo modo acdpienda. iL 19^ 
2,&3,1,2 

Jnrare rolens obligator, etai obligare ae nofit» 
ii. 13,2 

JuTATit Paulus. ii. 3, 21, 1 

Juramentum per sceptrum, salutem, et si« 
milia. ii. 13, 11, 1. Per salntem Prindpis, 
et majestatem Imperatoris. ii. 13^ 11, 2. 
Per Deos falsos an obliget. iL 13^ 2, L 
PiratsB aut tjranno prsestitnm obltgat n. 
13, 15, 2; iii. 19, 2, 1. Metn extortnm oUi* 
gat : et quatenus. ii. 13, 14. Perjure datum 
an obliget. ii. 13, 16, 1. Per res creatas ao 
licitum, et quo sensu. ii. 13, 11, 1, & 12. De 
re impossibili nihil operatur. ii. 13^ 8. De 
re pro tempore impossibili quid operetor. 
ii. 13, 9. Impediens majus bonum morals^ 
non valet, ii. 13, 7, 1. Violatom, ride 
Peijurium. ii. 13, 1, 2. Quomodo ex lege 
actui inyalido raliditatem conferat. ii. 19^ 
20, 4. De re illiciU non ralet. iL 13^ 6w 
Non extendendum ultra consuetam signifi- 
cationem. iL 13, 5. Regis initum esse po- 
test ob actum ipsius pnecedentem. iL 14,3. 
Dolo elicitum quam Tim habeat. ii. 23; 4, 1. 
Non intelligendum sub conditione tadta. 
iL 13, 33 

Juramenti forma, ii. 12, 10. Effectnt. iL 19^ 
13, et seqq. EflBoada quatenus pendeat a 
superiore. ii. 13, 20. Vis et interpretatio. 

AC VERBORU^L 

469 

il 13, 1, 2, 3; Hi. 1, 19. Violati poena ad 
posteros manat. ii. 13, 1, 2. Obligatio ex 
animo deliberato. ii. 13, 3, 1 

Juramento promissum non potest retineri ob 
peccatnm alterias antecedens. ii. 13, 20, 3 ; 
fit 19, 3, 1. Convenit maxima simplicitas. 
ii. 13, 4, 1. Testis et ultor Deus. ii. 23, 
10. Absolatio a juramento unde Tim ha- 
beat. iL 13, 20, 2. Circa jaramenta quid 
possint superiores. ii. 13, 20, 1, 4. Pro- 
missum compensari non potest cum eo quod 
ante erat controTersum. ii. 13, 20, 3 ; iii. 
19, 19, 1, 2 

Jaramenta (leges RomansB circa) quid sta- 
tuant. ii. 13, 20, 4. A Christo quae pro- 
hibita. iL 13, 21. Begum, ii. 13, 19; ii. 
14,3 

Jnratum pactum fortius non jurato. iL IG, 
29,2 

Jurisdictiones summa inferiores concedi jure 
hiereditario possunt populi consensu, ii. 6, 
10 

Juris naturoB dictata alia magis, alia minus 
manifesta. ii. 20, 43, 1 

Juri naturos non repugnant qusdam qua 
vetita sunt lege divina. ii. 20, 42 

JuRJurandum. Vide Juramentum. 

Ju.HJurandum a Civitute factum et repetitum. 
iii. 19, 8, 1 

Jus pro eo quod justum est. i. 1, 3, 1. Pro 
qualitate sumtum, quid sit. i. 1, 4, 1. Pro 
lege, i. 1, 9, 1. Pro lege ad aliarum a jus- 
titia yirtntum materiam pertinet. i. 1, 9, 1. 
Katurale. i. 1, 10, 1. Quid, et quomodo 
diiferat a divino voluntario. i. 1, 15, 1. Vo- 
luntarium, t6 iv ra'^ei. i. 1, 9, 2. Naturale 
a Deo immutabile, et quarc. i. 1, 10, 5. Est 
aliquod consequens actum humanum. i. 1, 
10, 4. Sumitur aliquando pro eo quod est 
honestum. L 1,10,3. Videtur mutori prop- 
ter materia) mutationem. i. 1, 10, 0. Esse 
aliquid juris naturalis probatur a priori et 
a posteriori, quomodo. i. 1, 12, 1. Juris 
naturalis reductirie quie sint. LI, 10, 3. 
Ejus juris permissiTSB tantum qua sunt, et 
preecipi, et vetari a Deo possunt. i. 2, 5, 1. 
NatursD pro certo statu, i. 1, 10, 7. Et 
genUum quomodo a Romanis jurisconsultis 
sumatur, et an recte. L 1, 11. Kectorium et 
equatorium. i. 1, 3. Non est in brutis 
ani^nantibns, de illis improprie quo sensa 
dicatur. L 1, 11, 1 

Jns Tolontarium humanum, Tel diTinum. 1. 
1, 13. CiTile, ciTili latins, cirili arctius. i. 

1, 14, 1. Divinum. i. 1, 13. Ant est nnins 
populi, ant omnium, i. 1, 15, 12. Omnibus 
populis commune triplex, i. 1, 15, 2 

Jus gladii quid in sacris et profanis literis. !. 
2, 7, 2. Diyinnm Hebraicum alios populos 
non obligat. i. 2, 16, 1, 2. Hebraeum quoad 
nos abrogatum non recte dicitur. i. 1, 16, 7* 
Quem usum nunc habeat, et quem in per- 
missis, i. 1, 17, 1, 3. Nihil continet juri 
natursB contrarium. L 1, 17, 2. Gentium 
quid: et quomodo probetur. i. 1, 14, 1. 
Non est commune omnibus populis. i. 1, 
17, 1. Et usus juris distinguenda. L 3, 24. 
Supereminens regis, aut civitatis, an liberet 
a fide subditis data. iiL 19, 7. Gentium 
externum vetus. iiL 1, 18, 1, & 19, 1. Ex- 
ternum qimle. i. 3, 2, 2 ; iiL 10, 1, 3. Pro 
jure externo. iiL 4, 2, 2. Kegum et popu- 
lorum quondo pace remissum censeatur. iii. 
20, 15. Gentium circa insqualitatem in con- 
tractibus. ii. 12, 26, 1. Internum ab externo 
distinctum. ii. 12, 11, 2; iii. 7, 6, 1, 3; cap. 
10, 1, 3, 6i 3, 1. Exterorum supereminenti 
dominio non subest. ii. 14, 7, 8. NatursB 
moribus obliteratur. i. 2, 7, 1 ; ii. 15, 5, 1. 
Gentium debcllo captis. iii. 6, 2, 1, 4. Pig- 
noris, retentionis, servitutis an bello acqui- 
ratur, et quomodo. iii. 6, 26, 1. Captivi* 
tatis etiam injuria dicitur. iii. 7, 6, 4 

Jus gentium yetat pemiissa jure natursB, et 
permittit yetita. iii. 4, 15, 1. Apud popu- 
los quosdam. iii. 4, 19, 1. Improprie quod 
multi populi usurpant sine mutua obliga- 
tione. iii. 1, 8, 2; ii. 3, 5, 1 

Jus sa?pe remittendum ut bellum vitctur. ii. 
24, 1, 1, 2: 1, 3, 4, 1. Luendi pignoris an 
tempore amittatur. ii. 4, 15, & 3, 20, 6 

Justitia cxplctrix. i. 1, 8, 1 

Justitia attributrix, diavefirjriKii. ibid. An 
tantum circa res communes, expletrix circa 
res singulorum versetur. i. 1, 8. 2 

L. 

LacedflBmone nepos ex filio m^jore filio minori 
natu in regno proilatus. ii. 7, 30, 3. Filius 
rege patre natus pncferebatur ante nato. 
ii. 7, 29 

Lacedsmonii dolum in bello pluris quam Tim 
faciebant. iii. 1| 6, 2 

Lacedffmoniorum mos de agris captis. iiL ^ 
11,2 

Laconum jus in Messeniam. ii. 4, 2, 1 

Adipvpa, iii. 6, 24, 4 

470 

INDEX EEBUM PKSCIPUARnr, 

LatrofBi fito ««mu. iu. 19, 2, 2 

LatroDCi jus legationis non habent. iL 19^ 2, -3 

LcgatiooMy MiHliue rejid poMiint. iL 1?, 3, 2 

htjgatua Bn junuiktionfm faabcat. iL 1% ^, 2. 

6i quid debcAt, qoomodo oompcllandoi. ii. 

19, 9. Qnaodo ipoDte domnm redire poinL 

U. 10, 25, 2 

Legati mittmteni obligmnt etuun eontrm Mr- 

ewDft mandaU. U.ll, 12. Qni jure ^entiam 

nUntnr. ii. IS, 2, L In bellis ciTilibiu quo 

jnrv tint. ii. 1^, 2,3. An admitundL ii. 19, 

3^ 1. Ob qoaa eaoiaj poMint non reci|M. 

iL 18^ 3, 1. Qoo can mntabiles. ii. 19, 3, 

3, Bcfernnt penonam mittentii. ii. 19,4, 
5, Jore drU'i loci nbi tont non tenentnr. 
ii. 18, 4, 5. llabentnr qnasi eswnt eitra 
territorinm. Qnd. Delictum per qnem pn- 
niendnm. ii. 19, 4, 5, 7. Per modum de- 
fensionb occidi aat repelH posinnt. ii. 19, 

4, 7* An rabjaceant jori talionii. iL 16, 7, 
2. Domoa an pro aijlo. ii. 19, 8, 2 

Legatonun joa. iL 18, 1, 1, & 3, 1. An Taleat 
apod eof ad qnos non mittnntnr. ii. 19, 5. 
Valeat in beUo. ii. 18, G 

Legatonim comites an inriolabiles. ii. 18, 8, 
1. Bona an poasint pro debito capi. ii. 
18,9 

Legato* (ob) riolatot bella. iL 18, 11 

Lex quid. i. 1,9, I, 2 

Lex Mosii dnpliciter snmitnr. i. 2, C, 4. Jn- 
dldaria quando et qaomodo sublata. L 2, 8, 
7. Non habet priui et poster! ob. ii. 5, 13, 
G. Vide Jos llebrsum. 

Lex non semiier irritum facit quod retat. ii. 
5, 10, St 13, 4. Imperfecta Ulpianoqna;. iL 
6, 16, 1. De Sabbato et de decimis qao- 
modo ad Cbriitianos pertineat. L 1, 17, 5, 
Idem potest quod consensas expressus. iii. 
13, 1, 2. In pranamptione facti non cxis« 
tentis fundata, an oblfget. ii. 11, 6, 2. 
liomana de Iscsis ultra dimidinm pretii. ii. 
12, 12, 2. Occidi aliqucm permittens an 
consdcntiam liberet, et quando. ii. 1, 14, 1. 
Qns fcras, pisccs, ayes regi addicit, non in- 
justa. ii. 3, 5. Jnsta qmo retat quod jure 
natura) licet, ilnd, De osncapione an per- 
tineat ad snmmum imperium, aut ejus par- 
tes, ii. 4, 12, 1 

Legis ratio porticulariter cessans casum a 
lego non cximit. L 3, 5, 3. Dispensatio 
regem non obligat. ii. 14, 13, Iv Cessatio 
in particular! dispositio est ad dispensa- 
tionem. ii. 20, 20. Conditor an se obligetf 
et quatenos. ii. 4, 12, 1, & cap. 20, 24, 1 

Lex Hebnea an profaibeat dlrortia et matri- 
monia ploriom nxcrom. u. 2, 9, 1, 3 

Lcg« (in) pcenali diapenaaiidi canaa que. u. 
20, 24, 3 

Leges pcraales ant eoactine locum non ha- 
bent circa actna regnm. n. 14, 1, & 2, 2, 2. 
Bomanae de coacractibns. iL 12, 12, 2. Bo- 
manonim pcnales in quo iniqnsB. iL 2(^ 33. 
Que obiigent. in. 23. 5, 3. A Chriatianis 
ferri poaaent similes Hebraicist nia triom 
eanaamm aliqna obstet. L 1, 17, £. Et 
eontractns miaceri poasnnt. ii. 14, 9. Non 
omnes obligant. ii. 14, 12, 2; iiL 23, A, 3. 
Qna Talidiores s! casn confligant. iL 16^ 29, 
1. Inierficere aliqnos permittentcs qnando 
Jns interdnm dent, qnando solam impnni- 
tatem. ii. 20, 17. An obligent sommam 
potestatem. iL 4, 12, 1 ; iL 20,24,1. Qoaai 
pacta. iL 11, 1, 3. CiTiles qnasdam plane 
injnstc. iL 7, 1; u. 14, 12, 2 ; iii. 23^ 5, 3. 
Hnmans qnedam prscipere poasnnt com 
mortis pericnlo obserranda. L 4, 7, ^3. 
Hnmanins sunt interpretandaB. ibid. Que- 
dam, etiam dirinae, tacitam habent cxcep- 
tionem sommas necearitatia. L 4, 7, 1, 3L 
Beapicinnt id qnod plemmqne accidit L 4^ 
4, 3. Ferri poasnnt tempore, quo rammnm 
imperium amittatur. ii. 4, 12, 2. De ra 
promissa qus obligant. ii. 4, 4, 2. Injosts, 
quae ' propinqnos nocentinm innocentea 
interfici jubent. ii. 21, 15, 1, & 12, 1. 
Ciriles de promissis minorom. iL 11, 5, 2 

Legitima on lege hnmana toll! poadt, et qna- 
ten us. ii. 7, 4, 3 

Legum finis et efficacia. ii. 12, 12, 2. Dirersitas 
circa venditionem et emtionem. ii. 12, 15, 1 

Acta. iii. 6, 20, 2 

Lenitas in errantes circa diTina. iL 20, 50, 
& 1, 2, 5 

Liber homo postliminio quomodo redeat. iU. 
9,5. Suarecuperat: an et alienata. iii. 9» 
6,1.2 

Liberam fore Cortbaginem qaomodo inter- 
pretandum. ii. IG, 15 

Liberi filiamm alendi. ii. 7, 4, 3. Pignorari 
ac Tendi a parentibns quando possint. ii. 5, 
5. Jus ipsomm in liberos. ii. 5, 7. £x 
quibusdam matrimoniis impediantnr anc* 
cedere. ii. 7, 8, 2, 3. Ob parentum delicta 
non puniendi. iL 21, 13, 1, 3 

Liberis an debeantnr alimenta, et qno sensn. 
ii. 7, 4, 1. An alendi volgo qaaeaiti, et ex 
incesto natL ii. 7, 4, 2, 3 

Liberos cogendi jua. ii. 5, 2, 3, 4 

AC VERBOBUM. 

471 

Liberomm cnin parentibiu matrimonia con- 
tra jus natune. ii. 6, 12, 2, 3 

Libertas qnando jnsta belli causa, ii. 22, 11 ; 
it 4, 14, 1, 2. Quo scDsn natnralis. ii. 22, 
11 ; ill. 7, 1, 1. An pax placeat, giUTis in- 
terdnm deliberatio. ii. 24, 6, 1, 2; i. 4, 
19, 2 

Libertati pneferenda Tita popnli totins. ii. 

Libertas popnli quid significet i. 3, 12, 1 , 2. 

Subditorum obligatnr ex facto Buperiomm. 

lit 2, 2, 1. Bellandi non pnraumitur ab- 

dicata. u. 16, 13, 2 
Ucere pro jure extemo. ii. 12, 26, 1 ; iii. 4, 2, 

2, & cap. 10, 1, & 2, 1, 2. Vox ambigua qnas 

significationes habeat iii. 4, 2, 1, 2. Quai- 

dam dicnntur, qua* rectius aliter fiunt. iiL 

4, 2, 1, Si cap. 10, 1, 1, 2, 1. Ob irnpunita- 

tem. ir. 4, 2, 2, & cap. 10, 1, 3. Oppositnm 

ei quod decet, aut oportet. iii. 4, 2, 2, & cap. 

10,1,2,2,1 
Limen et limes idem. iii. 9, 1 
Limitati agrL U. 3, 16, 1; ii. 8, 12, 1 
Lis potest ntrinque esse sine peccato. ii. 23, 

13,3 
Liteno Marcae. iii. 2, 4 
Litigare Cliristianis quo sensn vetitum. i. 2, 

8,4; iu 24, 2, 4 
Littus quorum, ii. 3, 9, 2 
Loca in solo pacato posita quo casu recte oc- 

cupentur a bellante. ii. 2, 10, 1 
Locans pluribus operam an a singulis merce- 

dem in solidum exigere possit. ii. 12, 19 
Locationis et conductionis natura. ii. 12, 18 
Locator tertio rem locans, conductor! tenetur 

de eo quod perdpit. ibid. Operse ad quid 

teneatur. ii. 12, 19 
Locupletatns ex re aliena, eatenus ad resti- 

tntionem tenetur, et quare. ii. 10, 2, 1, & 2 
Locutio de ftituro nostno potestatis quo- 

taplex. ii. 11, 2, 3 
LoGutionis ambigus usnrpatio quando licita. 

iH. 1, 10, 13 
LudoTici et Galeatii controrersia de Medio- 

lano. ii. 7, 19 

M. 

MaocabsBi bello adjuverunt extraneos. Vide 

Aimonsi. ii. 15, 9, 6 
IfaccabsBorum resistentia qualis. i. 4, 7, 5 
Hacedonum lex qusedam injusta. ii. 21, 15 
liagistratns inferioressnmmum imperium ha- 
benti juste resistere non possnnt. i. 4, 6^ 1, 
' ffir Christian! Panli tempore, i. 2, 7, 1, 2. 

Hebnci non restiterunt malis regibns. !. 4^ 

6, 3, 4. Ex quibus damnis teneatur. ii. 17, 

20, 1. An teneantur, eo quod a nautis 

cautionem non exegerint. ibid, Oppidanos 

qnatenus obliget. iii. 22, 6 
Maharbalis factum, iii. 22, 9, 2 
Mahumetistarum opinio de necessitate resti- 

tutionis. iiu 10, 3 
M^estas pro dignitate imperantis sumitnr. i. 

3, 21, 1, 2. Quid sit. ibid. 
Majoratuum jura tempore amittuntnr. ii. 4, 

10, 3; successio in regno Castellse. ii. 7, 

22.1 
Mandantis morte an pereat mandatnm. iL 11, 

16 
Mandatario (cum) qui contrahit, etiam si 

mandatarius mandatnm excedat, obligatur. 

ii. 11, 11 
Mandatarius mandatnm excedens quando nos 

obliget. ibid. 
Mandator ad quid teneatur. ii. 12, 13, 1 
Mandatum an impleri possit per eeqnipollens. 

ii. 16, 21. Excedens, et sic cum alio con- 

trahens, ad quid obligetur. iii. 22, 4, 1, 3. 

Generale et speciale in bello. iii. 18, 1, 4 
l^Iandata pnblica, quo) nautis dantur adrersus 

piratas. ii. 17, 20, 1 
Manlii bellum in GallogrsDcoB quale, iii. 3; 

10 
Manubio) quid. iii. 6, 16, 1 
Manumissio interdum omitti sine peccato ne« 

quit. iii. 14, 6, 4, 5 
Marcelli (M.) moderatio in yictoriis. iii. 12, 

7,2 
Mares feminis pncferuntur in regnis a popnlo 

delatis. ii. 7, 17 
Marc an proprium fieri possit, an terra con- 

tineatur. ii. 2, 3, 1, 2. Non divisum. ii. 2, 

3, 2, 3. In fundum admissum. ii. 3, 10, 2. 

Occupatione omissa ad naturam redit. ii. 

3, 11. Navigandi jus in mari. ii. 3, 12. 

Imperium in mari quorum sit. ii. 3, 13 
Sfaris pars qnatenus occupari possit. ii. 3, 8, 

10,1 
Maritns caput nxoris quo sensn. ii. 5, 8 
Masculina pro communibus. ii. 16, 9 
Mater quomodo magis certa patre. ii. 7, 8, 1 
Matrimonium quid sit ex jure naturss. ii. 5, 8, 

2. An irritum defidente consensu paren- 

tum. it 5, 10, 1, 2, 3. Irritum cum alterins 

TiTcntis conjuge. ii. 5, 11. Ad morgen. 

gabicam. ii. 7, 8, 3. Apud Toteres Boma- 

nos postliminio non restituebatur. iii. 9, 9, 2 
Matrimonii petitio injnsta belli causa. U. 22, 

472 

KDEX REROI PR JIClPUARUif, 

7; iL 1, 21, 2. Jon ex lege ChristUna. ii. 
3, 9. 2, 3 
MAtrimonu ncn inennda cum prcfanis. U. 15^ 
10, 4, 3. Qaa'dam talU sunt ex lege, iit 
liberi ad hjereditatem non admiitantur. ii. 
7, 8, 3. Plurinm axorum olim licita. ii. 5, 
9, 4, 1. Cum propinquii sangDine, act 
affiniute, onde, et quateoos illicita. ii.5, 12, 
1, & 13, 1. Parentum com liberu, et libe- 
ronm cam parentibiu contra jus natunB : 
et node illlcitA. IL 5, 12, 2, 5. An licita in 
f^radibu expreiiis in Leritico. ii. H, 13, 3. 
Fratram et soromm qno jare retita, et 
unde iUiciU. H 5, 13, (i 
Blatrimoaionim contrafaendorum ]if>ertas qol- 

bill et quatenas debeatur. ii. i', 21, 1, 2 
Maxillam obvertere llebraris quid. i. 2, 8, 8 
Maximua natu in regnid a populo delaiid prs- 

fenur inter pares §exu. ii. 7, !<?, 1 
S^fembri conserrandi causa interfectio licita. 

ii. l.C 
Mendacium prohibitum, iii. 1, 9, 1, & 10,3. 
Qui auctorea certis casibus admittant. iii. 
1, 9, 2, 3, 4. Diccre et mentiri apud Gel> 
lium qaomodo distinguantur. iii. 1, 10, 1. 
A Deo alienum. iii. 1, 1^, 1. Stricte dic- 
tum quid. iii. 1,11, 1. An comniittatur 
retpcctn tertii,ad quern scrmo non diHgitur. 
iii. 1, 13. 1, 2 
Mendacii, qua illicitum naturaliter, quid ma- 
teriale. iii. 10, 1. Quid formale. iii. 1, 11,1 
Mendacio (de) et a'quivocatione Schulosticu- 

rum sententia. iii. 1, 17, 3 
Mendacium pro vita. iii. 1, IG 
Mensura ejus quud res valent. ii. 12, 14 
Alcntiri apud volentem an liccat. iii. 1, 14, 1. 

Ilusti licere qui senserint. iii. 1, 17, 1 
Mentitur qui dicit quod fabum putat, licet 

verum sit. iii. 1, 10, i 
Mercutorcs in licllo ab injuriis vindicari de- 
bent, iii. 11, 12 
Meritum ex libera voluntatc. ii. 21, 12 
Mctu proniittens an tcneatur. ii. 11, 7. Quid 
faciens, abiiolute Telle dicendus. ii. 11, 7,2. 
Causam dans contructui quando ad re^titu- 
tii^nem teneatur. ii. 13, 14, 1 
Mctum inferens tenetur ad restitutionem. ii. 

11,7,2 
Mctus a tertio illatns an actum vitiet. ii. 11, 
7, 3. Alterius an tollat jus transire Tolen« 
tb. ii. 2, 13, 4. A ricino an justA l>elli 
causa, ii. 22, 0, 1, Ac 2, 1, 17. Solus non 
BuflScit ad jus intcrficiendi alterum. ii. 1, 5, 
1, 2. Exceptio non libonit a religione juris- 

jnraodi. iii. 19,4,5. Qui pro juste habeator 
in bello publico, iii. 19, 12 

Miles de incendiis et raptn sine jussa pnUico, 
an teneatur. iii. 14, 6 

Uilitare propter pnedam, ant stipendiiun pne- 
cipue non licet, ii. 2j, 10 

Milites Chriitiani tub Juliano. i. 2, 10, 11. 
Sub DiocletUno. i. 2, 10, 11, 8. Jadd 
extern is militabant. i. 2, 7, 5. Ab ecdesia 
non excommunicati. i. 2, 10, 2. Qaomodo 
tenentur ex bello injusto. iii. 10, 4 

Militi qua* ex praeda cederent apud Komaaoa. 
iii. C, 24, o 

Militia mercenaria sine delecta caass impro- 
batur. ii. 25, 10. Pcenitentibus olim in* 
terdicta, et quare. i. 2, 10, 9. Est inter- 
dicta clericis. ibid, £am ecclesia retus 
probat. i. 2, 10, 11 

Slilitiie repetitio qiialis damnata Sjnodo Xi- 
cc-ensi. i. 2, 10, 7, 8 

Militiam concedit Origenes interdum Chris- 
tianis. i. 2, 9, 2. Et capitalia supplicia con- 
cedit iUis Tcrtullianus. ibid, Ob qaas 
causas JudsfidetrectaTerint. i.2,9,3. Quas 
ob causas olim etlam Christiani earn de- 
trectaTcrint. ibid, 

MUitis Christiani officinm. L 2. 10, 12 

Militibus datus commeatus prodest et duei. 
iii. 21, 1, 5 

^Ulitum nomine qui Teniant. ibid, 

Mincrva> calculus, ii. &, 13 

Minor annis hosti oblij^tur. iii. 21, 3. An 
proniittendo obligctur. ii. 11, 5, 2 

Misericordia digni qui bello capiuntur. iii. 
14, 2, 1 

Misericordisc ora apud Athenienses. ii. 21, 

f>,2 
Mi:fsilia quomodo fiant' capientium. iii. 6, 22 
Mobiles res quando fiant singulorum capien- 
tium. iii. G, 12 
Mobilia gcncraliter ]>ostliminio non recipiun- 

tur. iii. 9, 14, 1 
Moderatio in belli jure circa personas. iii. 11^ 

7,1 
Modi liabendi impcrium qui. i. 3, 11, 1 
Modus in pfrna unde petendus. ii. 20, 28 
3Ionomachia bellum finire an liceat. iii. 20, 

43, 1, 2, 4 

Monomachij» de regno quia effectus. iiL 20, 

44, & 47, 1 

Monopolia qua) licita, quo) contra jus, et qua 

contra caritatcm. ii. 12, IG 
Monopolium. Vide Cuemtio. ii. 2, 24 
Morari in tcrritorio alieno an llcitum. ii.2^ IS 

AC VERBOBUM. 

473 

Hone pnrgatio in pace an admittenda. iii» 

20,35 
Moralia non consistnnt in puncto. i. 2, 1, 3 
Moraliam incertitudo unde. ii. 23, 1 
Mori HebneiB dimitti vocatur. ii. 19, 5, 3 
Mores generales in aliqua parte mundi non 

fMnont jus naturae, ii. 20, 41 
Mors deportationem quando comprehendat. 

iL 16, 9. Pro yera religione quanti fad- 

enda. i. 4, 7, 15 
Mortem pati potius quam alium occidas, 

quando liceat, quando non. ii. 1, 8, 9, 1. 

JEtemtan aggressoris an quis sua morte 

carere debeat. i. 3, 3, 3 
Mortis casus expressio quando extendatur ad 

caaum non nati. ii. 10, 20, 3 
Muli qui apud Bomanos postliminio recepti. 

ill. 9, 14, 1 
Mulierum imperia Romanis incognita, ii. 9, 

11,2 
^ultitndini etiam in delicto parcendum. iii. 

11,19 
Mnndiburgii jus. i. 3, 21, 1 
Mnrenn controversia cum Mithridate, ii. 16, 

30 
Mnri faciendi prohibitio quando ad aggeres 

extendatur. ii. 16, 20, 3 
Mutii ScsTolffi factum, iii. 4, 18, 1 
Mutilator quid restituere teneatur. ii. 17, 14 
Mntuum gratuitum quo scnau. Vide Usura. 
Mntuam accipicns pecuniam a debitore meo, 

mihi tenetur. ii. 10, 2, 9 

N. 

Nabidis controTersia cum Romanis. ii. 16, 

18,1 
Nalvalquid. ii. 13,21,2 
"Sal quid significet. t^tV. 
14 ai ¥al, oO ou, quid significet. ii. 13, 21, 2, 3 
VaW (nondum) an jus suum amittant, et quo- 

modo. ii. 4, 10, 1, 2. Leges possunt eo- 

rum jus conseryare. it 4, 10, 3 
Naturale, tox, pro solito fieri, ii. 12, 26, 2 
Naturales filii succedunt patri, nisi lex impe- 

diat : et adoptari possunt. ii. 7, 8, 2. Non 

succedunt in regnis a populo delatis. ii. 

7,16 
I^aturalia pro certo statu, il 8, 5 
NatursB prima et consequentia qu»? i. 2, 11 
Katuraliter licita an omnia etiam apnd Dcum 

lidta. u. 1, 10, 1 
Kaufragorum bona confiscare injustnm. ii. 7, 

Nares captSB quando jure belli censeantur. 

iii. 6, 3, 2. Nunc nullae postliminio red- 

eunt. iii. 9, 15 
Nayigandi libertas pactis imminui potest, ii. 

3, 12, & 15,1,2 
Navis, qua apud Romanas postliminio re* 

cepta. iii. 9, 14, 1. Si cui nocuit, an do- 
minus teneatur. ii. 17, 21, 1. In qua in- 

nocentes sunt an peti tormentis possit. iii. 

1,4,1 
Necessaria ad finem licitum licita. iii. 1, 2, 1 
Necessitas excepta videtur in lege dominii. 

ii. 2, 6, 1, 2. Jus non dat, si sit evitabilis. 

ii. 2, 7 ; iii. 17, 1. Quod jus det in pacatos. 

iii. 17. 1 
Necessitate pactum pacem non rumpit. iii. 20, 

37. Pari possessor prasferendus. iL 2, 8. 

(In) non ultra snmendum quam exigit. 

iii. 17, 1 
Neglectus puniendi punibilis. ii. 21, 2, 5 
Negotium alienuro gerens sui lucri causa, re« 

petit impensas, in quantum alter est locu- 

pletior. ii. 10, 9, 2 
Nepos ex filio priore an filio posteriori prse- 

ferendus in regno, ii. 7, 30, 1. £z filio, 

an filiflB prefcrendus. ii 7, 30, 1, 2. Minor 

lex filio an pneferatur nepoti majori ex 

filia in regni successione. ii. 7, 34 
Neptis ex primogenito an filinm alteram ex- 

cludat. ii. 7, 35 
Ninus primus iniperium ampliarit. iii. 8, 1, 2 
Nocentes dedendi aut puniendi. ii. 21, 4, 1, 3 
Nocumentum quod ex occasione peccati, non 

ob peccatum sentitnr, poena proprie non 

est. ii. 21,11, 1 
Nocentibus sippe parcendum ob multos inno* 

centes. iii. 1, 4, 3 ; iii. H, 9, 1 
Nomina region um in pace quomodo aodpi- 

enda. iii. 20, 23 
Nostrum qnibus ex causis quid dicatur. ii. 2, 1 
Notitia de Deo quod inconspicuus. ii. 20, 45, 

1. Uno. ibid, Ut omniscio. Und, £t nt 

creatore. ii. 20, 45, 2 
Notitin actirsB de Deo. ii. 20, 45, 3. De Deo 

quomodo probentur. ibid. Que maxime 

uniTersales. ii. 20, 46, 1. Obliteratn. ii. 

20, 47, 1. Et quoles. ii. 20, 45, 1 
Noxales actiones ex quo jure. iL 17, 20, 3 

O. 

Obedientia sspe illicita. ii. 26, 3, 1; i. 4, 

1,3 
Obligari natoraliter quis quot modis dicatur. 

474 

INDEX REKUM PR^CIPUARUM, 

li. 14, 6, 1. Clriliter quit qnot modis dica- 
tar. ii. 14, 6, 2 
Obligatnr nemo ad b«Iliim injnitam. iU 15, 

13,1 

Obligemor quomodo per alinm. ii. 11, 12 

Obligator ralide prKdoni ii, cni metns iocns- 
■ns non eit. iii. 19, 4 

Obligationis sine ooactioneexempla. ii. 18,10 

Obligatio ex facto miniitrorain, ci\)i» sit jn- 
ris. ii. 17, 20, 2. Ex culpa qnalis. ii. 17, 1. 
Cadit in actnm ant facnltatem : et qnomodo 
h«c differant. i. 3, 16, 1, 2. Fendalis non 
tollit snmmnm imperinm, vid€ Fendalis 
obligatio. L 3, 23, 2. Ex dominio qnalis. 
ii. 10, 1. Ex reboB exstantibns, et non ex- 
stantibns. ii. 10, 1, 2, & 2, 1. Jnterdnm est 
in nobis ita, nt alteri Jos nnllom qnsratur, 
ii. 11, 3, 1 

Obligationem (ad) requiritnr animi delibe- 
ratio. ii. 11,4, 1,3 

Obies an teneator, mortno qni misit. iii. 20, 
67, Qui fngit, recipi a ciritate non potest, 
iii. 20, 54. Datus pro altero, si is mortnus 
lit liberatur. iii. 20, 50. An ex alia canaa 
possit retineri. iii. 20, 55 

Obsidi fngere an liceat iii. 20, 54 

Obsides an occidi possint jure belli. iiL 11,14. 
Intcmo. ai. 11, 18, 1, 2 ; iiL 4, 1, 4. Serv 
non sunt. iiL 20, 53 

Obsidum bona cui cedant. iii. 20, 53. Obli- 
gatio odiosa. iii. 20, 65, Eomm obligatio 
interdnm principalis, iii. 20, 38 ; iu. 23, 16. 
Alter an ex facto alterius teneatur. iiL 20, 

58 
Obstinata resistcntia non sufficit ad jus inter- 
num occidendi, vide Resistentia obstinata, 

iii. 11, IG, 1 
Occidere hostem, jus belli dicitur. iii. 4, 5, 1 
Occidas (mortem pati potius quam alium) 

quando liceat, et quando non. ii. 1, 8, 1, 

&9,1 
Occidere obsides an liceat. iiL 4, 14 ; iiL 11, 

18 
Occidondi deditos aut captos an justa causa 
talio aut resistendi pertinada. iiL 4, 13; 

ii. 14, 16, 1, 2 

Occidi possunt jure belli, qui intra hostium 
fines sunt. iii. 4, 6, 1. An possint qui ante 
bellum aliquo Tcnerunt. iii. 4, 7 

Occiduntur sones, captivi, infantes, mulieres 
belli jure. iii. 4, 0,2 

Occisio quando lieita jure intemo in bello 
justo. iii. 11, 2, 1. Quatenus in repressaliis. 
.iii. 2, 6. Hostis indistincte quo sensu li- 
eita. iii. 4, 3. Extra propositum, sire in- 

directe, quando. iii. 1, 4, 1. Pro Tits dt- 
fensione quomodo Titioea. iL 1, 8, 9, 1. Ne 
fngere cogamor : |Mt> taenda existimatioiM 
et pro rebus an lieita. ii. 1, 10, 3 

Occupandi jus in statu remm communinn. 
iL 2, 2, 1 

Occupatio post omiasam commnnionem. B. 
22, 5. Non est nisi in re terminata. ii. J, 
3,2. Alia per uniTeraitatem, alia per fan- 
dos. ii. 2, 4. Imperii, et doniiniL ii. 9^ ^ 
1,2 

Odium in promissis. ii. 16, 12, 3 

Odio carentia quomodo intelligenda. iL 16^ 
12,1 

Odiosa quomodo interpretanda. ii. 16^ 12, & 
In dubio personalia. iL 16^ 16^ 3 

OlKovofila, iii. 1, 8, 3 

O'lKovfievti, ii. 22, 13 

Onus Titandum in TerUs interpretaoAs. B. 
16, 12, 3 

Onera ex foedere transitorift ant manwitia. 
ii. 15, 7, 3 

Opera et pecunia quot modia inter ae conpa* 
rentur. iL 12, 24, 1, 2 

Operas qui promisit, quibua ex cansb ezA* 
setur. ii. 16, 27, 2 

Opificibus parcendum in bello. iiL II, 12 

Oppidum tradere qui promi^ potest pi Ml 
dium dimittere. iii. 22, 13 

Opulentia fere causa bellomm. L 2, 8 

OO oO quid. ii. 13, 21, 2, 3 

Orbis pro Romano dictns. ii. 22, 13, 1 

Orbi toti an unum imperinm expediat. iL V, 
13,1,2; iiL 15, 7 

Ordo eorum qui damnum dederunt in defaiCo 
rcstitutionis. ii. 17, 6, 12. Qni serrandoi 
inter socios. ii. 5, 21. Considendi intsr 
reges Christianos. ibid. Inter eoa qui 
partes in re dispares habent. ii. 5, 22 

Ordinum conventus populnm refemnt. L % 
10, 3 ; iL 6, 9. Alibi alios usus hab«t. 
L3,10,4 

Ordinatio dirina esse regia potestaa qM 
sensu dicatur. L 2, 7 & 3; i. 4, 4, 1 

P. 

Pacatorum quod ofBcinm circa bellantes. fiL 

17,3 
Pacta quie pactis aliis pnevaleant, si ctiA 
collidontur. ii. 16, 29, 1. Quibua imperil 
mixtura fit. L 3, 17 ; iii. 19, 10. Nuda an 
obligent jure natunc, et gentium. iL 11, 1« 
1. In mari, in racua insula, ant inter di- 

AC VEEBORUM. 

475 

▼enamm dritatum cives per litems facta, 
regantor jure naturae et gentiam. ii. 11, 5, 
8. Begam qno jure regantur. ibid, £r- 
raotium. ii. 11, 6 
Pactis (a) posterior discedens non est perfi- 

dns. iii. 19, 14 
Pactomm personaliuni et realinm dicrimen. 

U. IG, 16, 1, 3 
Paganos an hostem licite occidat. iiL 18, 1, 1 
TlapdSeiyfia, ii. 20, 9, 1 
Parentes alendi. ii. 7, 5, 1. Liberos pigno- 

rare ac vendere quando possint. ii. 5, 5 
Parentom jus in liberos secundum tempus 
distinguitur. ii. 6, 2, 3, G. Cum liberis 
matrimonia contra jus naturs. ii. 5, 12, 2, 6 
Pars major jus habet universitatis. ii. 5, 17 
Participes delicti qui. iL 21, 1, 2, 2 
Partus an yentrem sequatur, et quo jure. ii. 
8, 18. Matrem naturaliter non magis quam 
patrem sequitur. ii. 5, 29, 1 
Pater jus snum in filinm alienare an possit. 

ii. 6, 6, 26, 1 
Paterfamilias quid significet. iii. 14, 5, 1, 2 
Patientia quie punibilis in rectore, aut re- 

pnblica. ii. 21, 2, 2, 4 
Patientiam (ad) Christi exemplo invitamur. 

L 4,7,15 
Patrimonium populi rex alienare non potest. 
ii. 6, 11. Illius pars, id est, dominii a rege 
oppignorari cur possit. ii. 6, 13 
Paacorum dominatio. Vide Dominatio. 
Paolus Apostolus non improbat presidium 

militare. i. 2, 7, 11 
Paz religiose servanda, iii. 25, 1, 7. Utilis 
Talidioribus, inyalidioribus et paribus, iii. 
25, 5. Rupta quando censeatur. iii. 20, 
27. Rnmpitur ab eo qui ex reteri causa 
Tim infert. iii. 20, 28. Alienans bona im- 
perii, regni, coronie. iii. 20, 5, 2, 3. Qua 
Imporinm, aut pars imperii alienatur. iii. 
20,5 
Pads causa an bona subditorum yalide alie- 
nentur. iii. 20. 7, 8. Conventionum inter- 
pretationes. iii. 20, 9. Capita an distin- 
guenda in majora et minora, iii. 20, 35 
Pace non reddi dvitates liberas, qua) se 
sponte subjecemnt. iii. 20, 14. Begis an 
teneantur successores et populus. iii. 20, 6 
Pacem senrare qui Tult, postquam ab adver- 
sario rupta est, potest, iii. 20, 38. Facere 
cigus fit. iii 20, 2, 4. Major pars fadens 
obligat universitatem. iii. 20, 4. An facere 
posrit rex aut minor, ant captinxs, aut 
. exul. iii. 20, 3 

Pactiones de rebus reddendis, quas magis 

miuusque favorabiles. iii. 20, 21 
Peccandi facilitas causa non minuendsB poenss. 

ii. 20, 7, 1 
Peccatum ad mortem, ii. 20, 7, 3 
Peccata quae facile condonanda. ii. 20, 26. 

Quae excusabiliora. ii. 20, 30, 2, & 31, 2 
Peculatus committitur circa praedam. iii. 6, 

21,3 
Peculium quid. iii. 14, 6, 2. Quatenus do- 
mini, quatenus serri. ibid, 
Pecunia communis mensura. ii. 12, 17 ; ii. 17, 

22. Quanti eestimanda. ii. 12, 17. Steri- 

lis quo sensu. ii. 12, 20, 1 
Pensitatio non repugnat summo imperio. i. 

3,22 
Percussorem immittere an liceat in bello. iii. 

4,18 
Peregrin! tenentur legibus loci in quo con- 

trahunt. ii. 11, 5, 2 
Perfidiae usus in defectores, piratas, latrones, 

jure gentium dissimulatur. iii. 4, 18, 6 
Perfidomm opera qualium uti contra jus 

gentium, iii. 4, 18, 4, 5 
Perjurii poena posteritatem conting^t. ii. 13 

1, 2. Voluntas punitur. ii. 13, 1, 2 
Perjurus in piratam aut latronem non puni- 
tur. iii. 19, 5, 1 

Permissio quotuplex. i. 1, 17, 1. Ex more 
distinguitur a permissiono gx benefido. ii. 

2, 23. An legis sit actus, i. 1 
Permittere se arbitrio aliomm quid sit. iii. 

20,49 
Permutatio, contractus antiquissimus. ii. 12, 

3,3 
Persao multas uxorcs habebant. ii. 7, 9, 4. 

Eorum opinio de Deo. ill 5, 2, 6. Mos in 

judidis criminum. ii. 20, 30, 3. Lex quse- 

dam injusta. ii. 21, 15. Jus in liberos. ii. 

5,7 
Persecutio diffidlis prtesumi facit derelictio- 

nem. iL 8, 3 
Persei Blacedonis controyersia cum Romania. 

ii. 16, 16, 2 
Personarum aptitudo ad causas peccandi im- 

pellentes, et abstrahentes. ii. 20, 31 
Petenti dare, quo sensu Christus praedpiat. 

i. 2, 8, 6 
Petri factum gladio ntentis cur improbatanu 

i. 3, 3, 6, 1 
Pignorationes jure dvili irritae. iii. 2, 1, 2 
Pignus acdpiens ad quid teneator. ii. 12, 

13,1 
Pignoris datlo quails actus, il. 12, 0 

476 

INDEX RERUM PR-«:CIPUARUM, 

Pignomm conTentIo qaam interpretationem 
recipiat. iii. 20, B9 

PUagiiun quid. iii. C, 24, 7 

Pipini factum, iii. 4, 18, 1 

PiratJB non triumphantur. SiL 3,2,3. Qiub 
capiant non motant dominium, iii. 9, 16. 
Datum repeti potest, ii. 17, 10. Jus lega- 
tionis non habent. ii. 18, 1, 3 

Piflcandi jus in mari, quorum sit. ii. 3, 9, 1, 
& 10, 1. In diverticulo fluminis occupari 
potest, ii. 3, 10, 2 

Pisces quorum sint. ii. 2, 5, In stagno pri- 
Tato non sunt nullius. iL 8, 2 

Plantata solo naturaliter non cedunt it 8, 22 

Flebs in Aristocratico regimine ezsors om- 
nis potestatis drills, i. 3, 8, 6 

Poena jnsta nulla nisi ob culpam. ii 20, 3, 2, 
3. Deberi quo sensu dicatur. ii. 20, 2, 2, 
& 21. Exigi debet propter quid. ii. 20, 4, 
&G, 2. Divina qualis, et qucm ob finem. ii. 
20, 4, 2. Cum benefactis compensatur. ii. 
20, 22, 1. Potest esse citra legem poena- 
lem. ibid. An semper prairequirat juris- 
dictionem. ii. 20, 40, 4. An transeat in 
eos qui non deliqnerunt. ii. 21, 12, 13. 
Accepta aufert jus belli morendi. ii. 21, 
12. Modus in poBna unde petendus. ii. 20, 
28, 29. Proprie dicta in bcstias, non cadit. 
it 21, 11, 1. An delictum ezcedere possit. 
ii. 20, 32, 2. Kemittenda, ne ad bellum 
Teniatur. ii. 24, 2, 1. Maxime remittenda 
ab eo, qui la»us est, etiam rege ii. 24, 3; 2. 
Pace remissa quie censeatur, iii. 20, 17 

Pcenie definitio. ii. 20, 1, 1. Privatie permis- 
sio. ii. 20, 8, 5 ; ii. 20, 10, 2. Exactio an 
Erongelio permissa. ii. 20, 10, I, 2. Im- 
propriiD irregularitates. ii 20, 1, 1. £x- 
actio ad quam justitiae speciem spectet. ii. 
20, 2, 2. In mari. ii. 2, 20, 8, 5. Finis, ii. 
20, 4, 1, 3, & 6, 2. Omittenda3 cause. iL 
20, 22, 1. Fines quomodo ccssent. ibitU 
% 2G, 1. Quomodo ab oliis in alios trans- 
eant. ii. 21, 1, 2, & 2, 4. CiTitatum dis- 
ttnctsB a pcenis singulorum. ii. 21, 7, 2. 
Obligatio in unirersitate quamdiu duret. 
iL 21, 8, 1. Remisdo quibus signis in- 
telligatur. iii. 24, 7. Minuendie aut non 
minuends causes, ii. 20, 30, 31. ftfensura. 
ii. 20, 28, 33. Jus remissum, ubi actum 
est cum tjranno, quasi tali, aut cum pnc* 
done. iii. 19, 3 

Popnis (in) a^qualitas primo ac per so qua 
spectetur. ii. 20, 2, 3 

Pcenarum partitio : finea. ii. 20, 6 

Pcenale pactum ant lex, forUor non pcenaH. 
iL 16, 29, 1 

Poenalia quando ad hsradet transeant. iL 21» 
20 

Poenitentibus an peena onmis condonanda. fl. 
20, 12. Biilitia olim interdicta, et qoan. 
i. 2, 10, 9 

HoX€fio9 unde dictum. LI, 2, 3 

Polliciutio quid, et quern effectum habeat. 
iLll,3 

IIoXircKir ars quae AristotelL L 3^ A, 9 

Politic! scriptores magis spectant qnotidia- 
nam administrationem quam Jus imperiL 
L 3, 19 

Poljgamia naturaliter licita. ii. 5, 9L C« 
prohibita lege Erangelica. iL 6^ 11 

Pompeins bellum piratamm finit pactkmnNiik 
iii. 19, 2. Templum Hierosoljmofum ia» 
gressus contra legem, iii. 5, 2, 7 

Pontifez Romanns coronat ImpersttoreBi Bo- 
manum, qua talis est. iL 9, 11,4. Pronim* 
davit elecUonem factam a populo Booaasu 
ii. 9, 11, 2, 4. Vacante imperio fendonni 
iuTestituras, quo jure tribnat. ibid, 

Populus potest jus se regendi totmn aUeamb 
L 3, 8, 3. Eorum ezempla qui ae alik sob- 
jecemnt. UntL Liber £scto MagiitcatnM 
sine mandato non obligatur. ii. A, 16^ L 
Romanus jus Imperatorem eligendi ub- 
per retinuit. ii. 9, 11. Idem qui olim. fi.9^ 
11, 1. Regimine mutato tenetur de debito 
ante contracto. ii. 9, 8, 1. Liber factos se- 
det eo loco, quo ante rex aut priuoepa. lUdL 
Idem sub Alonarchico, Aristocratico, De* 
mocratico regimine. ii. 9, 8, 1. Migraas 
idem. ii. 9, 7. Idem quamdiu. ibid, Qoa- 
modo intereat. ii. 9, 3, 3, & 4, 1, & 6^ 1. 
Subditus an ob regis delictum puniri pos- 
sit. il. 21, 17, 1 

Populi ob reguni peccata punitt, quare. L 9^ 
8, IG. Pars alienari non potest nisi et ipsa 
consentiat. ii. 6, 4. Nee ipsa potest reea- 
dcre a populo, nisi ex sununa necestitatsu 
iL 6, 5. Ne quidem ex necoHitate rects 
alienatur. iL 6, 6. Consensus drea alle- 
nanda imperia quomodo intelligatur. ii. 6^8L 
Testimonium de jure successionis quid va- 
leat. ii. 7, 27, 2. Minor pars populum noa 
obligat. ii. 15, 3, 2. An postliminio a re- 
gibus recipiantur. iii. 9, 12 

Populo destructo an res maneat eomm qiE 
populo supersunt. ii. 9, 4 

Fopulatio inutilis ubi hostis aliunde ali po- 
test, iii. 12, 4. Quibus ex oansia inhibttiitoi 

AC VERBORUM, 

477 

lit 12, 1, d. Qiue ntilis : et qua9 inutilis. 
ibid. 

Popidatione abstinendum ubi apes est celeris 
Tictoris. iii. 12, 3, 1. Inhibita concilian- 
tor hostinm animi. ili. 12,8, 1, 2. In i'u 
inhibendis Belgaram, et Indorum mos. 
iiLl2,4,l,2 

Posseasio per alinm acqnlritnr. iii. 6, 9. In 
re dnbia imperil seqnenda priTato. i. 4, 20. 
Fenmm per instmmenta qnomodo qns- 
ratnr. ii. 8, 4. Longsera inter reges et po-> 
pnlos. ii 4, 2. Non acquiritur jaculi im- 
missione. ii. 8, 3, 4 . 

Pouessionis longsB faror circa imperia. ii. 4, 
7, & 8, 2, 3. Immemorialifl qua ris jnre 
gentinm. ii. 4, 9 

Pd8B688or necessitate pari pneferendas. i!. 
2, 8. Mala fidei quale jus acqairat. iii. 
. 7,6,2 

Posaidentis jos. ii. 2, 8. Melior conditio in 
re dabia. ii. 23, 11, 1 

Potteri captiTomm serri. iii. 7, 2 

Posteriora prioribos derogaiit. ii. 16, 4, 1. 
Fortiora prioribos. ii. 16, 29, 1 

Poatliminii non est jns durantibos induciis. 
fiL9, 8 

PosUiminio quffi dicantnr rccepta. iii. 9, 3. 
(pace qui) redeant, qui non. iii. 9, 4, 1, 3. 
(qui) rediit, jura in eum restituuntur. iii. 9, 
C, & § 10, 3. An aliquando populi se sua- 
que recipiant. iii. 9, 9. ( Ciritas) quomodo 
redeat. ibid. 

Postliminium quid : et illius Tocis origo. iii. 
9, 1. Apud socios, et amicoa. iii. 9, 2, 1. 
In bello et pace. iii. 9, 4, 1, 2. Ejus species. 
Iii. 9, 4. Andeditihabeant. iii.9,8. Extra 
bellum unde ortum: et apud quos locum 
habeat. iiL 9, 18 

Potestas regia, patria, herilis. i. 1, 6. Cirilis 
in quibus rebus consistat. i. 3, 6, 1. Sum- 
ma qu». i. 3, 7, 1. Ulius subjectum. i. 3, 

7, 8. Non est semper penes populum. i. 

8, 8, 1, 3. Temporaria aliqua. i. 3, 8, 12. 
Cirilis humana ordinatio Petro, Paulo di- 
Tina: quo sensu. L 4, 7, 3. Regia quo 
sensn bono nostro inservire a Paulo dica- 
tur. {. 4, 4, Si 1, 7, 3. Patria qusedam ex 
jure civiU. ii. 5, 7. Summa per consensum 
ant res quomodo obligetur ex pacto mino- 
mm potestatum. iii. 22, 3. Quomodo ra- 
tnm habendo et ex eo quod contra arcana 
mandata factum est. iii. 22, 4, 1 

Potettates minores quibus modis snmmam 
obligent. iU. 22, 2 

Tlpdo'tv alreitf, iii. 14, 6, 4 

Praecepta Evangclii an contineantnr injure 
naturali. Vide Eyangelii praecepta. 

Praeceptorum ordo secundae tabulae in Decal. 
ii. 20, 30, 3 

Pneceptum Christi de non resistendo, quem 
sensum habeat. i. 3, 3, 1,5 

Prscda: Graecorum, Asiac, Afrorum, Fran- 
corum et Romanorum mos circa earn. iii. 
6, 14, 1, 4. Militibus interdum data, et 
quibus ex causis. iii. 6, 17, 1, 2. Eadem in 
diversos usus distributa. iii. 6, 20, 1. In 
solutum' concedi solet. ibid, Bliliti dari 
quando cooperit apud Romanos. iii. 6, 24, 

5. (de) lex ciriiis statuere potest, iii. 6, 22. 
Interdum subditis conceditur. iii. 6, 24, 1. 
Socii aliquando partem habent in ea. iiL 

6, 24, 2 

Praeda decima consecrate. iiL 6, 1, 1. Jus 
probayit Deus. iii. 6, 1, 2. Nomine urbes 
et agri Teniunt in piis causis. iii. 6, 20, 1. 
Genera, iii. 6, 20, 2. Dirisio quot modis 
facta, iii. 6, 17, 1, 2. Pars data iis qui non 
militarent. iii. 6, 19. Miserabilibus per- 
son is. iii. 6, 22, 1 

Pncdari retitum manente periculo. iii. 6^ 
24,6 

PrsDdandi licentia olim inter populos diver* 
SOS. iii. 15, 5, 2 

Pnedictio dirina an jus det. ii. 22, 15 

Pnedoni fides debetur. iii. 19, 2, 2, & 3, 1 

Praedones duces facti. iii. 3, 4 

Pracmium cui debeatur, si duo simul impIoTe- 
rint conditionem. ii. 16, 19 

Praesentem reipublicae statum tueri civis boni 
est ii. 4, 8, 3 

Praesumitur in dubio pax inita hoc sensu. ut 
res maneant in statu, in quo postremo 
erant. iii. 20, 11, 12 

Pretia rerum unde. ii. 12, 14, 1 

Primi Tox quid siguificet. iL 16, 19 

Princeps. Vide Rex potestas summa. Nori- 
ter factuB sedet eo loco, quo ante populus. 
ii. 9, 8 

Principes populi liberi ri reprimi possunt. 
L4, 8 

Privatus non debet ad se rapere judicium 
quod est populi. i. 4, 19, 2. Se obligans 
hosti an contra rempublicam faciat. iiL 
23,5 

Privati an cogendi a superioribns implere, 
quod hosti promiserunt. iii. 23, 10. Pactis 
cum hoste obligantur : et quo sensn etiam 
piratis et latronibus. iii. 23, 4. Qcatenut 

478 

INDEX RERUM PRJECIPUARnr, 

capta saa faciant. in. IS, 1, 3w De beDo 

captMy qaaodo hoati, quando dritaU tC' 

Deantur. iu. 18, 2, 2 
PriTatia Chriatianis an liceat panire malefi- 

COS. u. 20, 16 
Privata canaa aim pnbliea in bdlo coDJongi 

potest, i. fi, 1 
PriTatc iDterfBctionis exempla. iL 20, 9, 6 
PriTilegia qnomodo interpretanda. iL 18, 4,4. 

QiuB late interpretanda. iiL 21, 14 
Prohibita non semper etiam irrita. ii. 5, 

10.1 
Promisw mnlta, quae natorm vaient, lex dri- 
lis irriU fadt ii. 11, 8, a Qub ploa no- 
oent promittenti qnarn alteri prosmit, an 
pnestanda. ii. 11, 1, 1 ; k cap. Id, 27, 2. 
Favoralnliay odiosa, mixta Td media, it 16^ 

10. Regom. Vide Reges. 

Promissi odos in commodam tartii adjnne- 
tnm, quid operetnr. ii. 11, 19 

Promissio non omnis tollit sommnm impe- 
riom. L 3, 16, 1. Ut Taleat aoceptanda. 
it 11, 14. IlliiiB acceptatio qnomodo fiat: 
ct an innotescere debeat promissori, nt 
perfectam rim habeat promissio, iL 11, 15. 
An rerocabilis ante aoceptationem : et mor- 
tno ante acceptAtionem prominario. ii. 11, 
16> An roTOcari posdt mortno intemnn- 
tio: item mortno tabellario. ii. 11, 17. 
Per ministnim facta qnando reTOcabilis. iL 

11, 17, 1. Facti alieni quid operetur. ii. 
11, 22. Requirit usum rationis in promit- 
tente. il. 11, 5. In errore fundata qoando 
dicatur, et quid operetur. ii. 11, 6. Rei 
illicits non valet, ii. 11, 8, 1. Facti, quod 
nunc in potestate promittentis non est, 
quid Taleat. ii. 11, 8, 2. £z metu. it 11, 
7. Ob causam ante debitam an obliget. 
ii. 11, 10. Perfecta quid, et quam Tim ba- 
beat. ii. 11,4, 1. NoTum jus confert. iii. 
18, 1. De non fugiendo a Tincto facta 
Talet. iii. 23, 8. Redcundo in certnm lo- 
cum, et de non milltando, hosti facta Talet. 
iii. 23, 7 

Promissiones causam expressom non haben- 

tes naturaliter Talent, ii. 11, 21 
Promissioni onus adjid qnando possit. ii. 

11, 19 
Promissionis materia quails esse debeat ii. 

11,8,1. Vis. ii. 11, 1,3, 4 
Promissum ob causam turpem an pnestan- 

duni. ii. 11,8,1,9 
Promittondi modus quis. iL 11, 11 
Promittens metn an teneator, iL 11, 7 

PropheCamm dicta de pace nib ETsnge 

quem sensam babeanL L 2, 8, 1 
Proportio Arithmetiea ct Geometrica an p 

prie disdngnant jnatitiani ezpletrieea 

attribntriceni. L 1, 8, 3 
Proponti, impetus, et cuds distiDetiOb BL ] 

4.6 
Proprietatb exonfinm. n. 2, 1, 2, 5 
Uporray/MTo^ iL 16, 7, 1 
npodvpa maris qoorom sint. ii. 3, 10^ 1 
ProTisi et imprvrisi distinctio. fiL 11, 4, 5 
ProTOcatio non dator ab arbitris Icetk ill 

snmmas potestatea. iii. 20, 46, 2 
Proximi nomine Tcnlt etiam qui per npn 

scntationem consequitor Jns gradns np 

rioris. iL 7, 30, 2 
Proximns qnis in lege Hebnsa : ct qoii ; 

lege ETangelica. L 2, 8, 10 
YevdcoOac in sacris Uteris quid. iL 19^ 3,4 
^eviopKtiv. iL 13, 13, 2 
Pnbliea ntilitas ad alienanda, etc VUkHfM 

tas pnbliea. 
Pndidtue conserrandss canaa Inteifectao I 

dta. ii. 1, 7 
Pndor quid, nbi de jure agitnr. iS. 10^ 1, S 
Pneri, id est, senri. iii. 14, 5, 3 
Pngnare in hostem qui mflca noo ail^ qao Ja 

Tetetnr. iii. 18, 1, 1 
Pnnid belli secnndi controversia. iL 17, 19 
Puniri an possint qui in fislsos Deos imp 

agunt. ii. 20, 51 
Punitio exem plans, ii. 20, 9, 1 
Pnpiilus ex commodato tenetnr in qoatn 

locupletior. iL 10, 2, 2 

Q. 

Qulntii ConsuUs salubre mendadnm. iS. 

14,2 
Quiritari unde dictum. iL 1, 2, 1 

R. 

Rabirii factum. iiL 22, 9, 2 

Rami ollTarum. iiL 24, 5 

Ratam rem haberi, obligatio qnalis. IL 1 
3,3 

Batihabitione snmma poteatas qnomodo o 
ligetur. iii. 22, 4, 1 

Ratio juris fundamentum. L 1, 11, 1. Adi 
quata qu«e. iL 16, 20, 2. Saepe oondd 
randa secundum potentiam, non aaonnda 
existentiam. ii. 16, 25, 1. Ij^gis mm pla 

AC VERBORUM. 

479 

Idem cam mente. iL IG, 8. Adieqnata qxue, 
et quid operetur. ibid. 

Bationii identitaa quando indacat extensivam 
interpretationem. ii. 16,20, 2 

Basis mors. ii. 19, 5, 4 

Bedempti ex captivitate redemptori qaomodo 
teneantur. iii. 0, 10, 2 

BediiMe ad hostem quia dicendus. iii. 23, 13 

Be<timi captivos et servos factos^ a>quum. 
UL 21, 24 

Begimen non omne ejus causa qui regitur. 
L 3, 8. 14 

B«gna media inter absolntum et Laconicum. 
L 3; 20, 1. A popnlo delata in dubio indi- 
Tidua. ii. 7, 14. Non deferuntur ad eos, 
qui a primo rege non descendant, ii. 7, 15. 
Non Teniunt ad naturales nee ad adoptivos. 
ii. 7, IC Ad mares Teniunt potius quam ad 
foeminas. ii. 7, 17. Quoroodo deferantur 
per successionem ab intestato. ii. 7, 10, 2, 
& § 11, 2. Patrimonolia pervenire possunt 
ad eos, qui a primo rego non descendunt. 
ii,7,12 

Begni et principatus voces signiBcatu proprio 
et improprio. L 3, 10, 1, 2. Pleni sive ab- 
soluti exempla. i. 3, 8, 8. A populo delati 
mcceasor non tenetur adonerahsereditaria. 
ibid. 

Begnum. Vide Imperium. Qaomodo divi- 
datur, et quo effectu. ii. 9, 10. Patrimo- 
niale, si sit individunm, debetur maximo 
Daiu. ii. 7, 23. A populo delatum est lue- 
reditas separata cetera hsreditate. ii. 7, 19. 
Italiae. ii. 9, 11, 4, 3 

Begula, secundum naturam esse, ut quern 
sequuntur incommoda et commoda sequan- 
tur, quomodo intelligenda. ii. 8, 16 

BogulBD do eo quod licet in bella iiL 1, 2, 3, 
4. Super deliberationibus politicis. ii. 24, 
5,1,4 

Belatum in referente. iii. 20, 24 

Beligio quo sensu juris gentium, ii. 20, 45, 3, 
& § 46, 3. Christiana, qua talis proprie, 
naturalibus argumentis non nititur. ii. 20, 
48.1,2 

Beligionis publico) status apud Hebreos a 
rege pendebat. L 4, 6, 3, 4. Jus ad socie- 
tatem humanam. ii. 20, 44, 3 

Baligionem multi affectu non judicio sequun- 
tur. Und. 

BeUglosa belli Jure destruuntur. iii. 5, 2, 4. 
Looa hostibus religiosa non sunt. iiL 5, 2,6 

BcUgiods locis parcendom in bello. iii. 12, 7 

Bennntiare. Vufa Abdioare. 

Rennntiatio de regno an noceat liberis natis, 
et an nascituris. ii. 7, 26 

Repetere (non) aliud quam dare. ii. 13, 5 

Reprssentatio apud Hebrseos. ii. 7, 6. Ger- 
manis sero cognita. ii. 7, 30, 1. In du- 
bio admittenda. ibid, Non surrogat in 
privilegium, quod sexus aut statis erat pro- 
prinro. ii. 7, 18, &ii.30, 2 

Reprassentationis jus undo. ii. 7, 6 

RepressalisB quid. iii. 2, 4 

Repressaliarum facultas impetrari a principe 
solet. iii. 2, 7, 2. Jura alia sunt juris gen- 
tium, alia juris dvilis. iii. 2, 7, 2, 3 

Repressaliis qui culpa sua causam dedemnt, 
tenentur eos, qui damnum passi sunt, in- 
demnes prsestare. iii. 2, 7, 4. Obnoxii qui 
sint. iii. 2, 5, 2. Non subsunt legati et res 
eorum. iii. 2, 7, 2. Eximi lege civili solent 
mulieres, infantes, res studiosorum, aut ad 
nundinas missie. ibid. 

Res repetita quid significot. iiL 3, 7, 1. Ra- 
pcro quid veteribus Latinis. iii. 4, 1, 1. 
Rcddero pro quavis satisfactione. ibid. 
Possunt capi, etiam in compensationem 
debiti in bello subnascentis. iii. 1, 3, & cap. 
13, 3, 1. Hostium perdere quousquo liceat 
justitia interna, iii. 12, 1. Amicorum, qum 
reperiuntur in navibus hostium, an belli 
jure acqnirantur. iii. 6, 5, 6. £t modus 
circa imperium distinguuntur. i. 3, 11, 1. 
Non perducto) intra pra'sidia dominium non 
mutant, iii. 6, 3, & cap. 9, 16, 1 

Kebus ad bellum non facientibus parcendum. 
iii. 14, 5 

Rerum defensio an jus det occidendi. iL 1, 11. 
Servandarum causa vis per Evangelium an 
et quatenus licita. iL 1, 13 

Reipublicffi bonum an nostri tantum causa 
desideremus. ii. 1, 9, 2. Forma mutata 
apud victos, et an recte. iii. 15, 8 

Rescissoria actio ex postliminio apud Roma- 
nes, iii. 9, 10, 3 

Resistere an liceat superiori in inmma neces- 
sitate. L 4, 7, 2, 4 

Resistentia obstinata non sufficitad jus inter- 
num occidendi resi«tentem. iii. 12, 16, 1. 
Aliqua in delatione imperii reservari inter- 
dum solet. i. 4, 12 

Respublica non tenetur ex facto snbditi. ii. 
22,2,1 

Restituere qui teneantur faciendo, aut non 
faciendo. ii. 17, 6 

Restitutio non debetur ex bello justoob vitio- 
sam intentionem. ii. 22, 17, 3. Rerum cap- 

4S0 

INDEX RERUM PRJ2C1PUARUM, 

tanim in hello in jure dubio qnomodo tem- 
pennda. iii. IG, 6 

Restitationem qui debeant in solidum Tel ex 
parte, ii. 17, It, 1, & 3, 10, 4 

Kestitutionia obligatio ex bello ii^jasto. liL 
16,3,4 

Restitatum debitum ex qao jure oriatnr. iL 
17, 8, 9 

Reaurrestionia spea an causa sepeliendL ii. 
19, 2, 3 

Rerocatio promisslonis. Vide PromiMio. 

Renmjndiei eximena, crimen committit. iii. 1, 
5,3 

Rex nnna eue potest plariam regnoium dis« 
tlnctorum. i. 3, 7, 2. An se adrersns cop- 
tractnm restitaere possit. ii. 14, 2, 2. An 
juramento teneatnr. iL 14, 3. Actus snoa 
priTatos a leg^ poteat eximere. ii. 14, 2, 2. 
Subdito suum auferens debet compensatio- 
nem facere ex commani. ii. 14, 7. Popu- 
lum aut successores non obligat in infini- 
tam. ii. 14, 12, 1 , 6, et quatenna obligat. 
ibid, Stipendia non solrens tenetur ridnis 
de damnis datis. iii. 17, 2, 3, 4. Minor an 
pacem facere possit. iii. 20, 3. Captims 
an pacem facere possit. ibid, £xul an pa- 
cem fscere possit. ibid, Priratus sit vi 
legis commissoriA. i. 4, 12. Partem populi 
alienare non potest. iL 6, 4. Hostis totius 
populi regnum amittit: et quomodo hoc 
capiendum. i. 4, 11. Regno ))ulsu3 jus 
habet ex foedere. iL IG, 7. Subditis jus 
suum auferre potest in pcenam: et ex ti 
dominii supereminentis. ii. 14, 7. Impe- 
rium derelinquens privatus fit. i. 4, 9. 
Regno ejectus an jus legandi habeat. ii. 18, 

2, 2. Temere bellum suscipiens ad restitu- 
tionem subditis tenetur. ii. 24, 7 

Regem (inter) et populum mutua suhjectio 
non est ordinarie. i. 3, 9, 1, & 3, 8, 14 

Keges possunt esse Christiani : et serrire 
Christo dobent, qua reges sunt. i. 2, 7, 1, 2. 
Quidam non subsunt popnlo etiam nnirer- 
sim sumpto. i. 3, 8, 8. Improprie dicti. i. 

3, 8, 11. Non omnes constituuntur a po- 
pulo. i. 3, 8, 13. Persarum summuni im- 
perium habebant, qusedam tamen facere 
juste non poterant. L 3, IG, 3. ^thio- 
pnm, summi, adstricti promissis. i. 3, 16,4. 
llebroi summum imperium habebant. i. 3, 
20, 1. Orientis, Persa*, ^gjptii, Sjri, 
Asiatici summum imperium habebant. ibid, 
Veteres Germaniss et GallisB non habebant 
summum imperium. ibid, Homani cum 

populo parti ti summum imperium. i. 3, 20^ 
5. ^gjpti summi, adstricti promissis. 
i. 3, IG, 3. Cum acta qmedam sua ab aliis 
expendi Tolunt, aut etiam rescindi, non eo 
partiuntur summum imperium. i. 3, 18. 
Creduntur in dubio Telle sequi auccesiio* 
nem, qualis in usu est in suislocis. i. 7, 11, 

2. Medii deberent cogere bellantea, ad ae- 
cipiendum sMiuam pacem. ii. 23, 8, 4. Mi- 
nores in actibus publids cum effectn oUi- 
gantur. ii. 14, 1, 2. Etiam cum homini non 
obstringuntur, Deo obstringuntur. iL 14^ 

3. Tenentur ex promisso, etiam c«usa dod 
expressa. ii. 14, 4. £x contractibua hata- 
raliter,.an et ciriliter obligentur. ii. 14, 6. 
An ex militum, aut nautarum facto tenean- 
tur. ii. 17, 20, 1, 2. Quomodo obligentur 
ex bello injusto. iii. 18, 4 

Regi regnum alienanti quatenus resiBters 
liceat. i. 4, 14. Cune esse debet ngom 
saliis. iii. 4, 1, 5 

Regis (jus) apud Samuelem. L 4, 3. Per- 
sona iuTioIabilis. i. 4, 7, G, 7 

Regum fides pro juramento. iL 13, 22, L Jn- 
dex solus Deua. i. 3, 8, 15. Actus non sunt 
irriti contradictione parentum. ii. 6^ 6^ I. 
Memoria damnata. i. 3, IG, 3. Aetna pri- 
Tati legibus communibus oiritatia reguntor. 
ii. 14, 1, 4. Non plene regnantium actus 
possunt irriti fieri, per legem popuU. ii. 14, 
2, 1. Cura generalis pro societate humana. 
ii. 20, 44, 1. Res fiunt regis Tictoris. iiL 
C, 24, 4 

Regibus captis an parcendum. iii. 11, 7, 2, 3 

Ripa privatis quando cedat. ii. 8, 13 

Ripie cujns, jure Romano. iL 8, 8. Cnjns na- 
turaliter. ii. 8, 9, 10, 13 

Roma quondam communis patria. iii, 15, 3 

Romani cur stipulationibus plus tribuaot, 
quam poctis. iL 11, 4, 2. Asperi in Tie- 
toria. iii. 11, 7, 4. Veteres dolia abstine- 
bant. iii. 1, 20, 3. Imperii quie fuemnt, 
cujus nunc sint. ii. 9, 11, 1. Sibi rindicant, 
qua} hostis ipsorum aliis eripuerat. iiL 6, 7, 
2, 3. Duri in captivos popularea. iii. 21, 
24, 1. Eorum instituta ad res beUioas di- 
rccta. ibid. 

Romanus. Vide Populus et Imperium. 

Romanorum jus in liberos. iL 5, 11. Contro- 
Tcrsia cum Latinis, et alia de duratioiM 
foederis. iL IG, 12, 4. Jus de postlimiiiio. 
iii. 9, 10, 1, 2, 4. Mos de agria captis. BL 
6, 11, 2. Circa pnedam. iii. G, 14, 4. Im- 
perator, idem Germanorum : unda^ iL 9, 11, 

AC VERBORUM. 

481 

4, 3. Jns de captiTis redemptis. iii. 9, 11, 
& S, 10, 2. Jus pro iis, qui postliminio 
redienint iii. 8, 10, 3. Lex circa res cap- 
ias, iii. 13, 4, 4. Mob circa regea captos. 
iii. 11, 7, 2, 3 
Ruben exheredatus a jure primogenitanD. 
iii. 7, 25 

S. 

Sabbathi lex pro senris. iii. 14, 5, 1. Cv^vm 
rei STmboInm. ii. 20, 45, 2. Yiolati pcena 
* cor capitalis. ibid. 

SacerdotibuB et eomm asseclis parcendum in 
bello. iii. 11, 10, 1 

Sacra cormmpi an possint jure belli. iiL 5, 2, 
1, 3. Quo sensu publica. iii. 5, 2, 2. lo 
deditione comprchenduntur. iii. &, 2, 1, & 
i. 3, 8, 3. HoBti sacra an sint. iii. 6, 2, 4. 
Populi Toluntate profana facta, iii. 5, 2, 3, 
5, & cap. 12, 7, 2 

Sacramentum militaro post Constantinum. 
i. 2,10,4, &ii. 13,11,3 

Sacris parcendum in bello. iii. 12, G 

Sagmina. iii. 3, 8 

Sagnntina controYcrsia inter Romanos et 
Carthaginienscs. ii. IG, 13 

Samsonis mors. ii. 19, 5, 4 

Sapiens natura magistratus, quo sensu. ii. 20, 

9.2 

Satisfactio ofFerenda ab eo qui deliquit, ante- 

quam justum bellum gerere possit. iL 1, 
18,2 

Saul an in impietate mortuus. ii. 19, 5, 4 

Sciens, pnosens et tacens quando consentire 
credatnr. ii. 4, 5, 1 

Scientia quando pncsumatnr. ii. 21, 2, G 

Scholasticorum sententia de mendacio et 
vquivocatione. iii. 1, 17, 3 

Scripti et sententis locus apud Rhetores. 
ii. 1G,4,2 

Scriptura in dubio ad monumentum contrac- 
tus adhibita censetur. ii. IG, 30 

Scriptunc et pictunc eadem ratio, ii. 8, 21, 1 

SjcvOior/tioc. ii. 15, 5, 1 

SkGXo. iii. 6, 24, 4 

Semiprari. iii. 11, 4, 6 

Senatus Romanus aliqno tempore partitus 
snmmam imperinm cum populo. i. 3, 20, 6 

Sententia jus proprie non dat. iii. 2, 5, 1 

Sententis quo diyidends aut conjungendie. 
ii. 5, 19. Quomodo nomerands inter eos, 
qui dispares partes in re habent. ii. 5, 22 

Sententiarum pari nnmcro reus abBolntur et 
possessor vincit. ii. 5, 18 

Sepelicndi jus quale, ii. 19, 1, 5. I^Ios unde 
ortus. ii. 19, 2, 1, 4. Hostes et inimici. ii. 
19, 3, 1, 2, 3 

Sepelicndos (ob) mortuos bella. it 19, 3, G 

Sepultura an debeatur Iiis, qui so occiderunt. 
iii. 19, 5, 1, 3 

Sepulturam prohibcre furor dicitur. iii. 19,3,4 

Sergius Paulus in magistratn manet factus 
ChristianuB. i. 2, 7, 10 

SerrituB ex Toluntate. ii. 5, 20, 27. Neuti- 
quam pugnat cum jure naturali. ii. 5, 27, 2. 
Ex poena, ii. 5, 3. Perfccta, et imperfecta 
quffi. ii. 5, 27, 1, & 30, 1. Quo sensu con- 
tra naturam dicatur. iii. 7, 1, 1 

Servitutis imperfecta) genera, ii. 5, 30. Bel- 
lica) causa, iii. 7, 5, 1 

Serrus meroedem laboris sui an sumere possit. 
iii. 7, G, 4. llesistero an licito possit do- 
mino, iii. 7, 7. Coppiosci debet, ut postli- 
minio recipiatur. iii. 9, 11, 1. Recipitur, 
ctiamsi animum res nostras sequendi non 
habet. iii. 9, 11,1. Mercenario compora- 
tur. iii. 14, 2, 2 

Senrum (in) quid vis licet, iii. 7, 3, 1 

Servi fratres nostri. iii. 14, 2, 3. Naturaliter 
pbilosopln's qui. ii. 22, 12. Ad operas ur- 
gendi moderate, iii. 14, 5, 1. Quo casu 
fugcro possint. ii. 5, 29, 2, & iii. 7, 6, 1, 
& i. 4, 7, 1. Transfugfc rccipiuntur post- 
liminio. iii. 9, 11, 1. Quando postliminio 
recipiantur. iii. 9, 11, 3. Etiam manumissi 
postliminio recipiuntur. ibid, Redemti 
quod jus apud Romanos. iii. 14, 5, & 10, 2. 
Dicuntur populi Bul)jecti. i. 3, 12, 1. Pro 
dominis bellant. i. 5, 3. Res fiunt domini. 
iii. 7, 3, 2 

Serris Roma> licebat ad statuas confugero. 
iii. 14, G, 4 

Servo Dominus quto pnestare debeat. iii. 14, 
5,1,3 

Servorum nati matrem sequuntur. iii. 7, 2. 
Deliberatrix facultas imperfecta, ii. 20^ 4, 2. 
Pilii an naturaliter servi, et quatenus. ii. 

5,29 
Servos (in) lenitas adhibenda. iii. 14, 4. Jus 

vitai et necis in eos quale, iii. 14, 3. Do- 

minorum quale, ii. 5, 28, & 3, 7, 3, & cap. 

14, 3, 1 
Servos Romanalexl)ello arcebat.i. 5, 4. (circa) 

Francorum jus et Hebrffiorum. iii. 7, 8 
Severitas laudabilis Dei, Mosis, Christi, et 

ApoBtolorum. i. 2, 8, 11 

II 

4S2 

INDEX KERUM PR^CIPUABOI, 

Sezni est qnid penonale. ii. 7, IS, 3. PriTi. 
legimn majoi qoam etaiii in regnomm 
sncecarione. iL 7, Id, 1 

Siciilc mccessionu controTenia. iL 7, 90, 2 

Eijrna Tolaotaru. ii. 4, 3 

Si?nis hoitiam nti licitam. iiL 1, 8, 4 

Significado impropriA quando admittenda. 
u. 16^ 13, 3. Strictior, laxior, et media. iL 
16, 9, 10, 20 

Silentiom non libemm nihil operator, ii. 4, 
5, 3. Qnando comensnm probet. ii. 15, 
17,1 

Simolatio qns lidta. iiL 1, 7 

Bingnlariam certaminom origo. iL 30, 8, 5 

Sin^atim licet, qaod gregatim non licet. iL 
5,24,2 

SingoU qnando pnnibilet ex facto nnireni- 
tatb. ii. 31, 6, 2 

Societaa a civitate in qno differat L 3, 31, 7. 
Cirilia ab hunaoo institnto coepit. L 4, 7, 
3. Com qniboi illidto Hebr»ifl. iL 15, 9, 
1, B. Profanis que, et qnatenns pericnlon, 
et qnomodo pericniis occnrri posiit ii. 15, 
10, 2. Negotiatoria an iniri poarit, ot alter 
damni immunis liL iL 13, 34, 3. Ubi opera 
et pecnnia inter se comparantnr. ibid. 
JN'tfii. 2. Ex qua alter nihil lucri sperat, 
non ralet. ii. 13, 34, 3. Bonomm nnirer- 
sorum qualis. ibid, NaralLf. Vide Admi- 
ralitas. 

Societatem roorte finiti, non est jnris natura- 
lis ant gentium. iL IC, IG, 4 

Sooietotis bellies dirisio. iL 15, 6, 3 

Socictate (in) partes aM]ua]e8 qnomodo intel' 
ligend«. u. 12, 31,1 

Socius sociam cogere potest, ut stet foederi. 
Ld,34,5 

Socii sociis jus reddere debent, si sobditi sui 
accnsentur. JNum. 4. ibid, Defendendi, 
qnando. ii. 35, 4. Qui sint in jure postli- 
minii. iiL 9, 3, 1. Quando partem habeant 
in pneda. iii. 0, 34, 3. In bcllo injusto de 
damnis tenentnr, interdnm et puuiri pos- 
snnt. iii. 1, 3 

Sociis illata vis quando pacem nunpat. iii. 
20,33 

Sociorum controTersi® jndicari qnomodo so- 
leant, i. 3, 31, 4, G. A sociis oppressorum 
exempla. i. 3, 31, 10. Plnriam quis prao- 
ferendus. ii. 15, 13, 1, 3. Nomine an fn- 
turi Teniant. ii. 10, 13, 1, 3 

Socios in fcpdere non nominatos adjnvore non 
est contra foBdus. ibid. Not, ii. 3 

Sollicitare subditos olienos non licet, iii. 1, 31 

Solum incnltom an concedendnm extemis. 

iL3,17 
Sorores dnas dncere ollm licitnm. iL 5, 14, 2 
Sorte amplins qnando aliqoid licite ezigi poi- 

sit. ii. 13, 32 
Sortis nsns ad bella ritanda. ii. 33^ 10 
Sparta. Vide Lacedxmon. 
Specialta efEcaciora generalibns. ii. I6y 29, 1 
Species pars substantia. iL 8, 19, 3. Populi 

qnomodo toUatur. ii. 9, 6. Id est» forma 

plures unins rei artificialis. ii. 9, 8, 2 
Specifivatione an res acqnirantnr. ii. 8, 19, 21 
Specificationis jus naturale qnale siL iL 8, 

19 
Spes lucri qnando reniat in restitntionem. S. 

17, 5, 3 

Spiritns, id est, forma, ii. 9, 3, 1 

Spolia hosti detracta qnomm sint. iii. 6^ 
\o o 

Spoliarehostem licet jure genUnm. iH. 5, 1 
Zvov^af quid. ii. 15, 6, 1 
Sponsio quid. ii. 15, 3, I. An ex notitia et 
silentio regem aut popnlnm obliget. iL 15, 

17,1 

Sponsionis CaodinsB et KumantinjB controrer- 
sia. IL 15, 16, 1, 2. Luctatiane controrer- 
sia. u. 15, 17 

Sponsores ad quid teneantur, si improbetnr 
sponsio. ii. 15, 16, 3. Tenentnr in id, quod 
interest. iL 15, 3, 3 

Sponsorum bona ad id, quod interest, obli- 
gaU. iL 15,16,3 

Stipulari pro tertio naturaliter licet, et qno 
cffcctu. ii. 11, 18, 1. Romans leges circa 
stipulationem aut acceptationem pro tertio. 
ibid, Num. 2 

Studiosis literarum parcendum in bello. iiL 
11, 10, 2 

Stnpra an contra jus gentium in bello. iiL 4, 
19,1 

Sua homini quffi. iL 17, 2, 1 

Subditi hosti militantes an pacem mmpant. 
iii. 20, 31. Alieni an bello defendi possint. 
iL 35, 8, 1. Eos sollicitare non licet iii. 1, 
31. Quando juste bellnm gerant. ii. 26, 2, 1. 
Qui. ibid, Not. 1, Hostinm nbiqne ofien- 
duntur jure beUi. iii. 4, 6, 8, 1. Reddendi 
superioribus, si bello injusto abstmcti sint. 
iii. 14, 4. Qnomodo fiant participes delicti 
superiomm. ii. 21, 7. An semper se in li- 
bertatem vindicare possint. ii. 4, 14. Bel- 
lare possunt in magistratns summsB potea- 
tatis jussu. L 4, 1, 2. Resistere imperan- 
tibus prohibentnr ex ipsa natora ciTilia to- 

AC VERBORUM. 

483 

cieUtia. L 4, 2, 1. Eorum rcsUtcntia est 
Tetita jure Uebrso, et jure Evangelico. 
i. 4, 3, 4. Fro iroperantibuB bellant. i. 6, 3 

Sabditis illata vis paccm rumpit. iii. 20, 32. 
Alterius, qui pirat® sint, vis illata, pacem 
non rumpit. ibid. Bellantibus promissa 
an teneant. iii. 19, 6. Dubitantibus tri- 
bata potius imperanda, quam onera mill- 
taria. ii. 26, 5. Interdum prsda concedi- 
tur. iii. G, 24 

Subditus cogt potest, nt obses eat, et quomo- 
do. iii. 20, 52. Dabitans an recte militet 
iL26,5,&§4. 1,4 

Subditorum facultas deliberatrix imperfecta. 
ii. 26, 4, 2. Ratione an bellum utrinqne 
justnm. ii. 26, 4, 3. Defensio an aliqua 
Justain bello iujnsto. il. 26, 6, 1. Libertas 
obligator ex facto superiorum. iii. 2, 2, 1, 
2. Factum an pacem rumpat. iii. 20, 30. 
Innocentinm res in pccnam non recte ca- 
pinntur. iii. 13, 2 

Snbditos suscipere migrantes, non est contra 
pacem, qus amicitiam complectitur. iii. 20, 
41 

Sabjectio ciyilis ex poena, ii. 6, 32. Cinlis. 
iii. 8, 1, 1. Herilis. ibU. Mixta, ibid, Po. 
pull perfecta et imperfecta, ii. 6, 31. Jos 
est in personam. Vide Lex. ii. 5, 26. Quo- 
tuplex. ibid. Fit Tel ex consensu, ibid, 
Yel ex delicto, ii. 5, 32. Christianorum, 
qua subsunt magistratui, quanta, i. 4, 4. 
FriTata. ii. 5, 8. Quid contineat. ii. 6, 27. 
Fublica qus. ii. 6, 31. Continet neceasi- 
tatem non resistendi. i. 4, 4. Yocatur et 
cirilis. iii. 8, 1. An subjicere se lioeat lege 
evangelica magistratui infidoli. ii. 15, 10 

Subordinationis natura et effectus. i. 4, 6, 
1,2 

SnbstantiiB tox pro more perpetno. ii. 12, 
26,3 

Successio titulum veterem continnat. i. 3, 10, 
5. Linealis in regnis qus. ii. 7, 22, 23. 
Cognatica linealis. ii. 7, 22. Linealis nul- 
lis gradibus terminatnr. ibid. Not, 1. Reg- 
norum in Africs partibus quibusdam. ii. 
7, 24. In regnis patrimonialibus. ii. 7, 12. 
Ab intestato unde. ii. 7, 3. Cur magis de- 
tcendat quam ascendat. ii. 7, 5, 2 

Sucoessionis ab intestato post liberos duo 
pradpni fontes. ii. 7, 9, 1, 3, & 11, 1 

Snccessionem quisqne elegisse creditur, qum 
in more patriss est. ii. 7, 11, 2 

Bncoessionam leges dirersa. ii. 7, 11, 1 

Sacoedens in regno patrimoniali indiridno 

debet aliis hsredibus id ipsum reponsare. 
ii. 7, 13 

Successores regum quando et quatenus tene- 
antur. ii. 14, 11 

^vfivXoia quid. ii. 12, 4 

Superior an et quomodo in subditum menda- 
cium committat. iii. 1, 15. Non is sem- 
per, ci^us utilitati regimen inseryit. i. 3, 
8, 14. Quid possit circa juramentum. ii. 
13, 20, 1, 3. Subditum cogere potest ad 
ca, qu89 non ex justitia, sed ex alia virtute 
debentur. it 25, 3, 4 

Superioris prsecepturo, quando excoset. it 
26,4 

Superficies an solo cedat. ii. 8, 22 

Supplicia capitalia antiquissima et in quibns 
criminibus. i. 2, 5, 6. Non solum Uebrais 
ea concessa. ibid. Not, 9, 10 

Supplicibus parcendum. iiL 11, 15 

Supplicum jus quibus debeatur. ii. 21, 5, 1, 4. 
Defensorum et non defensorum exempla. 
ii. 21, 5, 3, 5. Jus in bello quale, iii. 11, 
3,1. Causa ex quo jure cognoscenda. ii. 
21, 6, 2 

Supplices an belli jure ocddantur. iii. 4, 11 

Sjrtes an cuiquam propris. ii. 2, 3, 2 

T. 

•)?- 

Talio non transit personam, iii. 11, 16, 2 
Talionis postulatio Hebneis quo sensn lidta. 

ii. 20, 10, 7. Usus qui apud Hebneos et 

Romanos. ibid. 
Talionem in judido exigere Hebneia indul« 

turn. i. 2,8,7 
Telom quid jure Romano, ii. 1, 12, 2 
Tempi um Hierosolymorum intravit Pompeius, 

incendit Titus, iii. 5, 2, 5. Ejus religio. 

iii. 5, 2, 4 
Templa gentium a Judnls incensa. ibid, 
Templis parcendum. iii 12, 6, 1, 2, 5, 1 
Tempus immemoriale in dubio sufEdt ad de- 

relictionis pnesumtionem. ii. 4, 7. A oent«- 

nario differt. ibid, 
Tempus ad pcenitentiam dandum bis, qui 

supplido afficiuntur. ii. 20, 12, 1 
Temporia quaa vis ad pra»umendam derelio- 

tionem. ii. 4, 6 
Teneri bello qus intelligantur. iii. 20, 12, 2 
Termini sacra sine sanguine, iii. 15, 7, 1 
Terminomm duo genera, iii. 21, 4, 8 
Temc hostili quare parcendum. iii. 12, 1, 2, 

2,1,3,1,4,1,5,1,8,1,2 

48 if 

IXDEX BERUM PE-fiCIPUARUM, 

Territoriam onde dictum. iiL C, 4 
Tcrritorii pan populo Tacaa alienari potest. 

Terror non sufBcit ad jus intemam occidendL 
iii 11, IG, 1 

Tertio, qui metam non inenisit, fiietapromis- 
do tenet, iii. 10, 3 

Teetamentum eolemnitata aliqna defectum 
qnem effectnm habeat iii. 7, d, 2 

Tettamenti factio eet joria natnralis: quo 
senan. iL G, 14, 1 

Teatamenta de regnia patrimonialibns. i. 3; 
12, 5, C. Non patrimonialibui, non Talent 
niii ex populi consensu. iiL 1, 13, 1* In iis 
clausula derogatoria quantom raleat. L 3^ 
18, 2 

Testari non prohibentur extemi jure naturalL 
ii. 6, 14, 2. Quern impediens quando, et 
cui teneatur. ii. 17, 3 

Tbebaorum martjrum historia. i. 2, 10« 11, 1, 
4,7,10 

Tbebanomm bella cum Lacedssmoniia. ii. 1, 
8. Lex de rendendis liberis. ii. 5^ 5. 

Theodori iEtoli factum. iH.4, 18, 1 

Theeauma in multia regnis regi cedit ii. 8, 7 

Theeauii cujus, et de iis legea Tariie. ibid, 

Tibarenorum generositas. iii. 2, 20, 3 

TifiSv pro benefocere. ii. 13, 7, 2 

Tifitopta quid. ii. 20, G. 1 

Timothei ducis moderatio. iii. 12, 2, 2 

Titus templum incendit iii. 5, 2, 6 

Tradere se in fidem, quid. iii. 20, 60, 3 

Traditio non requiritur naturaliter ad perfi- 
ciendam alienationem. ii. G, 1, 2. Natura- 
liter ad tranalationem dominii non requiri- 
tur. ii. 8, 25. Ad translationem dominii in 
quibus casibus, etiam jure drili, non requi- 
ratur. ibid, 

Tri^ani dictum ad prasfcctum prsetorio expo- 
nitur. L 4, G, fi 

Transeundi jus per alienos fines, ii. 2, 13, 1 

Transcundum qua sit. ii. 2, 13, 1, 5 

Transfuga) jure Romano postUmioinm non 
liabent iiL 9, 10, 1. Serri postliminio re- 
cipiuntur. iiL 9, 11, 2. Ab his, a quibus 
transftigorunt, occidi solent. iii. 11, IG, 1. 
Belli jure rodpiuntur. iiL 20, 12. In dubio 
non reddendi. iii. 20, 12, 1. Eos admittere 
licet. iiL 1, 22 

Transitus nou debetur injustum bcllum mo- 
Tenti. U. 2, 13, 4 

Transmisaio linealis differt areprsBsentatione. 
iL 7, 22, 1 

Tribuni sacrosancti qaomodo fiMtL iiL 19,8,2 

Tributaris Medorum nationea an ejus condi- 

tionis manaerint, tranalato ad alios imperio. 

IL 16, 16, 4 
Tribntomm finis quia. L 2, 7, 12. Indictio 

ad Tictoris ntilitatem. iiL 6^ 15 
Tnlli Hoetilii dolus, iii. 1, 14, 2 
Tntelam (in) receptua nUiil debet agere nox- 

ium statu! cgus, a quo receptua est. iu. 24, 2 
Tntorea a quo dandi in r^nis patrimonialibns 

et non patrimonialibns. i. 3, 15 
Tjrannns titnlo. Vide luTaaor. 
Tyranno fides debetor. iiL 19, 2, & 1» 9^ 2 

V. 

Vades. iL 21, 11, 2 

Yalerii Lerini dolus, iii. 1, 17, 1 

Yandalics successbnis controrersia. fi. 7, 

30,2 
Yaaallns, qui non idem snbditns^ oogi non 

potest, ut eat obses. iii. 20, 52 
Yaaallorum jns circa alluviones. ii. 8, 1^ 1 
Yastatio. Vide Populatio. 
Yectigal man imponi an posdt. iL 3, 14 
Yectigalia pro tranaitn merctnm imponi qam 

possint. ii. 2, 14, 1 
Yela Candida. iiL 24, 5 
Yendendi llbertaa an alicni debeator. ii. 2, 20 
Yenditio potest dominium transferre ante 

traditionem. ii. 12, 15, 1 
Yeneno interficere jure gentium Tetitum. iiL 

4^ 15. Inficere tela an liceat. iiL 4, 16. 

Aquas an liceat iiL 4, 17 
Yenia dlgna quae. iii. 11, 4, 4, 7 
Yeniam dare an liceat. ii. 20, 31 
Yenire, et mittere, diversa. ilL 21, 16. Cui 

permissum, an qnem secnm dncere poasit. 

iii. 21, 27 
Verba intelligenda secundum materiam sub- 

jectam. iL 10, 24. Ex proprietate in dnbio 

sumenda. iL 16, 2 
Yerborum obllgatio interna ex mente. ii. 16^ 

1, 1, 2. Obligatio externa secundum inter- 

pretationem probabilem. ibid, 
Yeritas, id est, locutio aperta. iL 13^ 3^ 2. 

Justitia) pars. iiL 1, 11, 2 
Yestis apud Romanoa postliminio non recep* 

ta. iiL 9, 14, 2 
Yestium nomine arma non Teninnt. iiL 23^ 12 
Yctans fortius quam jubens,- quare. ii. 16, 

29,1 
Yia publica an alluTionem impediat ii. 8, 17 
Yicti dementer habendL iii. 15, 12. Yictori- 

bus permixti. iii. 15, 3^ 

AC VERBOEUM. 

485 

Victils eiipere nihil nisi qnod pacem impedit, 

laodabile. iii. 15, 2, 1. Relictnm Buam im- 

perimn. iii. 15, 7. Imperium relinqaere 

generosomm est. iii. 15, 4. Imperium re- 

linqui solet, locis qnibnadam detentis. iii. 

15i 5. Imperii pars relicta. iiL 15, 9. Per- 

miMiB 81UB leges, et magistratus. iii. 15, 10. 

Sua religio permissa. ibid, § 11 
Victor curare debet, ut religio Tera libere 

prasdicetnr. ibid. Quia dicendus. iii. 20, 

45. Ejus officium in eos, qui se deduut. iii. 

20,49,2 
Yindex sanguinis apud HebrsBos. ii. 20, 8, 6, 

& i. 2, 5, 4 
Yindicatio. Vide Ultio. 
Tindicts prirats exempla. it 20, 8, 3 
Viriati moderatio. iii. 12, 4, 3 
Virtutis actus quos jus UebrsBorum exigit, 

exiguntur et nunc a Christianis. i. 1, 17, 5 
Vis injusta naturaliter quee. i. 2, 1, 6. Justa 

naturaliter qua*, i. 2, 1, 7. Testimoniis 

probatur. i. 2, 1, 5, 7. In bestiis, quo sensu. 

i, 2, 1, 5, 3, 2. PoensB ergo lidta. iii. 1, 2, 3 
Tl, hominibns armaUs, coactisve, quid sign!- 

ficet ii. 16, 20, 4 
Yita in statu innocentiee. ii. 2, 2, 1, 2. Po- 

puli pneferenda libertati. ii. 14, G, 2. An 

obb'gari possit. iii. 2, d Tota reorum an 

examinanda. ii. 20, 30, 4 
Vitam Talide obllgari, antiquorum sententia. 

11. 15, 16, 4 
\itfB tuends causa mentiri an liceat. iii. 1, 

16. Pactio libertatem non comprehendit. 

iii. 23, 12 
Vitia qualia impunita esse debeant. ii. 20, 18, 

20,1 
Titiositas actus ab effectu discemenda. ii. 17, 

22 
Yitinm rei in contraotibus indicandnm, et 

quare. ii. 12, 9, 1 
Vitt8S. iii. 24, 5 
UlUo an juri natursB couTeniat. ii. 20, 5, 1, 3. 

Lidta jure natuns et gentium, ii. 20, 8, 2, 

3. Christianis permissa. ii 20, 10, 1, 5 
Ultionis restrictio unde. ii. 20, 8, 4 
Unio populorum, aut regnorum, quid opere- 

tur. ii. 9, 9 
Universitas obligat singulos. ii. 5, 17 
TJniTersitatiB debito singuli an obligentur, et 

quatenus. ii. 14, 7 
Voces an naturalia signa. iii. 1, 8, 1 

Vodbus (de) mcris disputatio cavenda. ii. 

20,23 
Volenti mcntiendo an injuria fiat. iii. 1, 14, 1 
Voluntas defuncti pro lege. ii. 7, 3. Qua 

pnnibills. ii. 20, 18. Dei nominatnr, ubi 

cause non apparent, ii. 20, 48, 1. Jure 

mutabiHs. ii. 11, 2 
*Yireppo\t}, figura qualis. iii. 1, 13 
*TiroK'p(ortc. ii. 13, 21 

Urbes quiedam a Deo excidio damnatas : qua- 
re. iii. 12, 2, 4. A Salomone Hieromo data) 

quales. i. 3, 12, 3 
TJrbium matricum jus in colonias apud GrsB- 

cos. i. 3, 21, 1 
Usucapio locum non habet inter duos popu- 

los aut reges. ii. 4, 1. Imo. ibid, § 2, 4 
Usunn quo jure yetitaj. ii. 12, 20, 1, 3. Ve- 

tit» lege nebnea. ibid. Not 3. Christianis 

illicitae, ibid. Crimen quibus casibas non 

admittatur. ii. 12, 21 
Usuras (drca) logum civilium efficacia. il 12, 

22. Hollandicum jus circa ipsas. ibid, 
Usus auctoritas in explicandis legibus. i. 2, 

9, 1. Rerum naturalis. ii. 2, 2, 1. Rd in 

abusu consistens sstimabilis extra rem. ii. 

12,20,2 
Uti opera oblata licet, etsi offerenti iUidta. 

iii. 1,21,22, & 2, 26,5,1 
Utilitas publica alienando bona subditomm 

pads causa, quo sensu requiratur. iii. 20, 7, 

1, & 10, 1 
Utilitas belligeranti ex abstinentia popula- 

tionum. iiL 12, 8, 1 
Utilitatis innoxisD jus. ii. 2, 11 
Uxor in corpus mariti jus habet ex lege eran- 

gelica. ii. 5, 9, 2. Rem yindicat, emtam 

pecunia sua, quam repetere potuisset. ii. 

10, 2, 2 
Uxoros, an plures habere lidtum sit: qui 

plures habuerint, qui una contenti; et an 

licitum sit eas deserere. ii. 5, 9, 1, 2, 4 

X. 

Xerxis et Artabarzanis controversia. iL 7, 29 
iSiufifjiaxia, ii. 15, 6, 2 

Zdandorum jus circa alluyiones. iiL 8, 15, 1 

LIST OF WORKS 

EDITED FOR THE SYNDICS 

OF THE 

Already Published. 

Grottua de Jure Belli et Pads, with the Notes of Barbeyrac 
and others ; accompanied by an abridged Translation of the Text^ by 
W. Whewell, D.D., Master ot Trinity College, and Professor of Moral 
Philosophy in the University. Three Volumes, Octavo. 42s, 

De Obligatione Conscientice Prcelectionea Decern Oxonii 
in Schola Theologica habUce A Roberto Sanderson, SS. Theologis 
Ibidem Profeasore Rcgio. With English Notes, including an abridged 
Translation, by W. Whewell, D.D., Master of Trinity College. Oc- 
tavo. 9#. 

Theophili Epiacopi Antiochensis Libri Tree ad Autolycum. 
Edldit, Prolcgomenis Versione Notulis Indicibus instruxit Guuelmus 
GiuoN Humphry, S.T.B. CoUegii Sanctiss. Trin. apud Cantabrigicnses 
quondam Socius. Post Octavo. 69. 

M, Minucii Felicia Octaviua. The Text newly revised from 
the Original MS. with an English Commentary, Analysis, Introduction, 
and Copious Indices. Edited by the Rev. H. A. Holden, M.A., 
Fellow of Trinity College, and Vice-Principal of Cheltenham College. 
Small Octavo, d^. 6(k 

Cjesar Morgan an the Trinity of Plato, and ofPhih Judasua, 

and qf(he effects which an attachment to their writings had upon the prin» 
eipks and reasonings of the Fathers of the Christian Church. A new 
edition, revised by H. A. Holden, M.A., Fellow of Trinity CoUege. 
Small Octavo, 4^. 

2 Works edited for the Syndics of the University Press. 

The HomilieSf with yarious Readings, and the Quotations 

from the Fathers g^ven at length in the Original Languages. Edited 
by 6. K CoBRns^ D.D., Master of Jesus College, and Norrisian Professor 
of Divinity ; KTamining Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Ely. Octavo. 

Pearson on the Creed. Revised and corrected by TsBiPLB 

Chevallieb, B.D.> Subwarden of the Univernty of Durham. Octava 

128. 

In this edition the folio of 106D has been biken as the principal model of the text, being the latest 
edition to which Uahop Peaiion made any adfUtkms or alterations; and the quotations from the 
Fathers hare been Terified throughouL The passages fhna the Rabbinical Writings and Chaldee 
Faraphraicfl hare also been caveAiUy collated. 

Archbishop Usher's Answer to a Jesuit, with other Tracts 
on Popeiy. Edited by the late Professor Scholefield. 8vo. 13^. 6(2. 

Wilson's Illustration of the Method of explaining the New 

Testament, by the early opinions qfJews and Christians concerning Christ* 
Edited by T. TuRTON, D.D., Lord Bishop of Ely. 8vo. Ss. 

Twysden's Historical Vindication of tlie Church of Eng^ 

land in point of Schism. Edited^ with the Author's MS. Corrections^ 
by Professor Corrie. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

Lectures on Divinity, delivered in the University of Cam- 
bridge. By John Hey, D.D. Third Edition, by T. Turton, D.D., Lord 
Bishop of Ely. Two Volumes, Octavo. 30*. 

Cambridge Greek and English Testament, in Parallel Columns, 
on the same page. Edited by J. Scholefield, M.A^ late Regius Pro- 
fessor of Greek in the University. Third Edition. Small 8vo. 7*. Qd. 

Cambridge Greek Testament. Small Octayo, Zs. Qd. 

Works kdited for ilie Syndics of the Univerrity Press. 3 

In Preparation. 

The Works of Isaac Barrow, compared with the Original MSS., 

and enlarged with Materials hitherto unpublished. New Edition, by 
the Rev. A. Napier, M.A. of Trinity College, Vicar of Holkham, Nor- 
folk. 

Theophylacti Commentaini in Novum Testatnentum. 

Edited by W. G. Humphry, B.D., late Fellow of Trinity College, Vicar 
of Northolt, and Chaplain to the T^ord Bishop of London. {In thePreni). 

Tbrtulliani Liher de Pnescnptione Hcfireticorum, with Intro- 
duction, Analysis, and English Notes, by J.J. S. Perowne, M.A., Fellow 
and Classical Lectui'er of Corpus Cliristi College. 

Tertullianus de Corona Alilitis, de Spectaculis^ de Idololatria, 

with Analysis and English Notes, by the Rev. George Currky, B.D., 
Preacher at the Charter House, late Fellow and Tutor of St John's 
College. 

Origeiies contra Celsum, with a revised Latin translation and 
notes. 

Chrysostomi Liber de Sacerdotio, with notes selected and 
original by Frederic Field^ M. A., lato Fellow of Trinity College, and 
editor of Chrysostom's Homilies. 

Smith's Select Discourses, edited by H. 6. Williams, B.D., 
Fellow of Emmanuel College. 

iRBNiEus, Selections from, edited by the Rev.W.W. Harvey, M.A. 
late Fellow of King's College. 

Whbatly on the Common Prayer^ edited by Professor Corrib, 
D.D., Master of Jesus College. 

4 Works edited for the Syndics of the University Press. 

Greek and Latin Classics^ with English Notes, 

for the use of University Students, 

by several Editors, 

Published. 
Cicero pro Alilone. Post Octavo, 3s. Qd. 

In Preparation. 
^SCHINES de Corona. 
Cicero pro Murena. 
Cicero de Officiis. 
Demosthenes adversus Leptinem. 
Demosthenes contra Midiam. 
Euripides. 

Homer, Tlie Iliad and Odyssey. 
Horace, 
isocrates. 

Lucretius de Rerum Natura. 
Ovid's Fasti. 

Plutarch, Select Biographies of. 
Sophocles. 

Xenophon's Ilellenica. 
Xenophon^s Memorabilia. 

LONDON: 
JOHN W. PAKKER AND SON, WEST STRAND. 

4 

\'i 

I- 

r ■ 

F 

i 

;l 

p 

: