A THINKER'S NOTEBOOK 

Nadnamoli Thera 

BERSERKER 

BOOKS 

A THINKER’S NOTEBOOK 

POSTHUMOUS PAPERS OF A 
BUDDHIST MONK 

BHIKKHU NANAMOLI 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

THE FIRST NOTE BOOK sesssssseesssessensscneenessenennensesenenrenenene 
THE SECOND NOTE BOOK 
ADDENDA .« 
General 117 
Notes on Philosophy 120 
Ontology and Buddhism — 139 
MISCELLANEA usssesssessssssseseenensessesenscessenencerseasacseacecsenesterernes 165 
Poems 167 
Tale 169 
Story 171 
Dialogues 172 
Words 175 
Today’s Fallacies and Half-Truths 175 
Impressions 176 
Canticle 177 
FROM LETTERS TO VENERABLE NANAVIRA csssssssescsossseceseens 179 
I 179 
Il 185 
Tl 188 
THE ESSENTIAL RELATION IN OBSERVING «esssssssessescsessscneees 189 
PATHWAYS OF BUDDHIST THOUGHT uiessccsssereesessnerensrenesene 198 
Buddhism: a Religion or a Philosophy? 198 
‘Does Saddha Mean Faith? Part I 
‘Does Saddha Mean Faith? Part II 
Cessation of Becoming 220 
Consciousness and Being 224 
THE SUKKHAVIPASSAKA sssecssssssscssesseenccucsnssscansensancenerseneenees 232 
Appendix 242 
Appendix II 248 

xi 

THE First NOTE BOoK 

1. Civilization is the art of living in contact with other persons with 
the minimum of discomfort. (1945) 

2. A thought for this Damocletian Age: the trouble with justice 
is it just isn’t it? (1946) 

3. For every man killed by man for the sake of facts, twenty or 
more are so killed for the sake of opinion. (1946) 

4, Worms look out of the eyes of the very rich and all the 
platitudes about them are true. (1946) 

(Later addition:) And the poor—how poor they are! 

5. I was the future and shall be the past—I am a timeless, 
everlasting Now, so short I have no end, so long I have no 
duration. 

6. If I insist on having only beauty before me I know only 
horror will be behind me, therefore I shall not dare to turn round. 
(1947) 

7. Madness is sometimes said to be divine—can the same ever be 
said of sanity? (1947) 

8. The five senses offer us five different ways of shutting out 
reality. What is intuition and what does it perceive? (1947) 

9. As electricity is made up of positive and negative current, so 
is human life a system of attraction and repulsion.—Turn off the 
current if you want quiet.—Yes, but where is the switch? 

10. Present-day politics rely for their power largely on an 
efficient battery of quick-firing slogans. (Mar 54) 

11. An unsuccessful lie conflicts with truth, but a successful 
one subverts and seduces it. (Mar. 54) 

12. Sing as loud as you will, there is nothing that does not 
eventually fall into the cavernous lap of ruinous Old Age, the 
procureuse of death. (1947) 

13. Let him who climbs the spiritual ladder make sure he has a 
sound head before he looks down into the past. (1949) 

15 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

14. How is it I have the strength to carry my own weakness? 
(1948) 

15, It is in the company of others that one can be really lonely, 
for then one’s personality is forced openly to try to express what its 
separate individuality is. (1949) 

16. If one could continue the calming process after everything 
has fallen calm one might enter the looking glass world. (1949) 

17, Among the inhabitants of Naples there are those who are 
inclined to cultivate ulcers and deformities on their bodies which 
they display while begging, in order to induce others to give them 
money. Among the inhabitants of a much wider area there are 
those who cultivate ulcers and deformities of the mind which they 
display, in company, in order to induce others to give them 
attention. (Sep. 49) 

18. The so-called seven colours of the spectrum together go to 
make up what is known as light—what, in other words, the 
scientists say is no more than a mere fractional band in the whole 
range of electro-magnetic waves—the only section of the wave- 
range which the visual sense can directly grasp. Indeed each colour 
is experienced as a particular limitation of light; light itself appears 
to be a particular limitation of the electro-magnetic wave-range. So 
would the five senses seem to be five specific limitations of the 
infinite—five exclusive ways of screening off, of shutting out the 
rest. In fact, the “outer world,” as known through the senses, seems 
to be conditioned by—shall one say our knowledge of it depends 
on—the limiting and sifting qualities of our five senses. By means of 
sifting and excluding, form could be said to be created from Chaos 
and thus our five senses are at the same time five creators and five 
ways of being partially blind. We live, as it were, in a cathedral with 
stained windows whose, to us, magnificent colour patterns let in a 
little of the light which the sun sheds indiscriminately outside. 
(1947) (Later addition:) But the “sun” would then stand for Chaos 
in our simile and how would that be wrong? 

19. If [had a child what could I say to him? “My child,” I could 
say, “you are here in this world because of my own pleasure and 
incontinence. I can offer you nothing better than become another 
‘little man’ like myself whom it is the present fashion for 

The First Note Book 

politicians and the like to idolize en masse and exploit and ignore as 
an individual. If you succeed in ‘improving’ your position this can 
only be at the expense of others and will increase its instability. If 
your position deteriorates it will be at your own expense. In a few 
years time you will, no doubt, be repeating these very words.” 
(1949) 

20. Heaven is where (it is supposed) we may enjoy what other 
people consider we ought to enjoy. (Apr. 1948) 

21. History is bones daubed and plumped out with the clay of 
opinion. (1949) 

22. The waves that die on the shore—where are they born? 
(Amalfi—Sep. 45) 

23. For a long time—over many years indeed—the atmosphere 
continued to echo the clanging of evil times as multitudes fell upon 
them. 

24. Some say “Jones has gone up in the world.” Others say “the 
world is upside down.” What has happened to Jones? (1949) 

25. Virtue is perhaps covertly disliked as much as it is because it 
entails refusing frequently what other people want one to do. 
(1948) 

26. One is, as it were, on the 20" storey of a burning house, 
and from the window there is a narrow plank leading across the 
street to the balcony of an—apparently—safe building opposite. 
(The Building Opposite whose blinds are always down, whose 
chimneys never smoke, whose doors never open, where no light is 
seen at night, about which there has been one’s frequent yet always 
inconclusive speculation.) To stay is to be burned for certain. By 
attempting the plank one will probably fall—still one knows one 
will have to walk that plank or burn. (Nov. 48) 

27. The journey through life is fingered by sign posts indicating 
routes whose bridges are found, on exploration, to have been 
breached by floods or wars. (1949) (Later addition:) The new 
“Autostrassen” have no signposts. 

28. It is spring, as the sun comes back north again, and, 
obediently, out come the bright leaves. In summer they will weary 
and darken under his rays; in autumn, as he retreats south, he 
abandons them to themselves; worn out they will die and fall to the 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

ground. Observing her own peculiar disciplines the moon watches 
monotonously throughout the seasons; waxing and waning she is 
occupied with herself—only when she is full do her three 
expressions reveal three phases of the boundless ennui she must feel 
watching all this for so long. 

¢ & *€ 

28a. The restless river slides by day and night intent only upon 
the sea. (Turin by the Po, May 1948) 

29, A function of art—of contemporary art—is to explore, to 
send scouts ever further into the wilderness of unclaimed discord. 
The advance-guard is in continuous touch with the enemy, fighting 
the unnamed, capturing the formless. Sometimes patrols fall into 
enemy hands; then, from their prison camps where madness rules, 
they send back reports, some of which seem half intelligible. (1947) 

30. Art is a reminder and, to some degree, illuminates. In my 
prison cell it serves as a screened window—which lets in a little 
light from which | infer the existence of the bright outside world. 
Were I to go and live out there, art, the screened window, would no 
longer serve any purpose at all. (1947) (Later addition:) But how do 
I know there is anything to live on out there? 

31. To say “The politicians have failed, the philosophers have 
failed, religion has failed or is out of date, science has failed and is 
not what it was thought to be,” and so on are not these all ways of 
saying that we, ourselves, have failed? The Govt. Treasury has no 
revenue unless the people work and are taxed (how taxes are levied 
and revenue spent is another question). Unless we put something in 
our bank account it remains empty. And so with religionists 
helpfulness depends upon what we put into it and continue to put 
into it. We may spend wisely or foolishly thereafter. After all, does 
not each community get the government it deserves or the religion 
it deserves, and so on? (Jan. 50) 

32. Certain water creatures delight in adorning their shells with 
other shells, pebbles, leaves: often they will stick on another living 
creature without regard to its preferences or to the position it 

dislikes. 

18 

The First Note Book 

In the building of systems of relationships among humans, one 
may often see someone build into his scheme of things—his 
psychological house, or shelter, as it were—the personality of 
another. That other personality may, on occasion, scream and kick 
against finding himself used as a brick to build another’s house, a 
tile to keep out the rain from another's room, a bronze ornament 
on another’s chimney piece, more especially if he has been stuck on 
upside down out of disregards for his feelings, or to please the 
aesthetic sense of the first-named. That you are a brick in my 
house, or that am one in yours is largely a matter of view point, 
once the building process has set in. (1947) 

33. Philosophies are to experience as maps are to the countries 
they represent. They should help one to find one’s way about, but 
even in this respect each is no more than symbolic. Philosophies 
have an ornamental value, too, just as maps have; and the latter are 
often elegant when framed and hung on the walls of rooms—used 
thus they serve quite another purpose. The prettiest are mostly 
those drawn to fancy on the basis of hearsay and those which are 
out of date. (1946) 

34. A party was once given to which Charity was invited as a 
guest of honour. However as she had only the rags of humility to 
wear and came to the front door on foot, she was turned away by 
the footman when she asked to be admitted. Nobody noticed she 
was not there. (May 50) 

35. When “duty” (as with “objective good and evil” and other 
such concepts) is brought into a discussion, beware! Mostly it is a 
means of getting you to work for some one else’s benefit without 
repaying you for it. “Jones is not doing his duty by society,” 
usually means: “I think if Jones were to do so and so instead of 
what he is doing, I should benefit. If you help me to persuade him 
we shall both benefit.” (Apr. 50) 

36. The food rotting in my guts provides me with the energy to 
play the harpsichord. 

37. The humanitarian needs an oppressed proletariat. The 
ministering angel lives by suffering. Meekness only shines forth 
when abused by the angry. (Mar. 50) 

38. What person or place or thing has benefited rather than 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

suffered by commerce and relations with me? But has anyone in 
their senses ever asked such a question? It can only be conducive to 
depression or complacency—and there is no conclusive answer. 
(Undated; 1950?) 

39. What does one say to one who has lost all he ever valued— 
to a cripple—to one who knows he must die within a brief period? 
(1950) 

40. Wandering in deserted places there are found many traces 
and tracks from which we deduce the movements of heroes and 
gods and so we weave history. Yet were our vision to become a 
little clearer we might discover that all these tracks are merely made 
by ourselves during our own earlier wanderings. (Mar. 50) 

41. One can judge people’s nature more reliably by the way 
they treat their immediate associates than by the feelings they voice 
towards humanity in general. (Aug. 50) 

42. For someone who would like to get on* but cannot, the 
next best thing is to teach others how to do. (Aug. 50) *(The 
insertion has been cancelled:) or make spiritual progress. 

43. It is impossible to please everybody, they say. And so that 
is perhaps why Saints who should be, one supposes, good enough 
to please everybody, are always dead. For then only the skeleton is 
left and everyone is free to make of them what he, in person, likes, 
and the Saints do not appear to confute such opinion. (Aug. 50) 

44. The recognition of a saint (and not only of a saint) requires 
two things: that the saint should be held to behave within certain 
prescribed limits of behaviour, and that people should have the will 
and capacity to recognize such behaviour. (Aug. 50) 

45. If you owe one a debt of gratitude, as in the case of any other 
kind of debt, it is better to avoid him until you can pay it off. (1950) 

46. Those who set themselves a final goal secretly—may be 
unconsciously—dread the attainment of it. (Aug. 50) 

47. Much of what is asserted as true is so asserted, not as a 
declaration of what the speaker knows but rather as a defence 
against doubt in the hope that the opposite proposition may be 
thereby excluded. (Nov. 50) 

48. You will never meet with a saint by walking round the 
world looking for one; but you may do so if you sit in one place 

The First Note Book 

and consider the matter. (Nov. 50) 

49. One may suspect that peo 

on their trapsings from continent 

ple whom one sometimes meets 
to continent, “looking for truth” 

are really like the man who searches his house for his spectacles 
which are all the time on his nose. But if he takes them off to look 
at them, he cannot see them for shortsightedness. (Nov. 50) 

50. Suppose boredom is 

a backstairs to liberation— 

insignificant, and so often overlooked. No one who has not known 
its higher degrees can claim to have lived. Not the Relative 

Boredom of long waiting at junc 

tions for railway connections on 

the way to visit friends—or the rashly accepted weekend with 

acquaintances—the reviewing of 
Boredom the “wasting-of-time 
enjoyment of the coming escape, 
us meanwhile. 

Absolute Boredom is rather tJ 

one’s livelihood as for the pianist w! 
desire for what we know makes us 

“Carnal physic for the sick soul,” t 
climbing of Mount Carmel, it is t! 
land which is no more, the Sin agai 
of patterns, the horror that waits 
the desert where Death mocks by 

one cannot bear but to keep the dar! 

a dull book. In such Relative 
"—feeling only heightens the 
the anticipation of which sustains 

he pain of nausea, it is the loss of 
ho loses his hands, the insatiable 
sick, it is the Great Drought, the 
he Dark Night of the Soul after the 
pillar of salt, the exile from the 
inst the Holy Ghost, the break-up 
alone in the night, the entry into 
serving one one’s daily food and 
ness of one’s own shadow before 

one for the very brightness of the light that reveals the universal 

emptiness. Do not try to turn bac! 

now—here in the desert perhaps 

there are doors open—in the cool woods they are overgrown, and in 

the busy cities they have built over 

51. Palliatives. Such thoughts 

them. (Mar. 50) 
about death as: “The end of it all,” 

“Those whom the gods love die young,’ ‘a merciful release’ etc; then 

such small dividends from the ban 
busy, you see), helping others (be 
or them), art (“it helps”), collecti 

rupt estate as: work (Iam always 
fore learning how to help oneself 
ions, Fitzrovia, Mont Martre and 

Parnasse, Via Margeritta, Bloomsbury and the Pheasantry, drink, 

travel, kindness to all except th 

humans one does not know pers 

¢ human animals, kindness to 
‘onally, politics, utopias, teaching 

what one would like to, but cannot practise. (1950) 

2 

1 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

52. In the long run mostly one is not measured (either by 
others or by oneself) so much by one’s best actions or by one’s 
worst (though the latter are the more likely of the two to be 
remembered), It is rather the average level of all one has done and 
one’s general tenor and tendencies and ways of reacting, the 
compass of one’s moods and the emotional, moral, ethical, 
aesthetical and productive range that count, that censor all one’s 
thoughts and acts. One can always try to leap to greater heights 
(and thereby risk coming down to earth more heavily). But what 
desperate work it is to try and displace in any direction the dead 
weight of one’s average conduct. (1950) 

53. Sometimes it is more difficult to sin than to be virtuous; 
though ability to do either does not ensure greatness, inability to do 
either is one of the signs of mediocrity. (Dec. 50) 

54. From the 18" to the 20!" Century it was the boast that 
human thought had at least come out of the dark woods of 
medieval superstition, credulity and obscurantism, into the 
sunshine of clear thinking where the dry breezes of scepticism blow 
unhindered. ‘Fell the trees and level the hills that still obscure the 
view; let the winds drive off the mist.’—they said. But now that 
much of this work has been accomplished it is beginning to be felt 
that there is no shade in all these flat plains of perpetual, parching 
wind and sunshine, and through this desert no flooding Nile flows. 
There are those who, secretly, would like, if they could, to 
reconstruct the dim, wet, haunted woods before they die of thirst. 
(Mar. 50) 

55. When people relate their symptoms to me I think of trees 
and of the cows that unscab their itchy backs on the bark of those 
trees. 

56. Maturity seems to be merely a name for the doorway that 
leads out of adolescence into old age. (Jan. 51) 

57. We have apparently to drink the wine of pleasure out of the 
cup of pain—and the cup remains. (Dec. 50) 

58. Religion is the organization of hope. (Oct. 51) 

59. Hope is killed by attainment. (Jan. 53) 

60. The world is like a zoo where there are no spectators, only 
animals in cages—some can move their own cages from inside and 

vv 
is) 

The First Note Book 

sometimes they play at being spectators. (Oct. 51) 

61. People are often aggressively assertive in proportion to 
their inward doubts about the truth of their hopes. Here fear lends 
strength to rally to the defence of the hopes suspected to be 
illusory. (Oct. 51) 

62. Wandering across a city—walking often quite alone, down 
dark alleys, through unfrequented districts and debouching 
suddenly onto main thoroughfares where for a spell one follows 
the main stream, is adopted by a group “he has come where we 
come from, wants to go where we want to go.” For a while it is true 
but the side streets are there. Pause in one of them for a moment, 
and the stream has moved on. So, as there is no catching up with 
the group, there is no more reason to return to the main street than 
to wander away from it... more alleys... more thoroughfares... 
Where shall we be sleeping tonight?... And those odd encounters of 
eyes in lonely alleys... (May 51) 

63. When one brings out one of one’s favourite paradoxes with 
the cliché, “I can never understand why ...,” it is disconcerting when 
someone knows the solution and one is made to understand it, for a 
mental prop has been removed, a domestic mystery debunked, a 
painted window shown to be a mere piece of wall in the rational jail. 
When one asks (not wanting an answer) in some strange suburb, “I 
wonder what is round the bend”, it seems possible that there might 
be a forgotten palace or a volcano there, or the back stairs to hell, 
yet people are mostly only too anxious to show you how 
homogeneous and respectable the suburb is. (May 51) 

64. Let us define religion as the organization of hope in such 
wise that all hopes are arranged as lesser hopes subordinated to one 
supreme hope which is of such a nature that, while it seems 
realizable, it cannot be realized now. In communism the “fading 
away of the state,” and in the old religions “heaven” and “the life to 
come” are like a rainbow (it has a treasure hidden at its base), 
clearly visible, but moves away as you approach. In fact the very 
essence is unrealizability mow. As far as the average man is 
concerned, the realization of the final aim means existence without 
hope which is shunned as futile despair and a horrible living death. 
Yet scarcely any one asks himself why he drags his heavy load of 

23 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

hope around. (Oct. 51) 

65. Like the drop of ink in the glass of water and the drop of 
water in the glass of ink, an evil doer does not purify his reputation 
with one good act, but the virtuous man ruins his reputation by 
one bad action. So evil would seem more effective than good. Odd 
that the world is not worse than it is. (Apr. 51) 

66. A man went to a theatre, but when he thought it was time 
to leave he found that the real audience was elsewhere and he was 
part of a show containing the piece he had come to see. (Nov. 50) 

67. Charity and a party of other virtues went for a trip to 
heaven. They got hungry and were served in a cafe with ambrosia 
and nectar. Now the virtues live on special diets. Charity looked at 
her plate and said: “I must be served with poverty or I shall starve. 
But there is none here.” Love said he needed separation. Hope 
wanted privation. Patience wanted adversity. Humility abuse, etc., 
etc. “Come,” said Charity, “We shall all starve here as we can’t get 
our special diets.” The others agreed and they returned to earth 
where there was a plentiful supply of special food for each. (Nov. 50) 

68. Pursuit of the “fascinating” difference of people leads to the 
discovery of the “appalling” sameness of people. “Fascinating” 
because one always hopes to meet the marvellous person who will 
be “radically different,” and eventually one’s search establishes the 
fact that people are but slight variations on the same human theme 
and it is “appalling” to find that the search was simply a flight from 
the monotony. (Nov. 51) 

69. So much can be done by teachers for others—but what can 
others do for teachers? (Apr. 52) 

70. Greek and Roman pagan thought is like the dry light of 
noon between dark nights. Early Christian thought is like a 
burning(?) fire in a vast moonless night. The Roman Catholic 
Church today is like a gas-lit street at mid-winter dusk in a foggy 
city. (Oct. 50) 

71. Funny how many claim to have the key to unlock the 
secrets of the universe—but where are those who will show, by 
example, where is the keyhole for their key? (Dec. 51) 

72. Europe has been kissed by History with a sore upon her 
lips. (May 51) 

73. The average man’s compulsive urges mostly pay him 

24 

The First Note Book 

enough wages to live on. (May 52) 

74. Intellect is like the dry land—by itself, without the rain 
drawn from the sea, it is like a barren desert. Feeling or emotion, is 
like the ocean—by itself also a desert of waves. They may cooperate 
as where Western Europe meets the Atlantic, or they may remain 
aloof and indifferent as on the shores of the Sahara. (1951) 

75. It is my ambition to attain to obscurity. (Jan. 52) 

76. All these things one gets attached to are continually letting 
one down by changing or dying or getting destroyed, or if it seems 
not, it is because one has oneself let them down by oneself changing 
or falling sick or dying. (Mar. 52) 

76a. What does one get from company? Two things 
apparently, firstly more stable and certain conditions of living than 
man as constituted can get by himself (mostly man dies by 
starvation or something if entirely isolated), and secondly a certain 
shake-up of ideas which is brought about by signs coming to one 
from “outside” (other people) in a different order than one is able 
to think up for oneself. That would seem to be all. But one has to 
pay through the nose for these. (May 52) 

77. The beauty of the world sometimes seems to hang about it 
like the shapes fancied in the pale coils of vapour exhaled by a 
midden on a still autumn evening. (May 52) 

78. There was never any time when the mortality of physical 
infants was as low as now—yet with present-day enthusiasm for 
throwing away bath water, the mortality among metaphorical 
babies was probably never so high. (May 52) 

79. If one has not attained any superiority over the average it 
looks silly to run down average people—and if one does obtain 
superiority there is no need to do so. Carping is the last desperate 
attempt at self-justification. (Apr. 52) 

80. It has been discovered that the flowering and fruiting of 
plants depends upon the right proportional length of night to day— 
and so too one might say that for a man’s personality to flower and 
fruit there is needed the right proportion between the daylight of 
reason and the night of emotion. (Apr. 52) 

81. Though we are often willingly exhorted by moral 
biologists to despise the parasitism of cuckoos and mistletoe and 

25, 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

tapeworms, the unprogressive and reactionary outlook of king- 
crabs, lamp shells and club moss, the antisocial venomenousness of 
snakes and nettles, the contemptuous and hostile seclusion of 
euphorbiae and cacti, yet it would seem that nature, with all her 
ruthlessness, is more tolerant here than they. (Apr. 52) 

82. A dead dog washed up on the lake shore; a large water 
lizard (the kind whose skin is made into handbags and shoes) puts 
its head into the mouth, between the teeth like jasmine buds, pulls 
out the soft tongue and gulps it down. It squeezes up to the 
shoulders through rents in the throat and gorges itself on the 
rotting guts inside. White fragrant flowers fall from the shore trees 
above. (Apr. 52) 

83. I should like to be sure that there was someone I had met or 
had known, who was, on balance, better off for the acquaintance. 
But how to know this? 

84. I should like to be reasonably confident of dying quietly 
without remorse for what was done badly or wrong, regarding it as 
the result of honest mistakes; and without regret for anything at all 
left behind. (Mar. 52) 

84a. Will the Behaviourist view of the mind one day seem as 
quaint as Cosmas’ description of the world seems to us? (Jul. 52) 

85. Nobody, I think, has actually said “The Kingdom of hell is 
within you”—perhaps because it is so obviously true that it does 
not need saying. The only new factor the idea of hell (the Christian 
one anyway) adds to the horrors that from time to time make their 
appearance in the world, is that of everlastingness—which shows 
nothing but man’s vindictiveness. (1951) 

86. Under the bushes in the dusk a land rail—not fugitive nor 
unfriendly. Neatly dressed in sober subdued colours as usual with 
its kind; this one in dark grey with russet head and striped pants; 
oversized shanks and toes. Prudent, grave and judicious; middle- 
class, unafraid, skilfully avoiding the inappropriate and the 
exaggerated,—the simple, Quaker-like humility a little studied? No 
use for “art”—see the huge, shapeless but so serviceable nest, and 
the complacent delight in its “song” which so nearly resembles the 
cries of a dying pig. (Mar. 50) 

87. Are not these tropical bookworms that drill through the 

The First Note Book 

pages from cover to cover wiser than we—better off in knowing 
only how to eat books than we who know only how to read them? 
We read and mark—they inwardly digest. (May 52) 

88. When all one’s associates go away for a holiday and leave 
one behind, one has a holiday oneself without the bother of 
travelling. (Apr. 52) 

88a The two opposed theories of the course of mankind—the 
past fall from grace, the present downward drive to the sordid end 
among the worms in slime and darkness and entropy—or the 
upward development from the insipid simplicity of grubs with 
triumphal progress up through the hopeful present to the golden 
wonders of the future superman (or) superdivine. 

If a man believes the first he can die like he who gets his ship 
and cargo into port before the winter gales set in. If he believes the 
second he can die like a man who is sent to a concentration camp 
and sees his bride carried off the day before his wedding. (May 52) 

89. Let us say I have come from Camden Town. I am in 
Oxford Street for half an hour looking for a shop to buy a toy and 
then I have to go on to a room in Lambeth. What has it to do with 
me if Oxford Street traces its beginnings in the Bucks and Oxon 
countryside and if its progress eastwards leads on to the blank walls 
of the Bank of England? 

What actual value or bearing has the progress of the race 
through future centuries—even if it were true—to a mortal with a 
hundred years’ life span? Is this what they offer for sale now as 
immortality? (May 52) 

90. When we are young the noise of general conversation 
seems much the most fun. When we grow up we discover the 
possibilities of the téte--téte. In maturity the monologue habit sets 
in. But now at last there is the chance to investigate the rich depth 
of the silence when the monologue is suspended. (May 52) 

91. If I must believe in something, let me believe in the next 
world—not in this death’s antechamber. For if this world is good 
and true then death must be horrible—and it is the only thing that 
is certain. (1948) 

92. Man has got bored with prostrating himself before god, so 
he now indulges his need for self-prostration by doing so to the 

27 

A Thinker’ 

state or to the material world of 
according to his new, creed, as hi 
worship a master because this 

power over others in the Master’: 

93. The sweetest words are t 

94. The past is full of peop 
menacing utterances for which t 
god. They do the same now but 
and the state. (Sep. 52) 

94a That is mere escapism” t 
to believe there really was an esc: 
not take it? (Sep. 52) 

95. The bars of one’s prison 

’s Notebook 

the five senses, worshipping them, 
is omnipotent master. Men like to 
gives them authority to exercise 
's name. (Aug. 52) 

hose not spoken. (Aug. 52) 

le who have made portentous and 
hey have claimed the authority of 
claim the authority of the people 

hey say—but if they were suddenly 
‘ape, are we to suppose they would 

are the people around one—and I, 

too, am a bar in each of their prisons. Much of the ‘help’ we give 

each other is just cement to fix th 

96. I cannot see: 

e bars more firmly. (Sep. 52) 

why it is better that there are more people in the world at a 

given time (is Belsen full better t 
that the trend of evolutio 

han Tristan da Cuftha?); 
mn needs must coincide with the 

direction I or any one would like it to be taking, nor that its goal (if 

any) is mine or theirs. 
97. What should a compass 

jionate man do who sees a savage 

tiger about to eat poisoned meat? (Oct. 52) 
Or who when walking beside a deep and dangerous river, and 
unable to swim, sees a man drowning in the middle of the swift 

current? Ought one to walk besid 

le such rivers? 

98. The voices of jungle birds—like concert flutes in the hands 

of idiot children. (Oct. 52) 

99. Worship of an anthropomorphic god is merely a form of 

narcissism and worship of the stat 
up. (Oct. 52) 

te is the same only more of a close- 

99. Worship of an anthropomorphic god is merely a form of 

narcissism and worship of the sta 
up. (Oct. 52) 

100. Autumn hush in an 
loneliness, small distant sounds, 
not-yet-ness of (coming) winter. 

101. When I have to make up 

te is the same only more of a close- 

English August. Transparency, 
, stillness of (departing) summer, 

(Nov. 52) 

my mind, I am forced, like Mark 

28 

The First Note Book 

Twain, to think I must have a great deal of mind for it to take so 
long to make it up. But when I give someone even a little piece of 
my mind, I seem to have not enough left for myself. (Jan. 53) 

102. The potentialities of any situation are, as it were, its womb 
full of litter. When we say “a choice has been made,” we are indeed 
stating that these offspring having matured, one of them has 
overcome the others and, in order to be able to express itself in the 
stream of actuality, to get chosen, it has had to kill them and 
devour their substance. For if once one choice has been made all 
other potential choices are irretrievably lost. But to suspend choice 
would be to suspend the flow of becoming. And so this cannibalism 
seems essential to becoming. (Jan. 53) 

103. What bores me is that whenever I look at anything I am 
precluded for just that amount of time from looking, at anything 
else. (Jan. 53) 

104. The invading platitudes that advance like sand dunes in 
the desert and bury the oases. (Jan. 53) 

105. One’s physical body lives inside the protection of its skin; 
and one’s mental body, as it were, lives inside the protection of its 
skin of fixed concepts. Just as one’s physical body heaves earth 
about with a spade, grows vegetables and cooks itself meals of 
physical food, so one’s mental body heaves ideas around, grows 
notions and cooks itself mental meals of definitions, purposes and 
aims which keep it going. (Jan. 53) (Later addition) Then there is 
the lavatory side of the simile. 

106. Eternity is a finite concept which is perhaps why Blake 
said that “eternity is in love with the productions of time.” These 
oppositions live on the borders, as it were, half beyond the horizon 
of one’s experience and they depend of the fact that I am I, and 
have an horizon to my field of experience, and that there has to be 
a beyond to it. (Jan. 53) 

107. This age is the age of spring cleaning ... spring after spring, 
and the furniture gets shabbier and shabbier and has to be replaced, 
and the walls get filthy and have to be repainted, and the tiles fall 
off and have to be put back, and the owners grow old and are 
succeeded by their heirs, and the house falls down and has to be 
rebuilt, and the state collapses and has to be reformed, and the 

29 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

world economic system gets out of date and has to be remodelled, 
and the world sources of supply dry up and new ones have to be 
found, and the sun cools down and the solar system gets deranged... 
It is the “progress” which keeps you where you are; and the whole 
thing is kept going by hope and fear, dangling their carrots and 
cracking their whips. (Jan. 53) 

108. Life and the world and oneself are nothing but a vast 
tautology. (Jan. 53) 

109. There are three ways of feeling low, or levels of fatigue 
(and they can all happen at once): physical, for which one takes rest 
and tonics; mental, for which one changes one’s environment and 
habits; and spiritual (which, is perhaps comparable to what the last 
surviving inhabitant of an oasis being blotted out by sand—in 
modern parlance, a “displaced person”—might feel), for which one 
takes time. In all three cases one hopes the remedy will be effective. 
(Jan. 53) 

110. Three kinds of people: Those who seem nicer when absent 
than when present, the opposite kind, and those who are equal 
present or absent. (Jan. 53) 

111. Dogmas are like stays to sustain a sagging understanding. 
But as they hold one up so too they hold one back. (Jan. 53) 

112. One may distinguish at least five layers in the mental 
ocean: (1) the public stratum of communicated reasoning and as 
much of the emotions as is communicable or convenient to 
communicate, (2) the bedroom layer, private to couples, (3) the 
evident personally Private layer, private to oneself because 
incommunicable or inconvenient to communicate, (4) the lower 
personal layer half glimpsed, half inferred, incommunicable, (5) the 
supposed “unconscious depths” postulated in order to explain 
inconsistencies,—like phlogiston? 

On the surface of it all reason floats like the unsupported layer 
of plankton. The great Philosophical Systems, the great Religions 
and Political Civilizations grow like organized mats of sargasso, 
heaving and drifting with the swell and the currents of the lower 
layers dissolving away. On the plankton reasoning birds walk, feed 
and so on. (Jan. 53) 

113. One’s life is like a jaunt in a car running without brakes 

30 

The First Note Book 

down a long hill towards a chasm. It makes little difference who 
drives it, for in any attempt to turn it round uphill its own 
momentum will overturn it and send it rolling down towards the 
same abyss. Skilful driving, only averts the overturn. (Jan. 53) 

114. A man’s life is like a day’s journey travelled, westwards 
and facing always the way one has come. In the morning the field 
of experience is bright, simple and—dazzling. Shadows are thrown 
by the sun from things already past and known and they need no 
interpreting—and there is nothing to hinder fancying the future. 
But after midday the sun gets ahead and there begin to fall—into the 
field of vision shadows of things before they are seen, some of 
which can be recognized as similar to things already known, but 
others not. And now the future journey depends on how these 
shadows are interpreted before the things which cast them—are 
encountered. And as the day draws on the shadows get longer and 
more intricate. And meanwhile, as when looking back from a car 
travelling down a long avenue of trees that are slipping by, the trees 
appear to get rapidly smaller as they recede, but distant hills behind 
in the background, though receding too, seem, by contrast with the 
shrinking trees, to be getting larger and larger. (Jan. 53) 

115. If people’s lives were adequate there would be no need for 
them to go hunting outside themselves and their surroundings by 
reading novels, going to cinemas, football matches and other forms 
of hero worship, and, vicarious life. At different times self 
discontented people have admired kings and aristocracy, man in the 
street and workers, farmers, govt. officials, the rich, the poor, the 
good old times, the good time to come, saints, foreigners, travel, 
mountains, the sea, the country, the city, this world, the other 
world, the West End, the East End, round the corner, humanism, 
satanism, solitude, company—but never what a man is himself 
now. (Apr. 51-Jan. 53) 

116. Why are the rich rich? Because society as it constitutes 
itself, by consenting to their status, is in fact paying them wages for 
the qualities it recognizes (the wisdom or folly of society of so 
doing is not at issue here). But this being so the rich then claim 
intrinsic worth not based on the society on which their status 
depends, and they fancy they have independent ownership of their 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

wealth. Forgetting their position is supported by society they bully 
it. For a while society seems to like it but later it turns and rends 
them. But in so doing it seems to be punishing them for its own 
stupidity and deficiencies—after which it pays others to be rich, and 
so this process goes on. (Feb. 52) 

117. What moved unicellular amoebas to amalgamate 
themselves into multi-cellular units like hydra and volvox? And 
multi-cellular units into societies of units like the Portuguese man 
of war? Was it boredom? And in the transitional stage did they live 
in loose societies like sponges or like termites or like us? And came 
to sell themselves to that association for their livelihood? And did 
they evolve a means of communication by which they exchanged 
experiences, built up a body of knowledge, and dominated each 
other, thus excreting a psychological glue in which they got 
trapped into new emergent complex units from which there was no 
longer an escape, except by the death of the unit which, as simple 
cells they had no necessity to know? An amoeba’s death is an 
accident, not a necessity, but to a complex unit death comes both as 
an accident and as a necessity. Are we heading towards new 
emergent complexities which will produce a new emergent kind of 
death? Up to now it has been an instantaneous affair but might we 
not invent a kind which lasts—a real “living death”? (Oct. 52) 

118. What is the matter with edifying poems (Tagore’s 
Upagupta for instance)? Does it fail on the highest level because it 
assumes the necessity (the “rightness”) of suffering without which 
the virtue, say, of unselfish service, collapses for want of anything 
to serve? No one need deny that suffering will be /essened if the sick 
are helped, and if prisoners help each other (though a study of 
man’s behaviour indicates this solution is less simple than it appears 
on the surface), but are we to adopt as the ultimate principle that 
the disease ought to be maintained so that there may be sick to 
serve—that all people ought to be kept in prison that they may need 
each others’ help; or, on the contrary, are we to adopt the principle 
that while it is good to help it is better to cure the disease and 
remove the necessity for prisons, so that help will no longer be 
necessary. Advocates of the former principle against the latter are 
in fact arguing that all physicians and surgeons should stop their 

32 

The First Note Book 

work and become nurses instead. (Jan. 52) 

119. There are those who like distant pen-friends whom they 
haven’t met better than neighbours whom they have. (Jan. 53) 

120. Just as one can arrange bits of iron, etc., into a 
hermetically sealed box which imprisons other pieces of matter, so 
one can arrange thoughts into a box too, which effectively 
imprisons other thoughts. (Jan. 53) 

121. There seem to be three main kinds of intoxicants or 
“opiates.” The physical ones, and religion, and politics. The former 
kind is just as popular as ever, but the last seems to be ousting the 
second (philosophy and works, precept and practice, etc. are 
subsumed under one of the latter two mostly). The ordinary man 
absolutely needs one of the three to screen from him the vision of 
the futility of life and the world. (Jan. 53) 

122. It is rather more usual in these times for men to be 
betrayed by their countries than for them to betray their countries, 
which is why there are so many “displaced persons.” (Apr. 53) 

123. In their high chilly palaces in heaven they need the fires of 
hell to warm them. 

If there were no heaven for its whole weight to press down on 
hell, the fires of hell would expand and cool down, and its 
inhabitants would have nothing to hate and envy any more. The 
wardens of hell would be out of a job, displaced persons and the 
inhabitants of hell would have none to look after them. (May 53) 

124. The past is the cesspit of the eaten, digested and excreted 
future. Like trees well-rooted in their own decayed leaves, we fruit 
best when deeply rooted in our own past. (May 53) 

125. Little boats of thought go fishing from time to time on the 
waves of the emotions. (Jan. 53) 

126. In all the hells that all the religions have described, this 
sameness and lack of originality is the most striking thing. (Jan. 53) 

127. Interpretative thoughts settle on a bare sensory perception 
like a swarm of blue-bottles on an open wound. (Jan. 53) 

128. There is no need to wear one’s deeds like medals. One can 
be just as much mentally nouveau-riche as financially. (Jan. 53) 

129. One of the most remarkable facts of this age is the 
negligible direct personal power which scientists have in the 

33 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

control of the world’s affairs. The marvellous means they so 
successfully produce are always used by non-scientists against 
whom the scientists themselves seem to be powerless and even 
purposeless. What clever sheep they are. (Jul. 53) 

130. It is not memory that is the ‘positive’ achievement but 
‘forgetting.’ It is not strange that we remember so many things— 
what is strange is that we can forget anything: it is strange and it is an 
achievement. The moments of happiness in this world are achieved 
by (consciously or not) blotting out the disagreeable impressions and 
memories when agreeable ones are present. (Aug. 53) 

131. The world as a mass of lies all struggling with each other 
to become true. (Oct. 53) 

132. How much better to be neglected than championed or 
abused by the wrong people. (Nov. 53) 

133. While Continental European Thought favours great 
philosophical systems built up according to a plan and founded on a 
central purpose, English thought has favoured the practical, the 
empirical—bodies of partially coordinated techniques for living and 
thinking, leaving the central purpose of life unstated—as something 
almost indecent to inquire into what purpose has been half 
instinctively referred (when necessity arose) to the Church and the 
Divine Right of Kings, the individual conscience of a man (the inner 
voice), the course of nature (progress and natural selection), public 
opinion, the statistical average, the Great Mathematician, genes— 
actually these are no more than painted panels on a sealed cassone for 
which there are many keys, but which has no lock. (Nov. 53) 

134. The world of what is there, is perpetually haunted by 
what is not there—what is not, but might be, there; what could not, 
but ought to be, there. (Nov. 53) (Pencil note:—What is there? No 
answer.) 

135. Truth is like the black background behind the stars 
(because it is ungraspable). Beauty is like the beam that goes out 
from a search light—because it goes out from the subject and 
illuminates some objects, leaving others in darkness—and it has no 
effect on the black background behind the stars. (Nov. 53) 

136. Curious that I seem to feel most at home when abroad. 

(Nov. 53) 

34 

The First Note Book 

137. I have a working principle—which sometimes paralyzes 
many of my impulses to action—that it is wrong (i.e., will lead only 
to failure to attain what one expects)—to take any action that is 
inspired or suggested by or has as its principal motive, opposition 
to (that is desire to snub or provoke or impress) someone else, (or 
even in its most general sense perhaps) one of the elements needed 
to avoid disappointment seems to be action taken for reasons which 
are “at right angles” to personal agreement or disagreement. (Nov. 
53) (Pencil note: In brief; don’t act out of spite?—I suppose so.) 

End of the First Note Book 

35 

THE SECOND NOTE BOOK 

138. Harmony illuminated by consciousness casts a shadow of 
disharmony. Power illuminated by consciousness casts a shadow of 
impotence. Non-being illuminated by consciousness casts a shadow 
of being ... (Nov. 53) 

139. Some time this century, I was told, the Houses of 
Parliament, as the dominant governing body of the Church of 
England, enacted that Anglicans need not believe in Hell. I have 
often wondered what happened in the Anglican Heaven after that. 
Have the heavenly palaces (or clouds), which had till then been 
conveniently warmed by central heating—they are so high up— 
from the eternal fires of Hell now put out by man, been growing 
gradually cold (like London in the early months of 1947 when 
there was a blizzard and no coal)? And so the Anglican Heaven 
must now be frozen quite stiff, and no one can get into or out of it. 
And all the bad people, like the good, have to be reborn on earth 
again as men—aiter all they must be reborn somewhere, and if there 
is no Hell or Heaven any more, where else? And that will then 
obviously go on forever and ever ... Unless perhaps the British 
Parliament re-establishes belief in Hell. (Dec. 53) 

140. Religion according to Marx is an opiate for the masses; but 
Marx being more up to date than the old religions gives them 
morphia instead. (Jan. 54) 

141. Facts are the one thing I do not believe in (any way there 
is no need). I have, admittedly, to “deal with facts” (so has a lunatic 
with his hallucinations); but that is no reason at all that I should 
believe in them (like the lunatic). A. N. Whitehead, the great 
mathematician—who I feel was a Protestant Archbishop manqué— 
often appeals to “stubborn facts” as the last authority, with a sort of 
unctuous worship. In this he exemplifies, I think, a disease of the 
modern mind, the tendency to indulge in masochistic orgies of 
prostration before the whip of its own contradictory sense 

37 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

experience—another kind of flight from oneself. (Dec. 53) 

142. I met a daddy-long-legs today, but not quite the kind one 
is used to. Though its body and wings were the ordinary size and 
shape, its legs were a full 3” long, thin as 100% cotton, with a 
baroque curve, and clothed in black-and-white-banded football 
stockings. It was like one of those creatures in Dali’s Temptation of 
St. Anthony. A product of natural selection? Nonsense. Made by a 
Creator then? But why not the third possibility, that its family had 
always been interested in being different, and had worked it all out 
themselves? “Let us show them” I can hear them saying. Now, 
darling, you must do like this always, and get your children to, 
too... (Jan. 54) 

143. The sun sees no shadows. (Jan. 54) 

The shadow sees no sun. (Feb. 57) 
I see the shadow and the sun—who sees me? (Jun. 58) 

144. If I say in the morning “I believe in God” and in the 
evening “I do not believe in God,” I am untrue to my belief and 
renounce my consistency, but preserve my freedom. If I keep to 
one assertion, I am true to my belief and preserve my consistency, 
but renounce my freedom. To be free is to be “untrue.” (Jan. 54) 

145. A half-truth is more effective—more deadly, says the 
moralist—than a lie, because the element of truth convinces and 
with the help of that conviction the false element goes deeper. (Jan. 
54) (Later addition:) What is a half-truth? What is Truth? 

146. In the 19** century there were the interdependent three 
coordinates of three-dimensional space, and there was time, and 
there were conscious observers. In the 20 century there are the 
interdependent four coordinates of the space-time continuum, and 
there are the conscious observers. Will it one day be seen that there 
are only the interdependent five coordinates of the space-time- 
continuum-observed-by-some-consciousness, and no unrelated 
extras lying around? It seems unarguable that any event necessitates 
a position in three-dimensional space, at a moment in time, from an 
affective-volitional conscious standpoint. The five must go 
together, and failing any one of the five there is (bar of artificial 
abstraction) nothing to talk about at all. 

38 

The Second Note Book 

“Ah,” they say, “but what about records taken of events which 
nobody was watching? That proves that things happen 
independently of an observer.” Actually it proves nothing of the 
kind. It only raises a fundamental aspect of conscious experience: 
that any given experience consists of two elements—what is 
actually sensed, let us say, and what is “interpreted from” that ‘basic 
sensum.’ If I see a tree, shut my eyes and do not see the tree, and 
open my eyes and see the tree, I say that the tree ‘was there’ when 
my eyes were shut, but it ‘was there unobserved.’ If other people 
with eyes open or with cameras, tell me it was there, or produce a 
photograph of it, at the time my eyes were shut, this is simply a 
new experience which, by inference, I relate to the eyes-open 
experience of the tree, and which I build into the ‘eyes-shut-tree-still- 
there’ concept. A tree that ‘is there’ unobserved cannot inherently be 
known other than by inferential knowledge, and that is ipso facto on 
a different level to the knowledge of the direct experience of ‘eyes- 
open-tree-observed’ experience. No amount of witnesses or records 
of a mechanical nature affect this principle at all. They are simply 
further ‘direct-eyes-open-observed’ experiences which the mind 
makes use of to strengthen its inferential (transcendental in the 
existentialist sense, perhaps) concept. (Feb. 54) 

147. What is one going to do if the scientists produce a ‘new’ 
and ‘superior’ species of man?—superior in whose opinion?—And 
(which is really frightening) if they find the means to avoid the 
inevitability of death? (Feb. 54) 

148. How much of what I think or say or do arises out of 
agreement with, or opposition to, what other people say or do, and 
is not spontaneous? (Feb. 54) 

148. How much of what I think or say or do arises out of 
agreement with, or opposition to, what other people say or do, and 
is not spontaneous? (Feb. 54) 

149. If you are not master of the facts they will beat you down 
with opinions. If you are not master of the void they will beat you 
down with facts. (Feb. 54) 

150. One is constantly encountering the limitedness of 
universal principles, also the secondariness of first principles. (Feb. 
54) 

39 

The Second Note Book 

put across successfully and so it is constantly conscious of its own 
appearance and often anxious about it. It is haunted by the fear of 
being seen, not as a fraud, which it is not, but in some light which 
would be incompatible with its own good opinion of itself and 
undermine its carefully maintained self-confidence and composure. 
Being ignominiously chased is for it much worse than being killed, 
and dignity is valued higher than life. The “good” clever cat is 
skilful and elegant. The “bad” stupid cat is clumsy and dirty. Cats 
are only vulgar (and how!) at night. Perhaps Siamese cats know all 
this too, which may be a reason why they are a sort of feline 
Pekinese. Cats are cosy but aloof. To refer to dogs as “he” and to 
cats as “she” is very misleading. And cats are not “catty” about each 
other. 

There is another point of difference: a dog is not only 
concerned to discover its human patron’s opinion of it and to 
“serve” that; but it is also interested that other dogs should know 
about this, and it is also interested in other dogs’ behaviour and 
personalities: “Smell me and I will smell you.” To a cat, on the 
other hand, other cats are altogether an accidental feature of its 
world (“love” apart—by day, at least), and unless actively in the 
way, they form absolutely no part of its life. So a dog may go about 
as one of a group or a pack either a leader or led; but not so a cat. 
(Jun. 54) 

156. Can one wonder at the picture of confusion man presents. 
He chooses as his herald of peace the dove, a singularly quarrelsome 
and disagreeably selfish and greedy bird, as anyone who has kept 
turtles will know. He takes the bee’s honey, mocks them for being 
“busy,” and praises ants, mindless, mechanical, vitriol-throwing, 
hag-ridden ants, as his ideal of thrift. Jun. 54) 

157. I find puns more important than facts. The Catholic 
Church, says Joyce, was founded upon a pun (the Rock of Peter). 
But that apart, there is hardly anything we do or think that has not 
a double meaning. (Jun. 54) 

158. It is our eyes that blind us and our ears that deafen us. 
(Jun. 54) 

159. Let us define suicide as a “half=death”—the death of the 
object while the subject lives, or vice-versa: an extreme choice, the 

41 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

result of the extremity of conflict. 

Intellectualism or rationalism kills the object by cutting it up 
with analysis, and so, in the extreme, what is left is perfect vision 
and perfect darkness. Nothing can escape the eye and there is 
nothing left for it to see—“the living death of the subject.” 

Faith kills the subject by refusal to take account of the 
generality of experience and its trends and contradictions. The light 
of faith is focussed on one aspect only, whatever it may be, till the 
eye is burnt out and blinded. Nothing is left unilluminated in that 
object but there is no eye left to see it—“the living death of the 
object.” 

Actually both extremes imply a self-contradiction. But they are 
not equal. For if we take the two tendencies short of their 
extremes—the eye that has outgrown its object and the object that 
has outgrown its eye—the first eye-object relation gives us hunger 
and the second nausea. (Jun. 54) 

160. It is certainly wrong to say pain and pleasure are equal and 
opposite. For suppose I am sitting feeling neither, I can always (so 
long as ‘the nerves are functioning’) be sure of causing pain by 
sticking a pin into myself. But the same does not apply to pleasure 
at all. 

Suppose we distinguish (a) mental unpleasure and (b) mental 
pleasure as (provisionally) more or less opposites, and (c) physical 
pain and (d) physical ... yes, what? ... Well, certain kinds of 
excitement arising from touch (very provisional). The usual 
combinations (the obvious ones) are (a) (c) and (b) (), the other 
two (a) (d) and (b) (c) also occur (unnoticed) as say guilt and sadism- 
masochism. The combinations (a present) (a past) and (b present) (b 
past) are obvious. The combinations (a present) (b past), another 
form of guilt and (b present) (a past) ... etc., etc. The point is that 
this analysis which is not carried far enough and is not accurate, is 
enough to show that the pleasure pain situation is not at all the 
simple matter it is supposed to be. (Jul. 54) 

161. Hallucination I take to be meaningless, unless applied to 
“five-sense” experience. And on that basis I accept (pro tem) 
Whately Carington’s description of “hallucination” and “genuine 
experience” as given in “Matter Mind and Meaning”—ie., a 

42 

The Second Note Book 

“genuine experience” is not distinguishable, if analysed, from a 
“completely organized hallucination.” To mental images the term 
‘hallucination’ is inapplicable: it can only signify five-sense 
experience that is not properly organized. (Jul. 54) 

162. He lives in a room hung with luminous curtains by whose 
luminosity he is able to see: he sees his immediate surroundings, 
and he sees the curtains themselves moving and agitated, as though 
by the impact of bodies behind them—but with the raising of the 
curtains there is nothing but darkness. (Jul. 54) 

163. Classical tragedy (according to Aristotle) is played upon 
the feelings strung between the opposites of pity and to terror. 
Existentialism seems to use the axis choice a man is forced to 
choose, terror. Existentialism seems to use the axis of choice— 
nausea (with the premise that a man is forced to choose to exercise 
his freedom). 

164. If any ‘progress’ is to be made, it is by continuous vigilance 
over acts and by continuous re-examination of facts. Sep. 54) 

165. All governments are a symptom of a universal disease, the 
need to be governed; all governments are bad, and some are very 
bad. (Sept. 54) 

166. With the spreading of the Northeast Asian prison and the 
American madhouse in this century’s second half there will soon be 
no third choice left. Then there will be the question to decide (the 
decision perhaps not in one’s own hands altogether) whether it is 
better to be an inmate or a warder—An inmate in America? A 
warder in Asia? or vice versa? (Oct. 54) 

167. As to faith: to make a principle work, that is, to prove it 
by results—say to swim out of one’s depth for the first time— 
requires absolute faith that the practice learned will preserve one 
from drowning. (Oct. 54) 

Then I can only preserve my faith by not learning to swim. 
(Jun. 54) 

168. The extending of knowledge tends to show that it is not 
possible to say of any principle “This is a/ways right’ or of any 
generalization “This is always true’ though one can say ‘mostly’ or 
‘virtually every time.’ (Oct. 54) 

169. When I pursue the concept of God, the symbol with 
which the theological systems interpret the Mystic Experience, I 

43 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

feel as if I were pursuing a rainbow. I see, as it were, the beckoning 
rainbow inviting the mind to obtain the tangible experience of 
touching something. But when I walk towards it through the rain, 
unlike a flowering tree, it recedes and then vanishes. Now for a 
rainbow I must have the sun behind and the rain in front. If I 
pursue the rainbow I shall go on getting wet. If I turn round no 
rainbow is visible. (11 Dec. 54) 

170. Overtly wanting to be of use to others seems scarcely 
distinguishable from covertly wanting others to suffer and need 
one’s help. 

171. Heaven must be rather like a museum where our past 
love’s and hope’s fantasies are frozen and stored away behind glass, 
untouchable, in an air parched of the dampness of the suffering and 
change that lent them the illusion of life and reality. Everything we 
create for ourselves in this world we mentally kill and store away in 
heaven. (Dec. 54) 

172. We survive in a narrow shifting territory between the 
dullness of order that drives the mind on towards the nauseating 
safety of absolute fixity, and on the other hand the excitement of 
disorder that sucks it towards the vertiginous thrill of being 
smothered by entropy. (Dec. 54) 

173. The sort of person who provides unquestionable answers 
to unanswerable questions. (Nov. 54) 

174. Lam not so much interested in arguments that one ought 
to believe this or that, or to disbelieve it—but rather in the fact that 
one is forced by the nature of experience to believe or disbelieve 
(which is only a mode of belief). ‘The octopus sucker must stick to 
something. (Dec. 54) 

175. While every inference still smacks of fact, there is no fact 
not infected with inference. (Dec. 54) 

176. A little chaos in the materialist order is like a drop of oil in 
a machine. (Dec. 54) 

177. Though vision so much dominates our world, we 
nevertheless do not quite trust it and always seek to confirm it by 
touch; but when we touch something we look to see what it “is.” 
(Dec. 54) 

178. “The five senses are notoriously unreliable” they say; but 
they always put theory to experimental test. 

44 

The Second Note Book 

179. Today’s trite thought—so many people have said that the 
world is a prison, but I can never find out for certain who is 
supposed to be inside and who outside. (Dec. 54) 

180. Any assertion that can be made can be contradicted. It is 
only by an appeal made to the empirical world (of probability, of 
things and events) that one side can be established against the other. 
All syllogistic proof rests on initial assumptions from empirical 
observation or arbitrary assertion. Where no appeal to empiricism 
is possible (as in metaphysics) it is impossible to establish one side 
of a contradiction against the other (unless one counts 
establishment to be exercise of force and violence and physical 
elimination of physical opponents). (Jul. 60) 

181. It is a mistake to compromise with the Devil and not with 
man. The alternative is an angry man with compromised 
principles. (Jan. 55) 

182. Just as the word “floating” signifies at its simplest a 
complex—at least a liquid volume with a surface against a gaseous 
volume and a solid (or oily) entity to float on the surface between 
the two volumes: so experience always, even at its simplest, implies 
a complex—a manifold subjectively organized in or against a 
manifold objectively organized with a surface dividing them, the 
surface being indescribable in terms of either manifold except as 
‘not’ or ‘nothing.’ (Jan. 55) 

183. Doing one’s duty consists in doing as the majority are 
supposed to do. (Feb. 55) 

184. Faith seems to be the subjective counterpart of Truth, 
which is objective. Speaking in terms of ‘things’ they describe ‘the 
same thing’ from opposite sides; but I take ‘things’ to be mental 
constructs out of the welter of the 5-sense data. (Mar. 55) 

185. Absolute Truth would be incompatible with life as 
absolute light would be with vision. (Mar. 55) 

186. The philosopher’s function seems to be to substitute for 
the experiential ‘almost’ and ‘mostly’ the words ‘entirely’ and 
‘always,’ upon which the fiction of the ‘absolute’ grows. (Jan. 55) 

187. Marvellously at variance—the two basic doctrines of 
today: Evolution and Equality of Man. If man is evolving how can 
all men be simultaneously equal? (Worship of progress and of the 

45, 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

average). (Mar. 55) 

188. Poverty looks bright through rich glasses, and vice versa. 
(Aug. 54) 

189. I have always felt doubtful about those people who try to 
get one to give up one’s own bunkum and accept their debunkum 
instead. (Mar. 55) 

190. The subject is ultimately at the mercy of the objective 
world: others can kill me without any possibility of my being sure 
of preventing them; but I cannot ever kill all others however much 
I might want to, supposing that I did. I exist therefore because 
others do not bother to blot me out, but the converse cannot be 
said of others. (Mar. 55) 

191. The conventional attitude of ‘serious’ people to puns (the 
Utraquistic Device) is hostility: how irrational (it is) has been 
shown by James Joyce. Perhaps when the psychology of Western 
philosophy has been worked out a little more it may show why 
there is this hostility. For the pun reveals an inherent duplicity in 
the workings of consciousness which the conventional Western 
moralist is loath to admit. (Mar. 55) 

192. It is usual to regard thought and action as having two basic 
modes: reason and impulse (or emotion or feeling). There is also a 
tendency to set one against the other and to argue on the lines of 
“he who is not with us is against us’ in this dualism. But there are at 
least three such basic modes: reason, impulse and observation. The 
overlooking of observation (which is the basic motive of the true 
scientist who has no theoretical or moral axe to grind) is, it seems 
to me, an absolute block in the way of behaving fairly or neutrally 
or seeing clearly. For there is nothing so unreasonable as 
rationalism carried to extremes, and impulse gets bogged down in 
slush. But how can a bad observer ever hope to get what he wants 
or even begin to know what he wants? The double conception of 
rationality/emotionality gives rise to cruel confusions. None is 
ever quite pure or quite absent, but one usually dominates and 
exploits the other. 

The word “Truth” has a different referent for these three types: 
consistency for the rationalist, correspondence of idea and the 
observed for the observer, and perhaps certainty or beauty for the 

The Second Note Book 

emotionalist. The first tends to ‘inject’ the objective into the subject 
and the last to ‘project’ the subjective onto the object. (Mar. 55) 

193. Exercise: Put every statement in this book into the form 
“if ... then’; if not already so stated. Where the ‘if’ is not explicit, 
find it. —But how difficult! —But how necessary! (Jun. 55) 

194. Theistic contemplation seems to be inseparable from 
disguised narcissism. Advaita Vedanta tries to escape from that by 
postulating absolute unity and absolute loss of the individual in the 
whole. But in order to lose personal identity and at the same time 
save the whole that opposes it, the Advaita Vedanta cheats. Both 
Christian and other theism and Advaita Vedanta are haunted by the 
spectre of Nothingness which they cannot cope with. (Jun. 55) 

195. Important to be clear and ruthless in one’s categories and 
types, but to remember that no living person is ever a type; for that 
is impossible from the very fact that he is living, and so both 
inconstant and with infinite qualities. So no compromise with 
types, but always compromise at some level with individual 
persons. (Jul. 55) 

We said this of the Devil above; but types are the Devil. 

196. Science’s dislike of faith is obscene to religion Miracles are 
obscene to scientists. 

It is an error to confound the obscene with the merely sexually 
indecent. The former includes the latter, but the latter is usually 
allowed to obscure the profounder and more alarming regions of 
obscenity that threaten to undermine being. (Jun. 55) 

197. The morning weeps tears of dew for the descent of 
evening. (Jun. 55) 

198. At sunset another day bleeds to death. (Jul. 55) 

199. While the materialists shout progress the physicists say 
that the sun will cool down sometime and the earth will become 
uninhabitable through cold and dark. (June 55) 

200. The better I can tell what you do the less I can tell what 
you are; for by your doing you change and so are no more what 
you were. (Jun. 55) 

201. He is sometimes insincere for God’s sake. (Jun. 55) 

202. Love: The desparateness of separation. 

Hate: The desparateness of association. 

47 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

But I do not see any exact opposites in the world: there is always 
some little corner of common neutral ground where the spies and 
traitors can come and go and do their fecund work. (Jul. 55) 

203. The essence of conversing mostly consists in throwing 
disguises to your opposite number and trying to get him to put 
them on, and vice versa. (Jun. 55) 

204. O poverty that blights* the corn / for making bread to 
feed the hand / that writes the cheque to pay the tax / that funds 
the cost of all the fees for adolescent education / wars and doles 
(that keep adults from starving). (Jun. 55) *Superscribed in pencil: 
sows? reaps? 

205. Pascal provides an example of an intellectual boat 
constructed in which to sail out on the sea of fever and pain in 
order to look for a port on a fancied further shore. Pascal’s boat 
was a boat for one; but his plan has served the adherents of the 
great systems as an inspiration to gang up and build prison ships. 
We think we have actually seen many boats wrecked, far more 
vanish, but none reach the other shore. (Jun. 56) 

206. If I declare on my authority alone I stand small chance of 
convincing them—why should they choose to be my mental slaves? 
If I declare on your authority alone or you on mine, or we on ours 
together, there is likewise not much chance of convincing them. 
But if I or you or we declare on his authority the situation is quite 
altered; for it is an invitation to them to be like me or you or us and 
for all of us equally to be his mental slaves and so each others’ 
slaves. It is the same whether “he” is the expounder of a religion a 
political dogmatist for “us,” or whether for him “he” is God or 
nature or the state. The structure is essentially the same. (Jul. 55) 

207. Pleasure and pain seem to be opposites in the sense that 
crocuses and steam rollers are opposites. (Jul. 55) 

208. Social reformers always speak in Universals—and 
universals are false because all our lives are particular. (Jul. 55) 

209. I might die in (the first half of) 1957. (Aug. 55) That hunch 
was wrong. (1958) 

210. It is most difficult to be natural. It is most unnatural to be 
normal. 

211. Authoritative people bore me: but what bores me even 
more are those swarms of little people who love authority and in 

48 

The Second Note Book 

virtue of whom the authority of the authoritative can be exercised. 
(Aug. 55) 

212. One shares some public preferences with an acquaintance. 
One shares many public and some private prides and preferences 
with a friend. One shares these and some private hates and shames 
with an intimate. (Aug. 55) 

213. Those who lead public religious lives honestly can have no 
intimates. (Aug. 55) 

214. The Indian mind being brought up in an atmosphere of 
tropical amorphous jungle, expresses itself in patterns, which 
repeat. The European mind, being brought up in an atmosphere of 
open, orderly-patterned vistas, experiences itself in things, regarded 
as individuals. (Aug. 55) 

215. When I laugh shall I think of all the people in the world 
shuddering at that moment in death? When I am dying shall I think 
of all the people in the world shuddering at that moment in 
laughter? (Aug. 55) 

216. Which is more “real”?—a bare ploughed field?—a field 
with cultivated crops? or a field full of weeds? (Sep. 55) 

217. At present, the two opposite interpretations of history 
are: first the classical, which describes events in terms of the deeds 
of men (kings, generals, etc.), and the Marxian-Hegelian, which 
describes events in terms of streams and currents, in which 
individual men are straws without personal influence. There have 
been some attempts to rejuvenate the old theory (¢.g., de Couvey’s 
‘Searchlight on Europe’) by describing events as the deeds of race.; 
and countries; but the result is merely a variety of (1) and no new 
principle comparable to that in (2) is involved. In (1) the principles 
are secondary to the man and it is this (which stems from Greek 
philosophy) which has produced the humanism of Europe, of 
which the Christian Church has done its best to claim the 
authorship, falsely enough. In (2) men are subordinated to 
principles. In (1) the following is possible (the up-to-standard test): 
individual men can be assessed by application of the principle 
which is secondary to the individual, and all those who pass the test 
are all right, no matter what the number. In (2) the opposite is 
possible (the ‘who-will-stand-the-pressure’ test): the screw can be 

49 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

put on till the number falls to so many and the weakest must fall 
out, no matter what the level of their standard (Sep. 55) 

(1) is the basis of security : 

(2) the basis of revolution. (Sep. 55) 

218. Religions as several, small, discrete (or partly discrete), 
mutually largely incompatible and wholly antagonistic creedal 
nebulae of rules held together by metaphysics, which float in an 
indefinite caustic void of hungry and hostile critical anarchy—a sort 
of angry magma in whose mass the religious knots condense and on 
which they surreptitiously feed and excrete. (Sep. 55) 

219. Qualified people deserve qualified admiration. (Oct. 55) 

220. ‘Things’ are not ‘single’ like draughts, but a ‘two-fold’ (at 
least) like dominoes—they have (at least) two values or aspects or 
components always, even if (as in a ‘double’) the twofoldness is the 
same; and then they have backs. (Oct. 55) 

221. Whatever is will be was. (Oct. 55) 

222. In the end you will always get what you want, though you 
may have to wait very long; but time is very long. And if you are in 
a hurry, you may have forgotten that you wanted it when it comes; 
and if you want what is contradictory, you will still get it, but you 
will be unhappy and unsatisfied. And it is the very hardest thing in 
the world to discover something uncontradictory to want. (Oct. 55) 

223. The virtues can only be distinguished from nothing (or 
negation) against a background of the respective vices. And so they 
are only relative and only a means—and the converse is just as valid. 
(Oct. 55) 

224. People tend to fall into two main types: those dominated 
by feeling and those dominated by intellect. (It is a common notion 
that women belong to the former and men to the latter). The 
former being guided by feeling, use intellect as a subordinate means 
to justify the impulsive feeling, and so tend to be inconsistent 
logically, self-contradictory and adaptable. Those dominated by 
intellect tend to use the subordinated feeling as a means to justify 
choice guided by logical formalism, and so they tend to be 
ambivalent to things and persons, being more interested in 
principles than in things. Just as the former try and convince others 
and themselves that their impulsive choice is right by isolated 

50 

The Second Note Book 

logical argument, so do the latter by trying to force what their line 
of argument had led to upon others and themselves. (Oct. 55) 

225. Logical exercise: Suppose we agree that it is morally 
wrong for you to rob me. And we shall probably agree that right is 
the opposite of wrong, Then since my robbing you is the opposite 
of your robbing me, it must: be morally right for me to rob you. 
(Oct. 55) 

226. Philosophy in this period seems most afraid of solipsism. 
Just through that fear, coupled with an unwitting acceptance of an 
‘either-or’ situation, it has embraced unreservedly misautic 
solalterism, of which the American behaviourists are the most 
extreme example. But the one is just as much a ‘heresy’ as the other. 
(Dec. 55) 

227. When I consider “other people” I am driven to the 
conclusion that in these visible bodies, these visible and audible 
words of theirs, their material acts, I am merely seeing, as it were, a 
reflection of part of myself not normally visible to me. I can’t see 
my face without a looking-glass—similarly I can’t see certain sides— 
the perceptive apparatus—of my character unless reflected on the 
“reflecting material surface” which “another person” presents. The 
polished surface of a looking-glass reflects my otherwise invisible 
face: another person’s body or speech or acts reflects (serves as a 
projecting screen for) parts of my personality otherwise invisible to 
me. What other people’s personalities “really are” I have absolutely 
no way of knowing anymore than a scientist has of knowing what 
matter “really is.” (Jan. 56) 

228. The process of life offers two principal divergent aims: (1) 
involves acceptance of (and placing foremost of) “this world” 
(including Heaven and Hell, which are only phases of it), and (2) 
renunciation of it. (1) offers multiplicity and intensity of (sensory) 
experience as the highest in theory with choice in practice. Survival 
involves compromise: compromise between is resort to war to 
protect the choice made or to get rid of responsibility for it by a 
surrender to a slave-master situation. Intervals of greater or less 
anarchy supervene. (Jan. 55) 

229. The lowest level of conscious life is like clay, and clay 
often sticks. Man must enter in creatively to enjoy. His first level of 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

creative enjoyment is nature (sunsets and all that). Then creative 
friendships on the level of acquaintance. Much higher comes 
creative or plastic art, then the discovery of how to make friends. 
Abstracts (mathematics and such music as Bach or Bartok) and last 
of all nothing. Nothing is the summit—the meaning of conscious 
life. (Undated) 

230. There is nothing in thought, they say, not ultimately 
derived from the five senses, So too, one might add in that case, 
there is nothing in architecture not ultimately derived from mud. 

231. A man acts on the (tacit) assumption that his acts will have 
effects in certain spheres and not in others; that their results will 
later be evaluated in some lights but not others. Example: a thief 
discounts the evaluation of his act in the court and an adulterer that 
of his act in the presence of the spouse—so with rebirth. (Jan. 55) 

232. The better I can tell what you do the less I can tell what 
you are; for by your doing you have changed and are no more what 
you were. 

Now if I describe what you are, when that is done, what you 
are not but were that. From what you were to what you are is 
gained by doing. By doing you deny—the present and are not what 
you were. You are what you will be described (in virtue of your 
doing, not what you will be or were). (Jan. 55) 

233. One tends to have a double standard: (1) what I choose, 
and (2) what I estimate to be public choice (average choice). Both 
are essential in the conduct of affairs, but excessive emphasis of the 
latter gives a vulgar (Commonplace, quelquonque) tone to all one’s 
thoughts and doings. (Jan. 55) 

234. Both hell and love are symbolized by fire—the ‘fires of 
hell,’ etc, and St. John of the Cross’ ‘living flame of Love,’ for 
example. (Jan. 56) 

235. 1.1 desire—I don’t know what = Angst 

2. I desire that (not here, not now) = an ideal 

3. I desire this (here, now) = a realized ideal 

4. Now there seem to be only two ways of treating a 
loved thing when confronted with it: either one can unite with it, 
say, eat it (in which case one has annihilated it, and so lost it) or one 
can contemplate it and so maintain one’s love unsatisfied, in which 

52 

The Second Note Book 

case the outlook is perpetual unsatisfiedness (through separation) or 
supervening boredom (due to change in oneself or the object) 
turning may be to hate or to forgetting. (Jan. 56) 

“Eternal love” and “selfless love” are both equivocations, and 
utraquisms—that an unstable state can remain unchanged eternally 
or that self can be eliminated and love retained. (I can set myself 
before or after yourself, but that is not to say that I preserve or 
annihilate myself before the world.) (Jan. 56) 

236. Concealment is concealment from others; forgetting is 
concealment from oneself. (Feb. 56) 

237. Definition of a PERSON as a fully-organized continuous 
focal disturbance in the objective field of another person; thus a 
person is always objective of necessity (my ‘person’ being ‘I’ 
objectivized). (On reading F. W. Myers’ Human Personality, Vol I, 
p.457). (Feb. 56) 

238. Three characteristics of any experience (however simple, or 
simplified): it is complex and incomplete and ambivalent. (Feb. 56) 

239. I do not believe in facts. (The past a factus). 

It is axiomatic that to be conscious is to believe in something, 
though one may not be actually aware of what (I believe in the next 
future moment). 

Only fictions can be believed in (the future is not a fact). 

Fictions produce either good or bad: some fictions contradict 
facts and produce bad. Some fictions transcend facts and produce 
good. (vice versa) 

240. A man’s body is structurally simply a hollow ring. A 
hollow ring elongated into a hollow cylinder, with the inner potion 
further lengthened and coiled; and above the upper orifice there 
bulges a head and between the upper and lower orifices the limbs 
stick out. The world passes in small portions through the ring, 
helped in by spoon and gulping and out by pressure and paper. 
(Mar. 56) 

241, If it is agreed by a theist that God has a will and what He 
wills is absolutely good, that he cannot will evil, and if it is claimed 
that God made man with free will, then it must follow that man’s 
freedom of will is freedom to differ from the will of God 
(otherwise he has no freedom), in which case it means simply that 

33 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

he has been given by God the ability to choose evil. In such a 
picture man appears like a child left shut up alone in a house with a 
box of matches and some gun powder by his father. (Apr. 56) 

242. Where would J be (and what would happen to me), if I 
could see all round me and above and below at once? (Jun. 56) 

243. Metaphysic is stamped on the physical world with the seal 
of death. That is a reason why no materialist will deal with it. And 
the biologist escapes by the verbal trick of identifying survival of 
the (metaphysical) race with the survival of the (existing) 
individual. (Jun. 56) 

244. Inability to be general or ambivalent when generality or 
ambivalence is needed is every bit as bad as inability to be precise 
where precision is needed. (Mar. 56) 

245. Only too often I seem to see myself as a joke at a funeral. 
(Jun. 56) 

246. Knowledge inherently denies knowledge both of the 
knower (‘the eye cannot see itself’) and of the known (‘appearances 
known suggest the transcendent thing-in-itself’). (Jun. 56) 

247. One is like a sieve: the holes (cleavages in one’s 
“unconscious” are, as it were, what one is not and either lets in or 
keeps out what one is aware of (through the cleavage—either by 
admiring or condemning). One is the wires (that one never notices 
at all), and they constitute one’s behaviour towards the things 
sieved. The world as sieved by me is transformed by that sieving. 
(Jun. 56) 

248. Bare acts linger on after their justifications have been 
forgotten or discredited. Motives are just mental acts. (Jun. 56) 

250. God pays the devil his keep as a good landlord pays his 
bailiff to grind his tenants, or perhaps as Mussolini is said to have 
secretly paid the anti-fascist exiles in Paris in order to justify the 
OVRA. (Sep. 56) 

251. If God really made man in his own image, what a 
revelation of the divine nature! (Sep. 56) 

252. It is in order to justify the world that Alyosha has to be 
made to live happily ever after and Ivan has to be made mad; for if 
it were the other way round, the whole farce of the world would be 
shown up for the farce it is. Mitya is an exaggeratedly ordinary 
man, blind and opinionated. Father Zossima worshipped human 

54 

The Second Note Book 

suffering in him as Raskolnikoff worshipped it in the prostitute 
Sonia, who is an exaggeratedly ordinary woman in some ways: 
blind and sentimental. (Sep. 56) 

253. No thing has a monopoly of any one quality. Nothing that 
is describable has a monopoly of any of the terms by which it is 
described. Only names are sometimes monopolies of things. (Sep. 56) 

254. Sometime after apes had produced men (if that is so), men 
at an early stage in their evolution evolved language. But 
grammarians seem to be so recent as to be actually only historical. 
However, that has not prevented them from appropriating what 
they did not invent, and laying down their laws for other apes 
offspring to obey. (Sep. 56.) 

255. The chirping honey-sunbirds sipping syrup flirting 
through the crimson whiskers of the bright hibiscuses. (Sep. 56) 

256. To have seen everything to the end of the world and in 
oneself with one’s cravings still intact and to have forgotten how to 
forget—that would adequately describe hell, no doubt. (Sep. 56) 

257. Remember how to do things, but forget what has 
happened. (Sep. 56) 

258. No standpoint whatever is safe against a rebellion against 
it. Any rebellion to be successful, must destroy the standpoint 
against which it is rebelling, and as soon as that happens, it must 
either disintegrate or become itself a standpoint. (Sep. 56) 

258a. Science is properly a state of enquiring, recording and 
explanation. Materialism is properly a state of faith in the external 
claiming to be gnosis either actual or imminent or ‘real but 
unachievable.’ (Sep. 56) 

259. What we are not at all interested in may be what we are. 
(Sep 56) 

259a. Reason has its heart, which is inaccessible to the heart 
(with acknowledgements to Pascal). (Sep. 56) 

260. The middle class: or the social sergeants’ mess. (Sep. 56) 

261. Matter is a myth invented to satisfy the emotional needs of 
the materialist. Myth is a matter invented to satisfy the rational 
needs of the spiritualist. (Sep. 56) 

262. The more one reflects on the question ‘What is this?’, the 
more absurd it seems: but yet never so absurd as the satisfaction 
provided by any of the possible answers. (Sep. 56) 

33 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

263. —Is good ultimately more powerful than Evil? Will Good 
ultimately triumph over Evil? 

—Yes, Otherwise one falls into the dualism of Manichaeism. 

—Then is doing evil justifiable if a greater good can be expected 
to result? 

—Yes. Otherwise it would be impossible to justify any good 
action; for it is not possible in this imperfect world to act in a way 
that is entirely free from any evil at all. 

—Then, in principle, since good is ultimately greater than evil, 
the greatest evil in this world is justified if it is done in the name of 
the greatest good? If that principle holds good, then there is 
nothing so wicked, horrible and unspeakable that I am not justified 
in doing ‘for the sake of the good’? (Oct. 56) 

264. —Is the world, the universe, finite or infinite? 

—Some scientists say it is finite. 

—Well so it is; for a scientist’s eye is the hole in the end of the 
universe through which he looks and observes it. Can he see 
through the hole the other way? (Oct. 56) 

265. Up till the 19" century medicine was such that those in 
need of medical treatment had, in effect, (as we see it now) only a 
choice of different grades of quacks to treat them: and now, 
similarly, those in need of political treatment have, in effect (as 
perhaps may be seen later), only a choice of different grades of 
quacks to treat them. (Oct. 56) 

266. Most philosophy offers metaphysicological stays for 
bulging emotions. (Nov. 56) 

267. I seem to have lived my life in three modes: up till the 
outbreak of war in 1939 I lived it in a very pleasant and mainly 
graceful rock-pool. The financial insecurity beginning in 1937 and 
the outbreak of war in 1939 silted the pool up. 1939-1948 was lived 
in the midst of History: Anti-aircraft volunteer gunner to G.S.O. 
Ill, LB. in Caserta, and afterwards Assistant head of the B.B.C. 
Italian section at Bush House. From then on it has been lived as an 
observer, withdrawn and watching. (Nov. 56) 

268. I shall never be able to compose my biography: but let no 
one else have the presumption to do so; for this would amount to 
theft. 

56 

The Second Note Book 

Don’t worry, no one will think of it. (Nov. 57) 
269. —(1) What I abhor = what I might be. 

(2) What I admire = what I am not. 

(3) What Iam unaware of = what I am. 

—But aren’t what-I-might-be and what-I-am-not the same? 

—In one way, yes: the difference lies in me and my attitude. 
(see § 276) (Nov. 56) 

270. The tragedy of Europe is that it has valued Christ’s 
crucifixion above his teaching. In acts Europe tends to the 
development of an earthly paradise, which the climate and the 
geography favours. That has been realized under the Romans and 
in modern Europe though not recognized. Living as they do in 
their earthly paradise of material (pleasures), Europeans are 
fundamentally and hopelessly bored. Subconsciously they long for 
the insecurity, the injustice, the blood, torture and killing of which 
their earthly paradise with its legality starves them. Hence the 
nostalgic yearning over the torture of the crucifixion, of martyrs, of 
blood sports, and so on. Universal love and liberalism remain 
remote intellectual ideals, but it is Marx with his doctrine based on 
violence and hate, who has gripped the 20' Century earthly 
paradise, just as the Church’s presentation of Christ on the Cross 
(.e., the crucifixion, not so much the teaching) gripped the imperial 
Roman earthly paradise. Christ taught not only love but said ‘I 
bring not peace but a sword...’ Love is perhaps a good bowl to store 
hate in. 

India much more near! 
part of hell called limbo. Si 
poverty, corruption, diseas: 

ly represents hell on earth or at best that 
suffocating heat, famines, overcrowding, 
e, torture, anarchy and lawless injustice 

are all on hand—in short suffering and insecurity—are the 

background for the island 

s of civilization contained in it, as the 

jungle is to the village. (he opposite to the ordered European 

landscape background wit 
need to yearn for hell in I 

h its anarchic city slums). There is no 
ndia. It is there to be seen before one’s 

eyes. The general background of chaos provokes a tendency to 

idealize calm, unity, 

nothingness, law, equanimity and 

harmlessness: all those qual 

ities that it is most difficult to come by. 

The Buddha lived a calm and uneventful life for 80 years and there 

57 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

are no Buddhist martyrs, and no Hindu martyrs, for the matter of 
that ... (Dec. 56?) 

271. Aggression, they say, has been outlawed; but whatever has 
been outlawed can be in-lawed again. (Jan. 57) 

272. For those to whom cleanliness is next to godliness, 
soapiness should be next to saintliness. (Jan. 57) 

273. Predetermination hangs on whether there are laws of 
mind (yet undiscovered but discoverable), or whether mind is the 
faculty of law unsubject to its laws. Psychology (under the 
influence of cybernetics) is likely to be absorbed into physics, 
which will have to create a special department for it; but how do 
the laws come to be? And how are they recognized? (Jul. 57) 

274. Winter England’s sad unshining suns. (Jul. 57) 

275. All is holy for him who has it so. All is unholy for him 
who has it so. All is conflict for him who has it so. (Mar. 57) —The 
have-nots seem wiser than the haves. (Jul. 57) 

276. “What I am unaware of is what I am”: then to be fully 
aware is not to be. (Mar. 57) 

277. Whatever one is conscious of is ipso facto second best (cf. 
King Lear: “The worst is not, so long as we can say: this is the 
worst!”). (Mar. 57) 

278. God’s kitchen, where his devil cooks 

Do fry the souls his Fisher nets. (Mar. 57) 

279. To be damned is to go on as I am, as long as I am damned. 
(Mar. 57) 

280. Logic lives in constant fear of puns. 

The pun questions; when folk pun, they poke fun at the 
holiness of the syllogistic IS. Socrates is a man... But what if man is 
a pun? (Apr. 57) 

281. Mathematics (the higher kind) being entirely mental 
(‘mathematicians do not know what they are talking about’), has 
purged itself of pun-haunting, and introduces them only 
voluntarily as in the Differential Calculus (a very rarified and 
abstruse pun—but nonetheless a pun that 

283. The world has been governed by serious people for a long 
time, and what an advertisement it is for their methods! (Jun. 57) 

58 

The Second Note Book 

284. Suspect those who prize warmth in others’ hearts—they 
probably have ice needles in their own. (Jun. 57) 

285. If the choice would lie between bunkum and debunkum, I 
would choose the former. (June 57) Debunkum is merely Devil’s 
Bunkum. (May 59) 

286. How they need the idea of backward races and peoples to 
swab their sore guilty consciences with! (Jul. 57) 

287. The need for miracles is a symptom of longing for the 
inexplicable and of fear of the totally explicable. Total explicability 
totally denies freedom. (Jul. 57) 

288. Really it would seem that the anti-nihilists do more to 
keep nihilism alive than the nihilists. (Jul. 57) 

289. The philosophical Absolute—in its various forms, 
Hegelian, Vedanta, Yogacara, etc., etc.—is logically only a tinted 
euphemism for nothingness, hence the inherent and veiled nihilism 
of all Absolutist systems. The difficulty always lies in the fact that 
any attempt to show that the Absolute is not nothingness by 
adducing a category or quality, however metaphysical, destroys its 
absoluteness, and without such adducing there is no distinguishing 
the postulated Absolute from nothingness. Even the assertion that a 
postulated Absolute is positive robs it of its absoluteness. (Aug. 57) 

290. If one elects for a positive value as the supreme choice one 
is necessarily committed to war to maintain that choice or to 
treachery to it; for no single value—grace, justice, equality, etc.,—is 
immune from threat of displacement by one or more of the others, 
and in themselves they are incompatible in proportion as they are 
each logically pursued and purified to their furthest extremes, so 
whichever I nail my banner to I am committed to defend that 
against all others and against nihilism—the attitude that says ‘no’ to 
all—when the pressure mounts and war conditions take over: or 
else there is treachery or forgetting. 

What is the ‘block in the unconscious’ that makes the 
‘conscious’ evaluate experience in terms of ‘positive’ and ‘negative’? 
(Aug. 57) 

291. The difference between sex and death-killing or being 
killed—seems to be one of degree and detail only. The sexual act is 
both a killing and being killed subjectively and objectively. But as a 

59 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

dying into a new life, its new life is incomplete to the extent that 
the sexual act as an act of dying is incomplete. It is a being reborn 
without loss of memory. The sense of liberation that follows is 
comparable to a brief shadow—back of the ‘innocence’ of the new 
childhood that follows after the profounder act of dying. The 
details in which these two modes of the same act differ should be 
tabulatable. (Aug. 57) 

292. A. If I say, psychologically speaking, that a person is 
behaviour, that is in the most vaguely general sense. But more 
particularly—that person who is thus psychologically behaviour, is, 
ontologically, the behaviour that he is unaware of, he is haunted by 
the behaviour he disapproves of and he is not the behaviour that he 
approves of. Note the triple position. 

B. But how can you say that? Of course he is the behaviour he 
approves of too, or some of it at least. When I do something I 
approve of, and I do sometimes, that is me, isn’t it? When I say ‘What 
I like about myself is this’, if that isn’t me, who is it? What is it? 

A. No, it is not you precisely because you notice it by contrast, 
as it were, apparently by contrast with what you disapprove of, but 
actually by contrast with what you are unaware of. It is precisely 
because you notice it and actively approve of it, thereby 
objectifying it, that it is not you. (Aug. 57) 

292a. Odd that “now here” is “nowhere.” (Aug. 57) 

293. The trouble with theists and atheists alike is that they are 
both tied to opposite sides of the same post. (Aug. 57) 

294. How much more frightening flesh is than bones! Who 
would not prefer to be haunted by a skeleton than by boneless 
flesh? (Aug. 57) 

295. Every act is an act of forgetting—forgetting some 
constituent state and composing some new one. (Aug. 57) 

296. The most positive thing in the whole world is Pain—and 
they both begin with ‘p.’ (Jul. 59) 

297. The Philosophers of the Systems are like house maids: 
They sweep the untidiness of the world under the carpet and 
pretend it isn’t there. (Aug. 57) 

298. To get out of the puddle of muddle one has to learn to be 
precise. To get out of the prison of precision one has to learn to 

60 

The Second Note Book 

handle the suggestive, the non-committal, the general, without 
falling back into the puddle. (Aug. 57) 

299. The necessity of food, and the inescapable arbitrariness of 
birth, ageing and death must never be forgotten: any philosophy 
that does so is only a fairy tale. (Sep. 57) 

300. Ignorance must never be lost sight of (as lack of 
knowledge, hiddenness in probability, or forgetting, or 
transcendence, or uncertainty 4 la Heisenberg). Any system that 
explains existence without it does not explain it. (Sep. 57) 

301. [ think what I instinctively so much dislike in so much of 
religious writing is—not its mixture of the rational and irrational; 
for that would be no more than true to life, but—its tendency to 
make the irrational respectable (which mostly it is not) and to 
present it as if it were rational: ‘Indeed it is so because it must be so, 
how could it be otherwise’ (which is the arbitrary ‘must’ palmed 
off as the reasonable ‘because’). (Aug. 57) 

301a. The free way between the lonely Ivory Tower on the one 
hand and the teeming Criminal Lunatic Asylum on the other is 
rather narrow, and much of that rather narrow free way is blocked 
by the Party Chiefs on the one side and the petty thieves on the 
other. (Aug. 57) 

301b. It would be so nice and easy if there were a rule for 
everything and it only remained to learn all the rules and then just 
to decide whether to keep or break a rule—but so often there are 
none and so we have to act without and make new ones; and these 
are always slipping out of date. (Aug. 57) 

302. How does the body come to be apprehended as a body? 
Why does it not fall apart into the seen and the heard, the smelt, 
the tasted and the touched? (Sep. 57) 

303. Sometimes there is the impression that the world consists 
only of vomits and excrements, and what is in between. (Sep. 57) 

304. The following example is perhaps typical of the 
arbitrariness of alternatives in the world in which one exists. It is an 
‘invariable rule’ and characteristic of the world that size and 
distance are associated in a one-way direction: ie., ‘things’ get 
smaller as the distance from me increases and larger as it diminishes 
(though this “appears” in “external logical” space only as 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

“subtending of angles”). This is reinforced by the smaller-more- 
distant things “passing behind” and “being hidden by” the larger 
nearer things. This is represented in pictures by the vanishing 
points of perspective. But there is no reason why the opposite 
should not be the case, why my world should not be inversely 
organized and “getting larger” be always associated with increasing 
distance and the smaller nearer things hiding the larger-further 
ones. It just isn’t so apparently. (Sep. 56) 

In the purely subjective view nothing is nearer or further (which 
is a logic-spatial construct based on body-kinaesthesia) but only 
visually smaller or larger, aurally fainter or louder, tangibly 
touchable with more or less kinaesthesia. (Sep. 57) 

305. No description of existence is “complete.” For a 
“complete” one will always have another (or more than one other) 
alternative description also “complete” which will in part coincide 
with the first and in part contradict it. Any system therefore is 
always lacking something (i.e., lacking “O”). (Sep. 57) 

306. To exist (or to non-exist) is to be related; but the relation is 
not a simple duality, but a duality (or more) in the object against the 
subject. Basically “passive” change in this triple relation is what is 
called “change-in-the-object” (I am acted upon, but to be acted upon 
I resist, consequently the agent changes, whilst I do not). “Active 
change” in this triple relation is what is called “change-in-the- 
subject” (-in-me; I act upon and the acted upon resists, consequently 
I change while the object does not). In existence, however, the 
reverse (or a combination of both) is what actually appears, since “I” 
see “my self” objectified: in the first instance as also “acted upon” 
and changed, and conversely in the second. (Sep. 57) 

307. In the pure-logical-objective, there is infiniteness and 
infinite regress to nothing, with an infinite number of vanishing- 
points in the distance. In the pure-subjective view there is always a 
horizon (and no infiniteness), with only one vanishing-point, 
namely, myself. (Sep. 57) 

308. When we are speaking of physics (especially of nuclear 
physics), it is important to remember that the terms “large-scale” 
and “small-scale” are, subjectively speaking, improper. For the so- 
called “small-scaled” of the atomic world is, in fact, in so far as it is 

62 

The Second Note Book 

perceived at all (i.e., those of its manifestations that are not purely 
hypothetical) in being perceived: that they may be so with the aid 
of “enlarging” media such as physical microscopes or “logical- 
inferential microscopes” is a purely secondary complication, but 
does not mean that the observed happenings are smaller, only that 
they are observable with the aid of certain means. To take a simpler 
(merely microscopic) case: an animalcule, as seen with the aid of a 
microscope is, subjectively speaking, the size it is seen to be. That 
this may conflict with logical consistency is another matter, as also 
in the much-talked-of “unreliability of the senses” (—but where is 
physics if the senses are not employed at all?) (Sep. 57) 

309. The objective world is determined absolutely at each instant 
that is conceived, but the determination at that or any other instant 
is only probable. (Sep. 57) 

310. Existence is like a game of dominoes—each domino has 
two values and there is the player (who is mot a domino, but appears 
in the domino-world as “I” and “my-opponent,” i.e., “active-and- 
passive”). (Sep.57) 

311. Reality (Truth) is a subjective-objective mode (injected 
into me from the object). Goodness is a subjective mode. Beauty is 
an objective-subjective mode (projected by me on the object). 
There remains, they say, that odd world of the “inherently 
unknowable objective.” What is that? (Sep. 57) 

312. The “unreliability of introspective data”: scientists 
constantly complain about this, by which they include pain, 
pleasure, will, purpose and goal .... and perception (awkwardly 
enough for them! since all percepts are ultimately private). But 
rather than complaining about this (which only reveals the 
scientists’ subjective volitional attitude), should this fact not be 
recognized? Instead of rejecting introspective data because they are 
not quantitatively “measurable”(......2) in the way science demands 
of “public data,” should they not be treated as one of their 
distinguishing characteristics, just as the Uncertainty Principle is 
now accepted as one of the characteristics on principle of atomic 
events? The description of why pain, for instance, while 
distinguishable in intensity, cannot be quantitatively measured 
(there is no Paris Metre for pain, and if anyone claims that electrical 

63 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

vibrations or tremor motions, which may correspond with pain, are 
pain, he is merely confusing the issue). The basis of physical 
measurement is “recorded dial reading” where two data are placed 
alongside and compared: the dial-pointer or the measurable tape 
and the Paris Metre. But where is this duality in pain? Our present 
pain tends to annihilate another by coalescence, and a remembered 
(or anticipated) pain is no more a measure for a present one than a 
remembered (or anticipated) metre-stick is for a present piece of 
tape. Ergo, pain, while distinguishable (by memory or anticipation) 
as differing in intensity, is mot measurable by present 
confrontation. (Sep. 57) 

313. What is said and thought is always reflexive (except perhaps 
the exclamation Oh! etc.) Without reflexion nothing and no action 
comes to light. The moment I say ‘I am doing this, I am not doing 
that’ I am reflecting (and no longer ‘doing this, not doing that’, but 
doing something else, namely, reflecting). But reflexion is also a 
‘doing’, and action is never quite divorced from reflexion. (Sep. 57) 

313. What is said and thought is (except perhaps the 
exclamation Oh) reflexion nothing and no action. 

314. A description of a simultaneous scene recited in words is 
“temporalized space.” A movement viewed (graphically) as 
simultaneous “trajectory” is spatialized time.” 

315. About the “unconscious” this might be said, namely, that, 
by developing and employing certain techniques (which are 
designed to screen off the more obvious and clamant patterns of 
behaviour in the observed) certain information about behaviour 
can be observed and gathered (which is otherwise hidden or 
smothered by the more obvious and clamant). This information 
can be (structurally) arranged in a pattern, which differs from the 
pattern offered by the obvious. If this disclosed and arranged 
pattern is then hypostatized by regarding the information as 
behaviour of a substance, that hypostatization is in fact the 
“unconscious.” What is remarkable about Freud is his unparalleled 
acuteness of observation, his ingeniousness and his naivety in 
hypostatization (as particularly evidenced by his absurd 
mechanistic description of consciousness in The Interpretation of 
Dreams—absurd, because it is pure fantasy). (Sep. 57) 

64 

The Second Note Book 

316. Of anything relative only one description is necessary, and 
if well done, it can “represent the Truth” (i.e., as correspondence 
truth) adequately, sufficiently, accurately. This, however, cannot be 
extended to “existence as a whole,” for which a plurality of 
“complete descriptions” will be necessary, which must both 
coincide and diverge (probably two is insufficient and three or 
more is the minimum). Something of this is shown forth in the 
“Complementary Principle” in descriptions of atomic events. But 
in a set of descriptions claiming to include the observer (both as 
observed and as functioning-unobserved), something more than 
this is needed. (Sep. 57) 

317. Hegel’s “Logik” is the supreme attempt to subject, once 
and for all, dialectic to logic, and so to have, in eternity at least, a 
tidy determined and judged All. This seems to be attempted by the 
introduction of “movement” into his Logik and the supplying of it 
with an absolute beginning. The “absolute beginning” (his most 
vulnerable point which cannot be established) abrogates the 
possibility of dialectic’s being anterior to logic and_ his 
incorporation of the dialectic into his Logik as “movement” 
subordinates it absolutely. But—as Kierkegaard has it—his world 
fails to exist. In existence the dialectic, if subordinated to logic, is so 
by decision, which can be revoked, when the dialectic destroys the 
logical structure on and below the plane of revokation and projects 
a new one. Herein lies the awful possibility and constant threat of 
disorder, confusion and doubt. (Sep. 57) 

318. Hegel’s “mediation” is an euphemism for confounding or 
presuming and his “absolute” is a euphemism for confusion. (Oct. 57) 

319. Pure existentialism (i.e., trying to “live” entirely in 
unreflective consciousness) is as much a forlorn hope as the pure 
“essentialism” of an ideal world of abstract generalities cut off from 
existence. The first leads logically beyond itself to the decorticated 
existence of the hero of Camus’ L étranger while the second leads to 
the absent-minded University Professor of Philosophy. (Oct. 57) 

320. It is always claimed for mathematics that precision is their 
prime virtue; and it is often said disparagingly of introspectively 
obtained subjective data that they are “unsatisfactory” or even 
“worthless” for scientific use. Now that may well be so; in fact, it 

65 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

should never be disputed. But suppose we ask the question: What 
are we seeking? In trying to gain control of objectivity (the 
“world,” “nature,” etc.) the more accurate the observations and 
measurements, the more precise the definitions and descriptions, 
the more perfect the exclusion of puns and ambiguities from the 
terminology, the more pleased we may be—for our aim is accurate 
prediction of outside happenings (with a secondary aesthetic 
admiration for the consistency and elegance of the method). But 
what about subjectivity? How to define the faculty of definition? 
How to préciser that ability to muddle and to clarify which waits on 
consciousness? How to describe whether the distinguishability of 
truth from untruth is true or untrue? ... (Oct. 57) 

321. What a pity that the maxim De omnibus dubitandum est is 
subject to the Theory of Types! (Oct. 57) 

322. There seems hardly anything more positive than the walls 
of a prison—with the warders who prevent escape, and the law, 
which justifies it all. (Oct. 57) 

323. The positive thinker builds: he builds prisons, making 
stone walls of things, and bars and wardens of principles and 
people. The negative thinker tunnels and undermines—yet his 
burrowing implies the prison. (Oct. 57) (Postscript:) But (as was 
asked before) who is inside and who outside? 

324. If one consults, say, the Concise Oxford Dictionary, it soon 
becomes evident that, in ordinary usage (that is, the usage of the 
Dictionaries and of common speech), no real or clear 
differentiation is made at all between existence, essence, and being (to 
look up allied words is also revealing in this respect). The position 
is either that they are not differentiated, or, if they are at all, any 
differentiation is only partial and is ambiguous and shifty. I take 
this fact to reflect a reality; and if that is so, then the philosophers’ 
differentiation between existence and essence, whether as used by 
St. Anselm or by Kierkegaard or the modern existentialists, is 
consequently ambiguous or even false in part at least. 
Consequently, too, the alternatives: “existence precedes essence” 
and “essence precedes existence” are in fact no true alternatives at 
all, and what they appear to represent must be expressed otherwise, 
less misleadingly. 

66 

The Second Note Book 

The “absolute certainty” of subjectivity (that too of 
Phenomenology)—as against the ‘probability’ of the objective 
world—is inseparable from ‘absolute disagreement’ between 
individuals. Why? Because it is the individual’s absolute certainty 
(of his cogito) that, carried to its extreme, constitutes his 
individuality as distinct from every other: that makes him himself 
and not a statistical component of probability, however much 
defined with accuracy of probability.* Statistics are, in their 
probability measurable (i.e., quantitative): what distinguishes the 
individual (in the last analysis, “the unique I”) is his absolute 
immeasurability: i.e., his being, his possibility .... Agreement can 
only be obtained in the objective statistical world—and it will 
always be quantitative, just as disagreement, there can never be 
absolute agreement. (Oct. 57) *One can only agree on the probable 
and therefore uncertain. 

325. A. “I have greenness, I am green. I have my body, Iam my 
body. I have a watch, I am not my watch.” 

B. “Dear me, how confusing!” 

A. “Lhave my self, lam myself.” 

B. “Dear me, how confusing!” (Oct. 57) 

326. To have” can be abolished (it is non-existent in Sanskrit 
and Pali) by amalgamating some uses with “to be” and others with 
the genitive of with “to possess.” 

So we are left primarily with “to be” and “to do.” Now the 
“copula verb” to be I regard as equivalent to the “auxiliary verb” 
(See C. O. D.) while the “substantive verb” to be = to exist. Now 
these two, “copula” (auxiliary) and “substantive” correspond to 
“state” and “action”: “to be green” = presence of a state of 
greenness; while “to be” = “to be actively present by changing or 
resisting change”—but this last savours too much of a definition. 
(Oct. 57) 

327. The medieval distinction between essence and existence 
(=being) is probably one of the most misleading ideas we 
developed. (Oct. 57) 

328. I take it (on the basis of normal English usage) that the 
word ‘self* represents (symbolizes) a fundamental ambiguity in 
perception—not that it has consciously, rationalistically been 

67 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

intentionally made to represent this: Just the reverse, namely, that 
its representation has come about thus 4 notre insu, without our 
suspecting what has happened at all, and the word has thus concealed 
the very ambiguity it represents. The ambiguity is this: it cannot be 
established whether a thing is the same as (identical with) itsel/—or I 
with myself—or separate and different from it. For instance: “I 
myself think...,” “a thing is no other than itself” and conversely 
“When Lam confronted with myself...,” “I come to myself,” “I sat by 
myself and myself it said unto me: “Take care of thyself, think much 
of thyself, for there’s nobody who cares for thee.” 

Accepting this, then, as a fundamental principle of existence, 
we can draw this conclusion provisionally. It can be said that “a 
thing is (exists)” or that “I am (exist)” of any “situational point” at 
which it becomes impossible to distinguish between sameness and 
differences. Or differently expressed: “I am” where I can both 
differentiate and identify myself; “I am” where this ambiguity is 
certain in the subjective mode, and “it is” where this ambiguity is 
qualitatively certain (not quantitatively probable) in the objective 
mode. (Nov. 57) 

329. The foregoing statement needs adding to: (1) for 
“subjectivity” better read “ambiguity” and for “objectivity” better 
read “uncertainty.” Where there is a focus of uncertainty, there a 
thing is; where there is a focus of ambiguity there J am, but always 
the thing is in relation to me, and J am in relation to the thing. [am 
“uncertain about myself” when I consider me objectively as though 
someone else. I am ambiguous about a thing when I consider it as 
mine/not mine. (Nov. 57) 

A fool-proof system would surely be system of proofs for 
fools. (Nov. 57) 

331. Stability is the dryness to be found in a bog. (Nov. 57) 

332. Consistency seems to be the hallmark of incompleteness: 
if something (particularly a description of the Universe or a 
philosophical system) is found to be consistent, then that is a sign 
that something has been overlooked (vide principle of 
complementarity in atom physics). Einstein’s complaint against the 
Quantum Theory that it makes the world incomplete seems the 
greatest recommendation of that theory. (Nov. 57) 

68 

The Second Note Book 

333. How useful the gods are! —those looking-glass frames, 
those blank slates on which we scribble our clumsy and self- 
contradictory ideals. (Dec. 57) 

334. A mind strong in faith and weak in reasoning 
(understanding) steadies itself by means of slogans. One strong in 
reasoning (understanding) and weak in faith steadies itself by means 
of logic. Both are constantly in fear of dialectic, but die of 
suffocation without it. (Dec. 57) 

335. A “slogan” = any cliché or quotation or text or book 
clung to uncritically “because I like it.” Dialectic asks “But why not 
some alternative?” to which faith can only reply by force or it dies. 
“Logic” = any structural, verbal and consistent system. Dialectic 
asks “But why not the opposite?” to which reasoning can only 
reply by breadth or it too dies. To force and breadth there is no end 
except through exhaustion. (Dec. 57) 

336. The blinding darkness of light; the deafening silence of 
noise; the (...?) insipidity of smell and taste; the numbing pain/ 
pleasure of heat/cold’s wounding caresses; the vertiginous 
accelerative immobility of motion; the swooning clarity of the 
unknown. (Dec. 57) 

337. Nothing triumphs, finally, in this world but death: the 
Eternal Life is death, and to live for ever is to die—for ever. The 
immortal is not born. (Dec. 57) 

338. If ignorance is an essential component of existence 
(whether as the finite unknowing of the infinite, or as the basis of 
Dependent Arising, or as the Uncertainty Principle in Atomic 
Physics), then any theory that does not take account of and include 
ignorance cannot claim to represent existence or the world fully. 
The fact that a theory works in practice, by experience, proves that 
it does so take account, or it would not work. But to show openly 
or incautiously such ignorance would be offensive, indecent, taboo, 
and so it is normally hidden, normally inadvertedly. (Dec. 57) 

339. My existence is my presence now, or my present life 
(birth-to-death); my non-existence is my previous lives (before 
birth) and my future lives (after death). Both together compose me: 
I am composed of both together. T'he objective materialist who, as 
a solalterist, forgets himself, takes existence as an all-truth, 

69 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

subordinating “I-me.” The religionist who believes in the 
permanence of the soul, takes the solipsistic “I-me” as an all-truth, 
subordinating existence. (Dec. 57) 

340. One’s dearest friend: he for whom one ought ethically to 
sacrifice (betray) even one’s highest principle: One’s highest 
principle: that for which one ought ethically to sacrifice (betray) 
one’s dearest friend (one’s closest loved one). What has justice to 
say here? What of liberty, equality, fraternity (where liberty can be 
liberty to enforce equality by any means whatever, equality can be 
equality in the brotherhood of those condemned to death which is 
freedom, and fraternity that of implacable (how the totalitarians 
love that luscious, lip-smacking, lascivious word!) fratricidal hate 
(each equally hating his brother in absolute freedom to do so)? 

341. When I have a system, I use it quite unsystematically, and 
when I have none I systematically do not use it. (Jan. 58) 

342. What is so wretched for the moralists about morals (or call 
them ethics) is that they never—however Procrustean the claim 
made for their absoluteness—quite detach themselves from 
expediency. (See § 391) (Jan. 58) 

343. “All the world’s a stage, and all the men and women actors 
on it” says Shakespeare. But actually only the men and women in 
the public gaze are actors on it. I, for instance, whom—and this I 
hold one of my greatest blessings while it is so—the public does not 
gaze on, am not an actor, but only a scene-shifter: the stage is 
curtained when I and those like me move on it. 

(Addition:) Or that is how I should like it to be always. (Jan. 58) 

344. Four kinds of principle: to do evil that evil may come, to 
do evil that good may come, to do good that evil may come, to do 
good that good may come. The first and last are very difficult: for it 
is almost as hard to be a devil as to be a saint. The second, surely, 
provides the intentions with which hell is said to be paved; but if 
that is so, then does not the third paint the frescoes on the ceilings 
of heaven? Far better is the third than the second; for in the second, 
the intended good for which the is done may never materialize, 
but the evil done remains; and, in the third, the intended evil for 
which the good is done may never materialize, but the good done 
remains. (Jan. 58) 

70 

The Second Note Book 

345. Riven by triviality and unamenable to meaning. Driven 
by meanness from the amenities of liberality. (Jan. 58) 

346. When I look at a looking-glass, what do I see—the looking- 
glass, my face or me? When I look at the world, what do I see—the 
world, my perceptions or me? When I look at you, what do I see— 
you or a part of my unknown sell? (Jan. 58) 

347. A deep inward experience is shared and cannot be 
unshared. Desire to share—it comes, perhaps, from intrusion into 
reflexion upon the separateness of self and others, which is 
dissolved in deep inward experience. Reflexion comes afterwards 
and is done from the standpoint of separateness. Separateness is 
unsharable. One might put it this way: such inward experiences 
cannot be unshared precisely because they are by their very nature 
inward sharing, but they cannot be directly communicated upon 
reflexion in separateness, and so a desire to share them may arise in 
separateness, which desire arises from overlooking the fact that 
they are already shared by their very nature. 

Bodies (mental or physical) are what separates (and with them 
words and spatial nearness); some feelings draw the separate 
together and partly dissolve it; consciousness unites in a-unity (? 
Ed.). Separateness implies unity; unity implies separateness; there is 
no final satisfaction or solution here as long as each craves for or 
dreads the other. (Jan. 58) 

348. Consciousness is unity; being acts by separating; what 
diversity cognizes is one (or in itself undifferentiated infinite, 
indefinite): what it separates into (is?) many.* The verb “is” belongs 
to being in abstracto; the verb “does” sides with consciousness in 
abstracto. But in existence consciousness is and being does. In 
Philosophy consciousness is, being is, and it is not clear how doing 
is done; and traditional logic only recognizes the “copula, is.” But 
“Man and logic are different categories.”(Jan. 58) * Unclear in MS. 

349. An effective way to kill a plant is to water it carefully and 
regularly for the first half of a drought and then to go away and 
leave it. But those who do that do not see the plant die: they go and 
water other plants in: other dry places in the same way. (Jan. 58) 

350. The existential pre-reflective choice is seen, on reflexion, 
as a preference. Acted: it is the freedom to that to which one is 

71 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

condemned. Reviewed: it expresses a preference or manifestation of 
free-will (but that is only on looking back—the looking back is 
itself a choice). (Jan. 58) 

351. Optimism must be an “existential communication” not a 
direct one: it must be induced indirectly as a spontaneous creation 
by the listener in himself, not directly (like a cooking recipe or an 
army drill-book). The attempt to do it directly degenerates into the 
parson’s synthetic ‘joy’ or the physical-training instructor’s 
‘radiance’ which may well generate pessimism as the bearer’s 
spontaneous mental response. It always does in me: I feel that the 
optimist who talks to or at me, has taken from me all the good 
there is and left my world as bare as a locust-stricken field. (Jan. 58) 

352. What the scientists are apt to forget: the difference 
between quantity and quality is one of quality, not of quantity. 
(Jan. 58) 

353. Modern analogy: just as the bombardment by neutral 
mesons is needed to split the atom’s nucleus which is held together 
by negative and positive charges, as we are told—so perhaps 
equanimity is the projectile with which to split the individual held 
together by the charges, of hate and lust. (Jan. 58) 

354. Some people are aggressively meek. (Mar. 58) 

355. “The purpose of oratory is to make people forget the need 
for evidence” it has been said. And, it may be added, the purpose of 
evidence is to make people forget that all sense-data are private. 
(And perhaps the purpose of the privacy of evidence is to make 
people forget). (Mar. 58) 

356. There are certain aspects of truth that one can only 
discover in oneself; if one is told of them, one will certainly, and in 
the very nature of existence itself, reject them absolutely. But 
perhaps they can be shared by those who have discovered them 
individually for themselves, and perhaps those who have not 
discovered them can be aided indirectly to discover them for 
themselves. (The use of the word “truth” here is in the sense of 
desirability of discovery). (Mar. 58) 

357. If existence were a riddle, its solution would be non- 
existence—but in what medium would it then have found solution? 

(Mar. 58) 

72 

The Second Note Book 

358. I used always to comfort myself with the belief that if 
physical pain became too violent it would be cut off by “loss of 
consciousness”—but why should this be always so? And what is 
“loss of consciousness” when described subjectively? (Apr. 58) 

359. Religion without art, like sex without art, not very 
attractive. (Apr. 58) 

360. The unambiguous is non-existent. (Apr. 58) 

361. Objectively there are three spatial dimensions and one 
temporal one, all perpendicular to each other, which together are 
held to constitute the four-dimensional time-space continuum of 
the scientists. This is purely objective and as such an artificial 
abstract. For in it time becomes spatialized into parallel world lines; 
“now” being an arbitrary convenience in it without necessity of 
any position. 

Conversely, in the absolute subjective view there would be 
three temporal dimensions and one spatial one, all perpendicular to 
each other. No one is ever seen directly but only reflected in one or 
both of the other two. They are past, present, and future, as the 
three temporal, and individual historical movement as the single 
spatial one: the importance of the notion of the perpendicularity of the 
three periods of time to each other subjectively cannot be overestimated. 
While “Individual Historical Movement” is, as it were, the “part of 
subjectivity that belongs to the object,” in subjectivity, the 
continuum of world-lines in the object is that part of the object 
which, as it were, “belongs to the subject in the object”: this 
interlocks subject and object and makes them inseparable. It also, 
by the difference of the positivity of spatial relations and negativity 
of temporal relations, gives a positive nature to the object and a 
negative one to the subject (“It is through woman that negation 
comes into the world.”) 

For the desperate unsatisfactoriness of the one time-dimension in 
purely objective science, see particularly Kant’s Theory of the 
Subjectivity of Time, Eddington’s New Pathways of Science on the 
“direction of time-flow” corresponding with “increase-decrease of 
entropy” (only a theory, mark you!), and Heisenberg in “Atomic 
Research and the Law of Causality in Nature,” [Universitas, (Engl. 
ed.] 1957, No. 2), on difficulties of knowing direction of time in the 

73 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

“small-scale” non-statistical field of the atom. Has anyone before 
suggested that past, present and future are subjectively perpendicular? 
Scientific four-dimensional time-space has no “now.” (Apr. 58) 

362. I leave the study of order and structure to the 
mathematicians and (in so far as they are capable) to the 
philosophers: [ am more interested in disorder and distructure. (This 
is what I say absolutely sometimes.) (Apr. 58) 

363. ‘So, then, in choosing absolutely I choose despair, and in 
despair I choose the absolute, for I myself am the absolute,’ says 
Kierkegaard (Either/Or, i, 179) This is a curious undeveloped 
insight into an uncomfortably true-half-truth: the pure solipsistic 
standpoint of the unique “I” (not the abstract and quelquonque “an 
ego among, others” of the psychologists). Purely subjectively “I” 
am unique: only that pure subjectivity is a half-truth (I do not 
know anywhere where pure solipsism is expounded honestly, as 
pure solalterism is by, say, the more reputable Behaviourists). In 
those terms of pure subjectivity “the others” are passive modes of 
“me” projected outwards. (vide Sartre's étre vz). This abstraction is 
an offence: and so Pascal says that “le moi est haissable,” perhaps with 
that in view. When the words “I see you” are heard the meaning (in 
itself utterly ambiguous) is fixed by me with relation to “my body”: 
if perceived as coming from my body, the “I” heard is identified 
with the unique absolute subjective “I”; but if perceived as coming 
to my body, the heard “I” and “you” are reversed (in this special 
abstract interpretation, “I” being always explainable as active 
subjectivity and “you” translated into “me” as passive subjectivity). 
(Apr. 58) 

364. Solipsistically, “I” (am) absolute and unique, and active 
with “me” as passive; “Thou” (art) the active “I” projected with 
“thee” as passive. “He” and “him”, etc., can only be arrived at 
through “us” and “we” (“We” and “us” regarded as (1) “I”/“me” on 
different occasions, or (2) “I”/ “thee”-“me”/“thou” simultaneously). 
(Apr. 58) 

365. Definition of rectolinearity: three points such that one is 
hidden by the second from the third; or unobservability of any two 
points simultaneously. 

Definition of perpendicularity: Three points such that one is 
not hidden by the second from the third; or observability of any 

74 

The Second Note Book 

two points simultaneously. 

(For “two points,” “three points” and “one point” one can read 
“duality,” “trinity” and “singularity.” 

The irreducible basis of observation is the trinity of the 
observed, the not-observed, and the observation point; or the 
observed-as-present, the observed-as-absent, and the (perpendicular) 
observant. (But this only “appears” in reflexion). (Apr. 58) 

366. The objects of science are all publicly measurable: by “dial- 
readings” or by confrontation with a “piece of matter called the 
Paris Metre” or by confrontation with the standard inch, the 
“average girth of the thumbs of three Scotsmen.” Those data which 
are private, such as feelings of bodily pleasure or pain, mental joy 
or grief, willing, clarity of perception are all measurable, too, but in 
a different way: they are measurable only by the action which they 
facilitate or inhibit (“I had such a tooth ache I couldn’t read,” “I 
wanted to see you so much I couldn’t sleep,” “He was satisfied 
enough for him to continue his work,” etc.). Pure consciousness is, 
however, immeasurable. (Apr. 58) 

367. Certainty is absence of infinity; infinity is presence of 
uncertainty. (Apr. 58) 

368. Nothing whatever can be apprehended apart from its 
opposite: but its opposite cannot be present at the same time-place; 
for anything whatever to emerge from anonymity as present to 
consciousness (which is not it) it must be haunted (shadowed) in 
space-time by its opposite, otherwise it cannot detach itself from 
the unknown. (Apr. 58) 

369. Cursed with the blessing of being condemned to be free. 
(May 58) 

370. I can’t find I; for when I do, what I do find: it’s myself or 
me I need first find; I can find ‘thou’; for when I do then ‘thou’ 
when by me found art thee. (May 58) 

371. Being, considered as Action, appears as becoming 
(beginning to be or movement). 

Action considered as Being appears as experience (history or 
staticity). 

An analysis (description or definition) of Being must 
completely avoid all uses of the verb to be and all its derivatives and 

75 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

synonyms. 

That of Action must likewise avoid all active verbs and nouns. 

Failure in this appears as a petitio principii or as a tautology. 

Appearance can be taken as the objective manifestation (ideal 
and real) of both being and action, which / subjectively experience. 
‘Together these make up existence. 

Essence merely duplicates either idea or being, and has no 
separate referent. 

(The verb to have duplicates the use of “there is” with the 
dative (in Indian languages). (May 58) 

372. “Ideas” appear as the—objects of the mind and “realities” 
appear as the objects of the five senses. The mind and the five senses 
are irreducible personal data together with their respective types of 
objects. The mind can “handle” say visible data either through the 
eye (as visibles) or directly (as visual images) and can confront these 
two and compare them (“This ink pot might have been better 
designed like this.”) (May 58) 

373. Consciousness (0) perpendicular to what it is aware of and 
not perpendicular to what it is not aware of. 

It (0) is aware of presence ( + )-cum-absence tut 
(O) in a state of asymmetricality (1). (May 58) 

374. All these mental foot prints in this book: what beaten 
tracks they make for themselves and follow! And how these tracks 
emphasize by contrast the areas where they never tread! (May 58) 

375. Life is mainly solalterism: death pure solipsism. (May 58) 

376. Three forms of agnosticism: (1) I am certain (know) that 
this is impossible for anyone else to know. (2) I am uncertain (do 
not know at present) whether this which I don’t know now, can be 
known by me or by anyone at some time. (3) [ am certain (know) 
that this which I do not know, can be known sometime. 

These three cover agnosticism about death. 

‘Three main attitudes to death (my death): (1) I believe (know) 
that I shall survive my death. (2) [ believe (know) that I shall not 
survive my death. (3) one of the three forms of agnosticism. 

It is impossible for ordinary, normal thought to confront the 
idea of (my) death except in one of these attitudes. All of these 

76 

The Second Note Book 

attitudes are wrong through the assumptions (explicit and implicit) 
that they necessitate. Consequently it is impossible for normal 
thought to confront (my) death with a correct attitude. (May 58) 

377. If there is rebirth then there is nothing in this whole 
world, not even oneself, that is worth killing anyone for. But if 
there is no rebirth, then there is nothing, provided only that I am 
clever enough to evade the direct consequences, to prevent me 
killing one who gets in my way. Materialists might not (like?) this. 
(June 58) 

378. There is no kind of act which is not wrong in certain 
circumstances. Suppose that were true? (Jun. 58) 

379. What nonsense it is to say that truth is beauty or what is 
true is good: is torture (the ‘flagellation’, say) not true and 
paintable? (Jun. 58) 

380. If absolute union with God (as in the Advaita) is taught, 
then who is lost, ‘I’ (in which case I no longer exist) or ‘God’ (in 
which case I assume the Nijjinski madness ‘I am God...’) or both (in 
which case the state is not distinguishable from no-god). Again if 
the personal Idea of God is replaced by Pure Being, then Being, to 
be pure, cannot be accessible to knowledge or, if it is, it is not pure. 
But if it is not, then it cannot be known whether it is Pure Being or 
Nothingness. (Jun. 58) 

381. The mind’s mouth is greed, its body ignorance, and anger 
its anus. People who quarrel with one or with each other in one’s 
presence, expose the bare backsides of their minds just in one’s face 
and shit on one’s door step. (Jun. 58) 

382. What is the human world if not heaven reflected in hell’s 
pitch-pool. (Jun. 58) 

383. The world had treated me for fifty two years now with 
admirable indifference and allowed me to go very much my own 
way. To me it has been on the whole tolerant and helpful. When I 
see what it has done to so many others in my time I think how 
easily it could have played the steam-roller or the cat-and-mouse 
trick with me. Who knows what is to come? (Jun. 58) 

384. Canticle (Persephone and All That). 

Only Mortality is immortal: all things mortal she mortgages 
for ever. 

77 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Only Temporality is eternal: all things temporal he tempers for 
ever. 

Only Particularity is universal: 

Only Perception is unperceived: 
Infinity! Infinity! Infinity! 

Not squared, not cubed; but 

Raised to the power of infinity. (Jul. 58) 

385. Since being applies everywhere, to positive and negative, 
without distinction (for what is not IS in the negative mode), while 
what is IS in the positive mode) it is impossible to define it, though 
it can be, in a sense, described. Being, in fact, = self identity; to be is 
to identify. Whatever is is itself (see Sartre for the two modes of en 
soi and pour soi). Now, since nothing whatever that can be 
individualized is simple (if it were simple it could not be individual 
in the sense of being distinguishable as individual), it follows that 
for any individual to have a self there must be identification 
between the individual and its self. Its self is thus both the 
individual and not the individual, and the individual is both itself 
and not itself, and its self is both individual and unindividual. How 
is that? Because—identification takes place through coalescence. (...) 
when two (complex) individuals are seen as having the majority of 
their qualities in common and the quality or qualities (or 
quantities) that individualize them, one from the other and from all 
else, are ignored, when thi: joring takes place involuntarily, an 
individual is seen to be itself. This is the objective aspect of things. 
Other people (seen in the accusative) and I (seen as me) are also 
“thingified”—(= realized, made a res). Consciousness is nothing; ‘I,’ 
subjectively, am an action for me (as myself), ‘I’ then being identified 
with ‘me’ (the untranscended sum of my actions and possibilities)— 
the individualized negative act with the individualized thingified 
history—am myself through coalescing, ignoring and forgetting the 
different qualities (or multiplicity) by which ‘I’ am distinguishable 
from ‘me.’ The moral of all this is simply that without ignorance 
there is no being or non-being. (Jun. 58) 

386. But how absurd it is to identify being and good, since evil 
is. And how can good be simply defined, without reference to evil, 

78 

The Second Note Book 

as the object of the will? And how can being be defined, without 
reference to non-being, as the object of consciousness’s affirmation, 
and since being is without limit, how can it be defined? 

No wonder scientists fight shy of ontology as it has been 
shaped in European, thought—but they have none of them seen 
why. (Jun. 58) 

387. Logic is impossible without the identifying process of the 
copula is and identification is the function of ignorance. (Swallow 
that, if you can, you logicians!) (Jun. 58) 

388. In the physical world, with relativity and the maximum 
speed of light as a finite quantity, while “sniform motion in a 
straight line (= rest)” implies change, in the surroundings of a 
coordinate system, it predicts nothing internal of the CS itself. But 
with, say, a (constant) acceleration the CS not only takes on an 
internal orientation but also approaches the maximum speed, from 
which it must result that the change will be in a sense (seen from 
outside the CS) trajectorial (like ageing', is distinct from mere 
altering) and is bound to result in eventual catastrophe to the CS 
(“death”). In the physical world, the phenomenon of gravity is in 
many ways equatable with acceleration. (Maximum speed with 
what?) We can regard the earth as CS expanding acceleratedly, 
which acceleration keeps us on its surface and makes us “heavy.” 
(Why then doesn’t the earth get larger?—That is beside the point.) 
Without the “acceleration” of gravitation the earth could disperse 
in dust and vapour, into nothingness.? But not enough, this gravity- 
acceleration—if there is a maximum speed (speed of a CS, relative to 
other CS), must result in the earth’s ageing-curve and eventual 
death as an internal phenomenon. Conversely, the seeming 
inevitability of ageing and death of the complex conscious animals, 
including man, might suggest both an acceleration and an upper 
speed ceiling. Suggestive as this line is, it suffers from two 
disadvantages: it smacks of argument by analogy, and it is entirely 
objective (in the scientific sense), which, though sound for physics 
given the self-imposed limitations of the scientific premise, is 
nevertheless totally inadequate for analysis of subjectivity. (Note 

' — Tonly “see” my own ageing, as it were, from outside my self. 

2 Mere solidity (=motion) in a straight line. 

79 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

the subjective analysis. might be made on the basis of the theory— 
see here No. 361—of the subjective orthogonal three dimensions of 
time and of space.) (Jun. 58) 

389. Everything I see hides something else: what is behind that 
tree-trunk? What is behind the positive emptiness I see extended 
between the stars? Everything I hear blots out some other sounds 
behind this conversation I hear and take part in, what is being said 
at the next tables on the right and on the left? Behind the roar of 
waves, what sounds are there? Behind the light buzzing of the ears 
in the silence of the night or of a cave, what sounds? Behind the 
smell of Camembert and taste of salt, or the taste of spittle in an 
empty mouth, the smell of nasal receptivity in a quiet nose,—what 
smells and tastes? Behind this touch of velvet or this (?), what other 
touch? And lastly, behind these ideas and images, what ideas and 
images? What? What?—But why do I ask? To recognize something 
revealed is to imply something hidden by it. (June. 58) 

390. The principle of non-commutative multiplication 
legitimates the idea of asymmetrical pairs or opposites which, while 
opposite, do not cancel each other out; pleasure and pain are one of 
these pairs. (Jun. 58) 

391. Expediency is really the reproductive organ of morality 
(its “shame” which it covers up), without which it would be sterile 
and its race die out. (Jun. 58) 

392. Perhaps the amount of pain one suffers is the measure of 
the amount of clinging to existence one has fundamentally. For the 
‘body’ that one has in dreams is too fragile in its continuity to 
withstand pair. It takes the solidly organized waking body to stand 
pain. Pain is inimical to continuity. But if continuity (life) is desired 
(voluntarily and involuntarily), an organization is needed to 
localize pain and contain it when it rises; this is the physical body. 
In this view the physical body is a pain barrier (rather as the tonsils 
are the germ-barrier) in the whole personality in waking life. In 
dream, to repeat, though there is my body in all my experiences in 
dreams, it is unstable and its situations (as seen in waking reflexion) 
succeed with disconnected jerks: bits of disconnected continuity, 
some long, some short. —But there is no bodily pain in dreams to 
any noticeable extent. To maintain continuity, ability to have a 

80 

The Second Note Book 

physical dam against discontinuity is gained at the price of bodily 
pain. (Jun. 58) 

393. It is best to live at peace with the devil one knows and not 
to try to make a breach too soon; for then he may go away before 
one is ready, and others whom one does not recognize may then 
take his place. (Jun. 58) 

394. If number is definable as what you can count, it is 
therefore finite, but an infinite number (see Russell, Mysticism and 
Logic) is what you cannot count, and is therefore not a number 
except by a pun (vide Russell’s statement that “the number of finite 
numbers is infinite”—which in “straight” language should be stated 
as no number of numbers is countable”). A definition of infinity is 
self-contradictory, verbally, since it involves placing a limit (finis) 
to that which is stated to have none. (Jun. 58) 

395. What I believe I know, I do not yet fully know: what I 
know I believe, I no longer fully believe. (Jun. 58) 

396. Ignorance screens the truth. It is on that screen that people 
paint pictures and write underneath their labels “god” and “not- 
god” and “theism” and “atheism.” (Jun. 58) 

397. Can definition define itself or description describe itself? 
Or can it be that description can only be defined, and definition 
described? (Jun. 58) 

398. In these days both theism and atheism have got a bit 
greasy with the smoke of Auschwitz—but why ever put up a 
memorial to that? What is there (that) art is not capable of? Anus 
mundi—it can kiss the world’s arse, it seems. 

399. Goodness can only be finally established by destruction of 
evil, and destruction is doubtful as to whether it is good. 

Truth must include evil, since it is manifestly wrong to assert 
that evil is untrue. 

Beauty, as art, if it can take the Cross (the cruifixion by torture 
and murder of a man-god), and Auschwitz (the crucifixion by 
torture and murder of humanity) for its aliment, would seem to be 
a foul feeder with no limit to the horrors it is willing to devour, 
without pecksniff ethics to censor it. (Jul. 58) 

400. Mythical entities can be measured: they used to measure 
phlogiston, and they still measure force. (Aug. 58) 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

401. Space and time are the great subjective mistakes which we 
all agree in making and on and in which we build all our 
disagreements. (Aug. 58) 

402. Charitableness to one’s neighbour is like clean linen: to be 
worn rather than talked about. (Aug. 58) 

403. The impenetrable secrecy of substances. Things hide their 
substance behind their surfaces. Crack open the surface to see the 
substance, and what do you find? Another surface, and so on. 
Substance is secrecy. 

And the secrecy of persons. You in all honesty—as I honestly 
believe—tell me all your secrets as a friend and confidant, but I can 
inherently never know that that is so, I can only firmly believe it 
(and to know that I believe is half to doubt while to believe that I 
know is to be half in real ignorance). What distinguishes me from 
you (or you from him or me from him) and vice versa, as persons 
rather than things,—the mode of difference between persons that 
differs from the mode of difference between things—is that, 
however honest and open I am, however much I try, through love 
or hate, or fear and terror, physical or mental, I can inherently 
never completely disclose my ‘self’ (for if that were possible, I and 
myself would disappear quite). Thus I am a secret and you a 
suspicion, that can never be removed (or vice versa). So lovers are 
jealous, and people torture each other in order to obtain 
information; no less now, in the 20'" century (with the modern aids 
of science and psychology) than in the middle ages or the 
renaissance (Tolstoy said a man does not know a State if he does 
not know the insides of its prisons)—yet with all the aids that 
science can and will be able to give one can never be quite satisfied 
that one has got it all. The irony is that this secrecy is itself so 
secretive that people quite forget it and believe all can be disclosed. 
A man can only tend towards openness—he can never quite get 
there. Socialism, if it degenerates into a flight from this fact, by 
pretending that the Ego (the psychologists’ depersonalized and 
quelquonque, and therefore fictitious ‘I’) does not matter and the 
individual is really subordinate to the State. The old regime has 
failed through failing to recognize that the State (other people) 
cannot be subordinated to the individual. (Aug. 58) 

82 

The Second Note Book 

404. The Absolute can only receive its Absolution from 
Consciousness (failing which/there is/neither absolute nor 
particular), and in so doing the absoluteness is particularized as 
such, and so is no longer absolute. (Aug. 58) 

405. A man can only tend towards frankness, he can never 
achieve absolute frankness or he would be a mere mechanical 
device. When he has deviated some way in this direction, people 
identify him with the idea of great frankness. They say ‘he is 
frankness itself.’ (Aug. 58) 

406. Whether one accepts an idea with the left hand of horror 
and indignation or with the right hand of welcome and approval, 
one has accepted it just the same and is left holding it—and it is no 
good hiding away from oneself under one’s coat what one has 
accepted with the left hand. (Aug. 58) 

407. Honour is a principle that asserts the Person above the 
Principle (and changes persons): The Nihilist or Revolutionary is 
the Person that asserts the Principle above the Person (and changes 
principles). (Aug. 58) 

408. What always distinguishes my body from all other 
peoples’ bodies? All bodies appear incomplete, but while other 
peoples’ bodies appear incomplete away from me, my body is the 
only one that appears incomplete towards me, too. This is true of 
any view point at any time. (Aug. 58) 

409. God is invented as the counterbalance to the unique ‘T’- 
illusion of pure solipsism. Atheist science therefore has, of 
necessity, to take refuge in Solalterism; for without god, if the 
unique subject ‘I’ is admitted (and science cannot control it), it must 
assume divine and absolute proportions and become madness 
(Kirilloy). Buddhism avoids this by removal of the ‘T’—illusion in 
all aspects, whether in that of god or the solipsistic 
misinterpretation of the unique ‘I.’ (Aug. 58) 

410. A: On the basis of monotheistic theology free will can 
only be freedom to do evil—if good and God’s will are equitable— 
and God, as the Creator of all things, is creator of evil through man 
as His Instrument, as creator of man’s will to do evil. 

B: If you say that, I will destroy you. (Aug 58) 

411. Seek and you shall find—what shall I find? The seeking. 

83 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Knock and it shall be opened unto you—and what shall be opened 
unto me?—The knocking. (Aug. 58) 

412. The process of gathering evidence on which to base a 
conclusion necessitates excluding irrelevant matter—it is always a 
process of selection and rejection, thus it must always be 
incomplete. This suggests that any conclusion based on evidence is 
always incomplete—‘no conclusion’—and_ provisional, however 
‘final’ it may be believed to be. To reach a ‘complete’ and ‘final’ 
conclusion about anything, everything would have to be 
considered and taken into account, which, since it would require 
infinite comprehension and eternity, would be the unattainable— 
the always possible that cannot be ‘killed’ by realization: or in 
other words, ‘the absolute future.’ (Aug. 58) 

413. People who set out to explain the unfamiliar in terms of 
the familiar, always end by explaining the familiar in terms of the 
unfamiliar. (Sep. 58) 

414. The Truth is often so insulting. (Sep. 58) 

415. The theists are men who, in order to see the light, build 
stone cathedrals round themselves with stained-glass windows 
showing the comprehensible attributes of their incomprehensible 
God. The atheists, in order to see more clearly, curtain off the 
stained-glass windows. (Sep. 58) 

416. It seems to me that rest, motion and acceleration, are 
inseparable in any total situation or event, and are thus three co- 
present structural modes. Modes of what? Copresent structural 
modes of permanence. But surely permanence is a delusion? And 
what moves and accelerates, at least, changes and is thus 
impermanent: No, rest or motion or change are together three 
modes of the situation, not of a thing—a ‘thing’ has one of them in 
appearance, when the others are relegated to the rest of its situation 
or event.—Properly change is an alteration of quality or quantity in 
which no one, nor all, of the three modes of permanence is present. 
Only a ‘thing’ can be at rest or move or accelerate, and a thing has 
illusion of permanence while it is that thing. When it changes, it is 
no more that thing, and so no motion or rest or acceleration can be 
attributed. (Sep. 58) 

417. The Law is nothing but a set of techniques for can 

84 

The Second Note Book 

hate into order and away from chaos (as commerce is for canalizing 
greed similarly). It is a mistake to identify war with hate: wars are 
made for greed and for fear more than for hate—see also Uncle 
Toby’s defence of war in Tristram Shandy. Judge Wildegoose’s 
description of Law as a device for delay (rather than for adminis- 
tration of justice), in which passions cool down and litigation solves 
itself with the passage of time and the help of boredom, is acute. 
(Oct. 58) 

418. The love/hate opposition is misleading and not true to 
facts. Better would be love/fear and greed/ hate. Or perhaps better 
a triangle which is constantly being forced hate 
into a duality by identifying one of the KN 
pairs: that is what makes the world go é 
round, no doubt. Trying to make an axis Hove 2 feat 
out of a try-angle by axing one angle on 
trial. (Oct. 58) 

419. Why, I sometimes ask myself, is speech so geometrical? If I 
exaggerate I speak hyperbolically. Arguments always follow a 
certain line and are sometimes circular. Statements are sometimes 
elliptic. A statement either has a point, or is pointless. Parables come 
from the word parabola (which is a simile or metaphor or, a 
something that follows something else: speech follows experience), 
and lastly, I find in the C.O.D., parlance (the English form of 
French parler, Italian parlare) comes from the Latin parabolare, to 
talk. I haven’t discovered any verbal squares, triangles or cubes yet. 
So it seems that the strange geometricity of speech (=parlance, 
remember) in general is confined to conic sections and covers them 
all. It is very odd. ‘But,’ some wiseacres may say, “You have got it 
upside-down. Speech has not borrowed from geometry (it is much 
older); geometry has borrowed from speech!’—But then I ask why 
have speech metaphors invaded geometry and taken possession of 
conic sections? There is no such situation in arithmetic that I know 
of. (Oct. 58) 

420. Among the principal essentials of existence are: the pun 
(no meaning or idea is quite unequivocal), the dialectic (no choice is 
settled except by a belief), conditionality (no thing or quality ever 
arises or is found alone; for if found, it is not alone since in the 

85 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

presence of what finds it), impermanence, identification (the self 
illusion made on recognition of anything, which is always wrong 
against the standard of Truth-that-never-disappoints), consciousness 
(without which there are no ideas at all), being (without which 
illusion nothing whatever can be cognized by recognition as either 
recognized or unrecognized), individualized perspect (without 
which there is no ‘view’), etc., etc. (Nov. 58) 

421, FABLE. —Once a person called “P” went to a place called 
“kitchen,” and with a lot of impersonal things variously called, 
including a thing called “a spoonful of salt,” performed some 
actions called “cooking” and produced a thing called “delicious 
dinner,” which the person called “P,” in another action called 
“serving a dinner to guests,” sat down to, with some other persons 
variously called, one of which was called “Q.” He was a chemist. 
He said, “Chemically speaking, there are only elements and 
combinations of elements, ‘you’ as a person, and a ‘teaspoonful of 
salt’ as a thing don’t exist chemically. ‘You’ and ‘it’ are both just 
combinations of elements, which are real. Now this so-called 
“teaspoonful of salt” is, for instance, merely a combination of the 
elements chlorine and sodium.” The person called “P” was 
impressed. For the next action called “serving a dinner to guests,” 
“P” thought “Why not, since Q said they were the same thing—that 
salt is merely chlorine and sodium—why not be original and serve 
some chlorine and sodium instead of salt? So much simpler! Why 
bother about their being combined as salt? They are more real too,” 
he said. “We'll combine them in ourselves at dinner.” 

So the person called “P” undertook an act called “buying some 
chlorine (poisonous gas) and some sodium (metal that burns and 
explodes in contact with water),” and these things (not elements in 
this action), with other things, the person called “P” acted on in a way 
called “serving a dinner to guests.” Now the result was quite 
different to that of the previous action also called “serving a dinner 
to guests” and identified by “P” as the same (sort of) action. The result 
this time was very painful to the person called “P” and the other 
persons called “guests,” and they all “died” very “puzzled.” Why was 
that? Because they didn’t mind their P’s and Q’s. (Nov. 58) 

86 

The Second Note Book 

422. The profoundest of all illusions is the illusion that there is 
no illusion. (Nov. 58) 

423. It is when the ethical fails that it slips back into the 
immediate—but as the ironical immediacy. It is when the religious 
fails that it slips back into the ethical—but as the comic ethical. 
Failure in the immediacy is simply immediate suffering. (Nov. 58) 

424. Besides the fact that no virtue stands out as such except 
against the background of its corresponding vice, it also seems 
impossible to find any virtue whatever that is not, on some 
occasion, in certain circumstances, itself a vice. If this were not so, 
no judgement would be needed—all would be settled by rule—and 
is judgement a virtue? (Nov. 58) 

425. In the pattern of ideas everything is possible even a 
contradiction. In the opposed pattern of existence (the might-be, 
the is, the existing), the possible and impossible are, more or less 
arbitrarily, distinguished, and what is possible then being only 
discernible by observation and learning. This points to an arbitrary 
fixed solution of dialectic on the basic existential level in existence, 
which perhaps distinguishes the individual personality during his 
life span. (Dec. 58) 

426. Heaven can be made into hell by other people or oneself. 
Hell can be made into heaven by oneself. In either case neither 
endures indefinitely—le Paradis est toujours a refaire. (Dec. 58) 

427. The best way to govern the world would apparently be to 
put half the population in prison and set the other half to guard 
them. This would be essentially humane since one of the 
characteristics that distinguishes human beings from animals is the 
habit of building prisons and imprisoning some of their own kind,— 
not to build and maintain them is inhuman. But perhaps there is no 
need to bring this about, to make this “essence” “exist,” since perhaps 
it is in fact how the world is now being ruled: now as it is and 
always has been. Half the world is in prison: each man is half in 
prison. Otherwise what need to talk of freedom? But prisoners are 
so optimistic, aren’t they? Don’t they imply that freedom must be? 
And then who is inside and who is outside? (Dec. 58) 

428. The scientific writer Sluckin in his Penguin book on 
Cybernetics dismisses introspection as valueless because of the 

87 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

vagueness and ambiguity of the data it provides. Now I maintain 
that this very ambiguity—this constant punning in the mind—is 
one of the most valuable data that is provided uniquely by 
introspection (a veritable pearl cast before the Suckling-pigs). I also 
believe that the techniques initiated by Descartes’ Cogito ergo sum 
(disregarding his construction of dual substances with which he 
obscured this) and Sartre’s ontology of Etre et le Néant provides the 
basis for a technique for the study of ambiguity. This basis is 
description (as opposed to definitions which are always ad hoc and 
unilateral fixings of a dialectic and, as such, can inheringly never 
provide any final solution but only a direction for a further 
movement). The special dialectic of ambiguity is whether to choose 
to fix an ambiguity by a definition and so merely shift the 
ambiguity elsewhere and conceal it (useful in certain techniques 
such as those of science, excluding the Uncertainty Principle) or 
whether to recognize—it as a valuable and true subject for 
description, when complementarity is needed. 

It is a certain fundamental type of ambiguity that distinguishes 
beings and things from qualities. The study of them must take into 
due and close account both certainties and probabilities (the 
scientist's “exactness” and “certainty” are never exact and certain 
but only approximations of probability to the absolute certainty of 
introspection that they can inherently never reach—the certainty of 
the ambiguousness). 

This technique corresponds to yoriso manasikara in the Suttas. 
(Dec. 58) 

429. There is an inherent special ambiguity about the “present” 
as an idea or as an existent, which it does not seem to share with the 
past or the future. Some argue that the present has no duration, 
being simply a surface between past and future, while others talk of 
its duration though they can’t agree on what length it ought to 
have and take specious refuge in a “spacious present.” Without 
paying particular attention to these two views, I find the mere fact 
that they are asserted indicates that the notion is elastic in the 
minds of other people and so too I find it in my own. Also the 
“present” seems to me equally admissible both for “what I am doing 
now” (extended) and for “what is present to me now.” 

88 

The Second Note Book 

(instantaneous). And the first (subjective) may be the “shortest 
thought flash conceivable” or “my whole life I am living” or 
“eternity of past and future in the now. In the last (objective), all 
temporalization, in its three “orthogonal dimensions” of past, 
future and present, “appear present” as follows: the past was 
(present), the present is (present), the future will be (present), and 
(this is an important point) all three together eternally may be. 
Again concern with the past (taken as probable) gives us historians 
(and Hegel), concern with the future (taken as possible) gives us 
scientists, politicians and astrologers (and Hegel), concern with the 
past and future gives us logicians (and Hegel). The Buddha 
recommends concern with the present in the Bhaddekaratta-sutta, 
and this is only possible by introspection which reveals the 
ambiguity, absurdity and contingency of eternity in time. Again, 
perhaps, the past is the legitimate field of knowledge (which 
comprehends), the future is the legitimate field of faith (faith being 
ignorant man’s instrument for groping beyond where knowledge 
extends). The present is the legitimate field for describing, in terms 
of the three times, and for remembering what one has described. 
(Dec. 58) 

430. (Vide Kierkegaard) Immediacy is ironical since, for lack of 
foresight, it risks failing to get what it wants and is, when inspected 
from without, always exposed to pain and disappointment, with no 
defences against them. Ethics, its immediate remedy, is either 
expediency with the purpose of gaining some future immediacy, or 
it is discipline to gain liberation from immediacy-with-its-blindness: 
ethics thus always points out of itself and risks, on inspection from 
without, appearing ridiculous. Liberation, its ethical remedy, points 
to the liberation of all needs ... (Dec. 58) 

431. Every victory won in this world is a stalemate on another 
level. (Jan. 59) 

432. That esse est percipi I do not deny by any means, though I 
think it incomplete. What is lacking? Nothing. How? Because, 
given that statement on its merits, it implies (in order that it may 
emerge at all) percipiens non est (i.e., non esse est percipere—perceive is 
a recul {rom being). This statement esse est percipi, is not quite of the 
same order as cogito ergo sum (a description, not a logical-causal 

89 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

deduction), which, if translated into its terms, would be cogito ergo 
percipior, which seems a quaintish non-sequitur, since it does not 
come out well either as a logical deduction or as a description. That 
percipiens non est I do not deny either. But this is only a starting 
point for completion, for the self-identity of the percipiens quis 
percipitur non esse (= non esse est percipere) now enters, and with it 
ramifications that extend thence ad infinitum. 

Now, phenomena gua phenomena must be (ought to be) 
distinguishable from what they are not in order that they may 
emerge at all and that the word may have a meaning (referent) and 
not be entirely redundant. If so—if they are, as such, 
distinguishable—it is from being, though with great caution (a 
limitation of being). And so, if they can be said to have a 
phenomenal-characteristic peculiar to them, by which they can be 
so distinguished, it is that when a phenomenon appears, it does so as 
hiding something else; but that when a search is made, on this 
invitation, for what ought to be beyond it, only other phenomena 
ever appear when it disappears (and so, never disappears!). On these 
terms consciousness could be said to appear as the phenomenon 
that hides nothing when it appears. Now, complementarily, if being, 
which phenomena are thus not, has, as such, an ontological 
characteristic peculiar to it alone, it is either that it has nothing 
beyond it, or better that it is hidden. A phenomenon, then, while 
thus certain in its phenomenality is ambiguous in its being. But if, as 
is always possible, the ambiguity in the being of the phenomenon is 
dialectically resolved, it reappears again in what the being is not, 
ie., phenomena, as their non-phenomenality (i.e., ability to 
appear). All this, in repetitive pattern and infinite (=indefinite) 
ramifications, vistas and hierarchies, levels, planes and ranges, 
provinces and pastures, is what the, structure of this play consists 
in. Hence the Double Ambiguity “whose naming kills and, has it 
born elsewhere.” Herein, too, lies the ambiguity of “essence” as the 
distinguishing characteristic: is it phenomenon or being?—logical 
copula or, predicate? (Jan. 59) 

433. Etre en soi is what phenomena appear to hide, which itself 
appears, in pure positivity, as what must (ought to) and cannot ever 
be (found). Etre en soi is thus, the real objective paradox—the 

90 

The Second Note Book 

paradox of the real. (res). (Jan. 59) 

434. What is probable? Certainty. What is certain? probability. 
What is infinite? Finiteness. What is finite? Infinity. What is 
permanent? Impermanence. What is impermanent? Permanence. 
(Jan. 59) 

435. The only one is the many and many the ones, The only 
one that is the many, is one of many. The only eternity is of time 
and temporal the eternities, The only infinity is finiteness; and 
finite infinities. The only permanence is impermanence; and 
impermanent the permanences. (Jan. 59) 

436. What a glue is made by a mixture of guilt and gratitude, 
and how well they sometimes mix in some pots! (Jan. 59) 

437. It is no ipso facto escape from dogma to assert (knowingly 
or not) non-dogmatism dogmatically. 

It is no ipso facto escape from credulity to believe in one’s own 
scepticism. (Jan. 59) 

438. Phenomena are secretive and what they secrete is being 
(pun). Hence the reason why, when we see some visible object, 
hear some sound, etc., we so often ask “what is this?” 

439. How often Rationalized Unrighteousness passes—for 
Righteousness! (Jan. 59) 

440. The proverb speaks of making a Virtue of Necessity; but 
the philosopher Emanuel Kant speaks (in the Categorical 
Imperative) of making a Necessity of Virtue. (Jan. 59) 

441. What is an identity? It is the essential oneness of two 
entities whose difference, if any, does not count. What is a 
plurality? It is the essential plurality of one entity whose oneness, if 
any, does not count. (Feb. 59) 

442. “Essence” (from the verb esse = to be): a medieval logicians’ 
concept, initiated by Aristotle, and used by logicians and 
philosophers as a synonym for characteristic: (i.e., characteristically 
distinctive phenomenon by which: we recognize what a thing, or 
class, is, by which it is recognized to be itself). This ontic metaphor 
from subjective-objective being to purely objective characteristic is 
a pun-by-metaphor of fundamental importance, and indispensably 
useful for those (Religious Doctors, say, or Scientists) who need to 
employ the “Utraquistic Subterfuge” (which is so valuable for 

91 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

verbal presti(-di-)g(itation-)e—remove what is in the brackets and 
see what remains. But a characteristic-phenomenon of such kind, 
called metaphorically “essence” (le phénomene de V’étre), is then that 
of something which has that essence and consequently is not it 
(whether that something is regarded as a Kantian, “Ding-an-sich” or 
as an Abhidhamma __ constellation-of-dhammas-with-no-self- 
substance, or what you will, makes no difference here); it is the 
special phenomenon by which I recognize what this, which has it, 
is, and by which I believe this to be what it itself is. Now by this 
i ontic metaphor of “essence” applied to the 
characteristic, being has been subtly drained away from the 
subjective-externalized in appearance; it is thus rendered possible to 
appear to verbally externalize Being and to objectivize it entirely. 
Thus it is now easier (apparently) to handle “existence” (that same 
thing’s Being) as just another external attribute, namely as that 
thing’s “quality-of-existing” predictable of it. The fraud is now 
nearly complete; and if the logical copula is (the verbal mode of 
being agreed upon as one of the basic assumptions of logic, and a 
logical constant): can only be passed off as quite divorced from 
being-and-existence with the mediation of the metaphor of 
“essence” externalized as characteristic or attribute, then the 
logicians can forget about the copula and make others overlook it, 
forget that it is the true verbal symbol for existential being by 
which, and only by which, logic maintains a connection with life, 
and forget that it contains the (hateful subjective) element of self- 
identification. This play with the “essence”-metaphor is possible 
because of the actual existential miragic identity-relation of 
ambivalence (one-in-two, two-in-one) between consciousness-and- 
being and between being-and phenomena. This ambivalence, which 
lurks in the copula is, is an anathema to logicians who seek by any 
means to hide it away. So now we have split being into two and we 
have apparently drained away being from the copula by means of 
the “essence”-metaphor and now we can proceed to make believe 
that the copula is is not really being at all (which is quite untrue, 
since it remains being on the verbal plane; and if it did not, no 
statements would correspond at all to life), and so the copula can be 
exempted from all question or analysis. When we propose to 

92 

The Second Note Book 

investigate being, this investigation can be handed over entirely to 
Logics, which, since the copula (its constant) does not count as 
being, is capable of handling the whole thing and indeed all 
existential problems (and so, if it seems that logic cannot answer 
some such problem, then, my dear sir, your problem is wrongly 
stated, is fictitious, and no problem at all since logic is always right: 
evvivea il Positivismo Logico!). No wonder the cogito enrages the 
Logicians so! This is not to decry logic in its own proper field which 
is that of being, but to expose its false claims that being can be 
subordinated to it or investigated or analysed by it. The proper 
instrument for that is yoniso manasikara, of which elements are 
contained in the cogito. (Feb. 59) 

443. The past came before me now; the future lies before me 
now; the present is before me now. (Feb. 59) 

444. Space = simultaneity of time. Time = allotropism of space. 
Space = homotropism of time. Time—consecutivity of space. 

445. First, examples of ought to be and must be as duty: “A man 
ought to be married and be a father of a family.” “A man must bea 
good patriot if he is to earn the esteem of his fellow countrymen.” 
“Darling, you must be grateful to God for giving you your good 
dinner.” “My dear boy, you ought to be making a living for yourself 
at your age,” etc., etc—This is duty. This is concerned to get it 
accepted that “duty is” in the sense that “duty is a valid field of 
perception” (Kant’s Categorical Imperative). Duty then, if only it 
can be established as a valid field of perception will decide such 
dialectics for us if we “just open our moral eye.” (Others say that 
duty is “what other people want us to do.”) This as duty. This, as 
duty taken ontologically, implies that the subject is not what he 
ought to (must) be—he is not (or there is doubt about: his being) 
married and a father; a good patriot, grateful for dinner, making a 
living, etc, etc. Ontologically (superficially, at least) they are all 
straightforward. 

This is merely to establish the duty form of “must be” and 
“ought to be” in common usage in order to dismiss it, because it is 
the other use that I want to bring out. 

The other (equally common but much more ontologically 
subversive and misleading) use is this, as the following examples 

93 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

may make plain: “We have been, travelling two hours already; we 
ought to be nearly there by now.” “It is half past two; the boat must 
be out on the open sea by now.” “What is the time? It must be about 
11-30.” “Who is that coming down the street? It ought to be Smith 
by the looks of him.” “The world is so marvellously designed, there 
must be a creator of it.” “There must be a way out of the mess,” 
“there must he a way up this mountain,” “there must be something 
in Nibbana.” “It is so because it must be so; how could it be 
otherwise?”, and the closely allied “It is too awful; It can’t be true! 
No! No! It isn’t so!” Now in the/first/case of “duty-must-be,” what 
must be is regularly what is not; but, on the contrary, in the case of 
this “certainly-must-be,” there is the presumption ranging between 
suspicion and the certainty of mauvaise foi, that what must be is 
(“Are you sure it is? Certain. Have you seen it or verified it? No, 
but I am quite sure.”). This is just the opposite, and to dismiss (?) 
“certainly-must-be” under “duty-must-be” is to confuse and 
overlook a whole range of (often very bogus, misleading and 
dangerous) reasoning. Larelle’s Ontology is a good example of what 
must (ought to) be as what is; and so is Plotinus at times. What is 
simply is, and, as such, is wider than certainty (certainly-must-be in 
this sense). Certainty and being are thus not coextensive. Certainty, 
in its special dialectic (that of certainty; uncertainty), is a 
“department” of being, which is obvious if we remember that to be 
is equally well to be certain as to be uncertain. It is this confusion of 
what must be in this meaning or certainly must-be with what is (as 
against what is mot, which also is in the negative mode), that led 
Alain to make his famous and absurd denial of images: They cannot 
be, therefore they are not. (Feb. 59) 

446. Ethics results from an effort to escape from the chaos of 
aesthetic immediacy. But ethics needs justification: justification of 
ethics by reason (with the aid of logic) produces the dialectic of 
rational philosophical systems; justification of ethics by feeling 
produces the dialectic of religions (with or without logic, and/or 
holy wars). Justification of existence is their incestuous offspring, 
and so is condemnation of existence. (Apr. 59) 

447. What do they give medals for? Why, for meddling 
outstandingly in other peoples’ affairs, of course. (Apr. 59) 

94 

The Second Note Book 

448. The meaning of this is that, the meaning of that is this; the 
meaning of any this is all this or any or all that, ... the meaning of 
All is Meaninglessness. (Apr. 59) 

449. The basic Irrational Act which is renewed every moment 
of life, is not to commit suicide. (Apr. 59) 

450. The descriptions of what cannot be found are almost 
itless in their variety and contradiction—limited only by the 
tless field of what can be found. (Apr. 59) 

451. Tertullian’s famous outburst on the enjoyment of seeing 
others—‘the wicked’—burning in hell betrays the unadmitted fact 
that all our paradises are other people’s hells. (Apr. 59) 

452. The ‘self-becoming’ of the Absolute, as they like to 
present it, seems a sort of ontological incest. (Apr. 59) 

453. Bad as the world is (supposed to be) without any meaning, 
it would be infinitely worse with one. The moralists all try to find 
one, but if they succeeded, that would be the end of meanings. 
(Apr. 59) 

454. There are the systems x and y, who regard each other with 
internecine hatred, and who shout against each other and at all 
others: “He who is not for me is against me.” But I do not say “A 
plague on both your houses”; for I have no wish to wish plagues on 
anyone’s house; and besides, even if I did, it would be superfluous, 
since each, by its own attitude, is already the plague on the other’s 
house. (Apr. 59) 

455. Eddington’s “two writing desks”—one being the familiar 
piece of furniture at which he is seated resting his arms on it, and 
the other a scientific physical body lacking all sensual qualities, the 
greatest part of which is empty space—nothingness—interspersed 
with innumerable specks of the uncertainty principle in the ‘form’ 
of atoms (‘open structures’) with their electrons and nuclei 
separated by distances at least 100,000 times their own size. (See 
Schroedinger, Mind and Matter) 

456. 1) Justice must be done. 

2) It is not enough that justice is done, it must be seen to 
be done. 

3) It is not enough if justice is done and seen to be done, 
it must be admitted to be done by those (the punished criminals, 

95 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

the losers of litigation) who are punished by it. 

And what if they won't admit it? Shall they be forced to do so 
or shall justice suffer the dishonour of defiance and of timorous 
support? In the last analysis, does not justice demand—has it not the 
right—the sacrifice of every other value at her altar, with only fear, 
common sense, weariness and forgetting to restrain her? How 
justice hates Mercy! How mercy loves justice! (May 59) 

457. What an ideal language classical literary Chinese must be! 
“No active or passive, no singular or plural, no case, no person, no 
tense, no mood’ it is said! To be perfect it only needs to be no 
language at all! (Jun. 59) 

458. Broadening of perception without broadening of 
judgement (understanding) seems to risk leading to increase of hate 
or of greed, with corresponding strengthening of delusion (the 
latter, perhaps, having something like a quadratic functional 
relation to the first two. (Jun. 59) 

459. Taking the physical outside world as my looking-glass, 
what is recognizable there as myself reflected? The Philosophers’ 
and the Physicists’ matter, as the unfindable ‘substance,’ the 
‘reality,’ behind appearances. My self cannot be found, and that is 
one aspect of it. Worship of it is a kind of narcissism. (Jun. 57) 

460. How much one has learnt may perhaps be known to 
oneself. How much one has not will certainly be shown in one’s 
behaviour when the squeeze is applied. (Jun. 59) 

461. “Don’t build yourself an ivory tower” the moralists say. 
But I am an ivory tower by the mere fact that I am. On the crude 
physical level the body is a frame of (ivory) bones on which the 
muscles are stretched, crowned by an (ivory) bone pill-box turret 
housing the brain-shielding it from the blows of ‘reality’ so that it 
can get on with its absurd work undisturbed. On the non-physical 
level my I-ness is an ivory tower of orderly individual views and 
vistas shielding ‘me’ from being swallowed up in chaos. Dear 
moralists: don’t they see that life is a constant flight up and down 
the endless steps of the dark ivory tower seeking to escape from the 
horrid chaos of real freedom? (Jun. 59) 

462. Heisenberg has formed his Uncertainty Principle for 
atomic physics. There seems to be something of the sort needed in 

96 

The Second Note Book 

epistemology; for Philosophy points to the Absolute (conceived 
dialectically as Being or consciousness). But such an Absolute, to be 
known, must be the object of knowledge, in which case it is relative 
to the knowledge and not absolute. If it is attempted to purify it of 
that last relativity, then, with the withdrawal of all knowledge, it 
cannot be known whether the Absolute (Being or Consciousness) is 
absolute or non-absolute (Being-or-non-being, consciousness-or- 
non-consciousness). The concept Absolute (or All), then, in the 
Absolute sense, is in other words, Ignorance (and Heisenberg says 
that ignorance is now accepted on principle as one of the 
characteristics of atomic matter). (Jun. 59) 

463. Pun 

A. The only content of knowledge is the known. 

B. Very nice. And so it would seem that the only discontent of 
knowledge is the unknown. (Jun. 59) 

464. Discord: passion and understanding opposed in a fight to 
the death that never comes. 

Harmony: Understanding as the understanding of passion; 
passion as the passion for understanding. (Jun. 59) 

465. The ultimate object of knowledge is only ignorance, which 
in philosophy is euphemistically called ‘substance.’ (Jun. 59) 

466. One is walled in by what one denies; one is chained by 
what one affirms. One is one’s imprisonment. (Jun. 59) 

Politically an example of this is the Communist who is shut in 
by the bourgeoisie he denies, and the consequence in practice is that 
he becomes even more bourgeois than the bourgeoisie. 

Religiously an example is the Christian whose Church, in 
denying the antichrist, falls into his power by denying him. (Jun. 59) 

467. What the psychologists—no, psychoanalysts call a ‘fully 
integrated personality’ is he not simply one who lives (loudly and 
contradictorily and humanely) according to the Old ‘Testament 
pattern? The New Testament is not an integrating force: ‘I bring 
not peace, but a sword ...’ (Jun. 59) 

468. Why should ‘integration’ be a good thing? 

‘Integration’ as integration of ignorance and craving in the 
personality, just as we now have ignorance and force integrated in 
the atom with Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle—‘Ignorance’ 

97 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

and ‘Force’—those old myths? (Jun. 59) 

469. Absolute self-creation is the transparency of 
transparency,—not distinguishable from nothing at all. (Jun. 59) 

470. “I” = focus of ignorance in perception; “me” = focus of 
ignorance in “étre-vu.’ 

471. The most important philosophical contributions of the 
scientists are those principles which they have admitted they are 
forced to accept against their inclinations. Foremost there are 
Einstein’s Relativity, Bohr’s Complementarity, and Heisenberg's 
Uncertainty (= ignorance as a basic principle of matter). Scientific 
theory erected upon these basic principles is philosophically 
unimportant in so far as it is ‘mystical’ (see Whitehead’s remark) or 
inherently unverifiable (material substance,) or any such unproved 
or unprovable assumption. The Quantum Theory, for example, is 
an ad hoc empirical makeshift which works, but which contains the 
logically disagreeable contradiction of complementarity, and it may 
well have to be replaced by another. 

The present-day Holy Trinity of Science is therefore: 
Relativity, Complementarity, and Uncertainty. (Homousion or 
Homoi-ousion, of matter (physics)?) (Jun. 59) 

472. India has three heavens: the sensual paradises, the heavens 
of pure form where there is no sex, and the formless heavens where 
there is no perception of form or of multiplicity. It is tempting to 
trace these to an unconscious projection of the three principal 
phases of human life as distinguished by psychoanalysts (especially 
by Freud on the basis of sex and infantilism): the first is idealized 
adulthood (which is why it is placed nearest ‘this human world’), 
the second is then the pre-puberty (sexless,) stage (from say 4-years 
to 12/15 years), which, n.b., is as far back as the normal man can 
consciously remember. The third, with its blotting out not only of 
sex but of perception of forms and of difference represents the pre- 
4-year-old period (or what is behind the normal field of memory). 
Childhood is normally sentimentally idealized (My happiest days 
were ...’ etc.) which equals heavenised (‘Unless ye become as little 
children ye shall not enter the kingdom of heaven!’). A point to 
remember here, which is extremely important is this: the break 
between the first period (before memory) and the second-and-third 

98 

The Second Note Book 

is quite obvious, but the break between the second and the third is, 
although the fact is obscured by the apparent continuity of the 
historical—memory, quite as absolute as the other on the level of sex 
values. While one can ‘recreate’ by memory one’s ‘historical’ 
experiences during the period between the first memories and 
puberty, one cannot revive the sexless values and patterns (what the 
moralists like to call the ‘innocence’) of that period. (How futilely 
confused the moralists are here is well shown by the frequent 
unethical behaviour of children (excellently well portrayed in A 
High Wind in Jamaica): a child’s attitude to theft and violence is 
practically unrevivable by an adult, even if a thief or violent 
himself). In this sense we have the ‘three planes of being’ 
corresponding to the ‘three planes of heaven’ in this life; and in this 
life they are just as absolutely separated as the ‘three planes of 
heaven’ are. (Jun. 59) 

473. The Middle way: Their tram-lines: on the right their Ivory 
Towers, the factories and Trust companies; on the left: their work- 
houses, cancer hospitals, undertakers, their prisons and lunatic 
asylums. (Jun. 59) 

474. Dante, in exile in Verona, lamented his having always to 
‘climb other people’s stairs.’ But I ask myself, where are the stairs 
that are not other people’s? Where are the stairs that are mine 
which they cannot demand rent for or commandeer or confiscate if 
they please? (Jun. 59) 

475. In the corridor: he saw a door bearing the words: “Don’t 
open me.’ He opened it. A dull room inside with windows of 
frosted glass and another door on the far right bearing the words 
‘Don’t open me.’ He opened it. Another dull room with windows 
of frosted glass and a curtained looking-glass opposite the door on 
whose curtains were printed the words ‘Don’t look in me.’ He 
drew the curtains and looked, and he saw the same dull room 
reflected, with another door half-right behind him bearing the 
reversed words “Don’t open me.’ He opened it and found himself 
back in the first room. There another door on the left bore the 
words ‘Don’t open me.’ He did so and was back in the corridor. 

99 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

476. Up-to-Date Glossary 

Beauty—the current style of hair-do and make-up. 

Truth—What no one knows—does it matter? Perhaps what 
science is about to reveal to us alter religion has had its day in doing 
so. 

Goodness—= gracious (a gentle exclamation), 

Philosophy—Solipsism (‘What am [?’ and all that: rather 
discreditable). 

Psychology—Solalterism (‘What you are’ and all that: better than 
philosophy). 

Psychoanalysis—W ell, well! very deep and dirty. 

Ethics—my right to decide what they shall do. 

Politics—your right to oppose me. 

Government—their obstruction of us. 

Art—the normalization of the Enormous (e.g., Empire State 
Building, Tachisme, Auschwitz memorial, and what next?) 

Duty—to be politically conscious. 

Christianity—the opposite of Marxism. 

Marxism—the opposite of Christianity. 

The Middle Way—sitting on the fence. 

477. The only difference between discovery and creation seems 
to be that discovery objectifies its object in the involuntary mode, 
while creation objectifies its object (the otherwise same object,) in 
the voluntary mode. Hence the reality of the discovered against the 
imaginary fictitiousness of the creation. However the created thing, 
once created, in so far as it takes on an involuntary aspect (what is 
done cannot be undone), itself becomes discovered as created and so 
it too gains a species of reality. (Then the ‘false’ can be discovered 
too, but that is perhaps another question) (Jul. 59) 

478. The absurdity of love is that it assumes the very 
separateness it is its nature to wish to unite. (Jul. 59) 

479. Positivism is the wall: Negativism is the locked Door in 
the Wall. (Jul. 59) 

480. Mostly a man is ashamed to tell all that he does, ashamed 
to do all that he thinks, ashamed (or unable) to think all that he is. 

481. War: He who is not for me is against me. Peace: He who is 
not against me is for me. (The only difference is in the arrangement 
of words.) (Jul. 59) 

The Second Note Book 

482. Ordinary knowledge, which emerges against ignorance, 
cannot act because it cannot by its very nature know the acts’ 
desired result (which lies in the uncertain and only probable 
future). In order to act, therefore, faith is necessary, which 
supplements the deficiency of knowledge here. Such knowledge 
knows with certainty the pure opacity of its object which 
absolutely walls it in, and behind which wall is the province of 
ignorance. Faith is confident about penetrating the wall by action, 
whose result, during and before the action, cannot be known. This 
kind of knowledge is thus a making opaque of the grounds or 
material for the action without which no act can be begun, while 
faith ‘sees’ through this (to knowledge) absolute opacity to the 
result. Faith is thus a clarifying in its own field. When the act is 
completed it is then known to knowledge as the ‘completed-act- 
with-its-result’ (or as a failure), but then it is made opaque and faith 
has withdrawn from cooperative knowledge. Faith and knowledge 
cooperate in an act to overcome ignorance, which is restored when 
the act is known to be completed. 

For faith to act it must not be known to be doing so (reflexion); 
for such knowledge inhibits faith (the centipede who fell into the 
ditch when she reviewed her legs’ function while walking). If faith 
is forced up into knowledge’s field either it dies or it becomes 
‘mauvaise fo? of the kind Sartre describes. (Jul. 59) 

483. Knowledge emerges from ignorance as its ‘opposite,’ faith 
needs and uses ignorance for its medium, since it is essentially the 
aid for knowledge beyond its own field. 

The three have a triangular relationship in an act (with no true 
opposite for any of the three). 

In the ordinary sense knowledge is certain that what is is and 
that no action is possible. Faith is certain that no result is 
impossible. Ignorance is not certain how the action is being done, 
which changes what is known to be into what it is not. 

484. One’s thoughts are like nothing so much than an 
uncorrected text full of mistakes. (Jul. 59) 

485. People seem to approach religion for one of two main 
reasons or for both mixed together: They are moved either by a 
wish to discover truth (leaving that vague word vague here) or by a 

101 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

need to find justification for a predilection. Of the first, an 
outstanding example is, perhaps Kierkegaard. The second is far the 
more common. In myself I find elements of both. Perhaps the two 
merge with the incompatibility of two lines that meet at right- 
angles, and from the meeting-point some set out in one direction 
and some in the other. (Jul. 59) 

486. Discord is the monotone. But there are so many 
monotonies. (Jul. 59) 

487. It is only death that lives for ever: and the life-everlasting 
is death. 

It is only life that dies for ever: and the death-everlasting is life. 

The lifeless has died for ever. The deathless has lived for ever. 
(Jul. 59) 

488. Action 

The ‘actional’ attitude has two complementary modes: (1) The 
voluntary (active’) (exercise of will’, ‘free will’, control, doing, 
etc.), and (2) the unvoluntary (passive’) (‘limitation of will’, ‘out- 
of-control’, ‘inaction’, etc.). These two modes are constantly 
interlocking and alternating in the process of existence-as- 
becoming. The Result of an Action comes under (2). (1) looks to (2): 
that is, any act is done with respect to its expected result, without 
which is no act at all. This means what is called an ACT is, in fact, 
an experienced transition from the voluntary (active) state of (1) to 
the unvoluntary (passive) state of (2), e. g., the active, voluntary 
igniting of a fire-work is an example of (1), while the passive, 
involuntary, nose-tickling firework’s independent buzzing (or the 
ensuing sneeze), is an example of (2). This whole ACT, as an 
‘experience of a transition’ from the one type of constitutive 
cognizance to the other, opposite, type—on the voluntary- 
involuntary dimension—involves the manifestation of faith- 
ignorance already discussed: faith that the result will ensue as 
expected, and ignorance in the actual experience of the act-as- 
transition). For simplicity’s sake the examples cited are those of the 
elation conscious-body/inanimate-thing; but the relation of the 
Act/result between two conscious bodies (‘persons’) is not 
essentially different in its basic structure—as I/not-I—from the first- 
mentioned: then I am this result: what [ am is out of my control. 

102 

The Second Note Book 

More briefly, these two are respectively expressed by the words ‘T’ 
and ‘me’—T’ voluntarily make ‘me’ the involuntary result, ‘me’ 
being the reflection I see in the not-I. (Jul. 59) 

489. Idiosyncrasy—or the individual idiot’s singular craziness. 
(Aug 59) 

490. Two kinds of people: Those who, when a new idea is 
placed before them immediately assess it in terms of good and evil, 
and if received as good, they refuse to consider its impossibility, 
but, if received as evil, they refuse to countenance its possibility; 
and those who assess it in terms of possibility or impossibility, and 
if received as impossible, refuse to consider whether it is good, but 
if received as possible, then for them its possibility is more 
interesting than its evil—Ethics and Science. (Aug 59) 

491. Any description is always a reduction in dimensions or a 
projection onto another dimension (or set of dimensions). (Aug. 59) 

492. Let us unite for, not against, lest, by uniting against, we 
affirm and consolidate what we unite against, and lest, if what we 
have united against is no more, we do not know how to 
disembarrass ourselves of our againstness and so turn against each 
other. (Aug. 59) 

493. Being, being universal, cannot be defined except in terms 
of itself, which is no proper definition. But split, say, into positive 
and negative, it can speciously be defined as the one in terms of the 
other: that is ontology. So with consciousness only in asymmetrical 
«- @) (Aug. 59) 

493a. The imposition and perfection of order kills slowly. The 
introduction of complete disorder kills violently. Perfection of order 
is death by old age; interruption by chaos is death by violence. The 
breath@) of life needs both order and disorder. (Aug. 59) 

494. If all men are equal in the modern world, what place have 
teachers in it? (Aug. 59) 

495. Words distort thinking, thoughts distort perceiving, 
percepts distort acting, acts distort being, [beings distort naught, 
that I may be the acting of the perceiving of the thinking of the 
wording of the question ‘who?’.] (Aug. 59) [ ] added in pencil 

496. To do is to act. He who acts is an actor. An actor is 
essentially one who acts a part that he is not. But is not this the 

103 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

characteristic of all action? Is there not an aspect of falsity and 
ignorance, when evaluated in terms of being and knowledge, in the 
very nature of any act, of action itself (if action can indeed be said 
‘to have, be or “do,” a self”)? Curious, too, that to “do” someone is 
to cheat him. (Aug. 59) 

497. Tragedy 

A man had to go and live on a lonely moor near a deep bog, in 
summer full of flowers. He was not married then. He had two 
friends. One came to visit him. As he walked with him on the 
rocks beside the bog, the friend decided to gather flowers. The man 
warned him not to step on the bog. He laughed and was going to 
step out on it: ‘Why, it is good firm turf!’ he said. The man 
knocked his friend down, just in time to prevent him. The friend 
took such a great offence that he went straight away and avoided 
the man ever after. The man was sorry in a way. Soon his other 
friend came. The same thing happened, but this time the man 
decided it was perhaps better not to offend the friend than to save 
him. So when the friend stepped out from the rocks onto the bog, 
he said nothing and did nothing. The friend sank and was drowned. 
The man was sorry in a way. Now he had no friend. Soon they 
came and filled in the bog and built a town all over it, and they 
turned the moor into a mine. The man got bored and died, but 
only after a long time, at a great age, after doing a lot of work. 
(Aug. 59) 

499. It is reckoned a good thing to be able to ‘rise to an 
occasion’ adequately, and the greatest men are those able to rise 
adequately to the greatest occasions. But there is one occasion to 
which none is able to rise, and that is another’s death. The nearer 
and more important the death, the greater and more disturbing the 
inadequacy. Inadequacy is in the highest degree a painful state. 
Hence the flight into the conventional group-behaviour of funeral 
rites, chief mourners, wakes, and all the rest. If the Forgetting- 
Mechanism is in good order, it removes the inadequacy. (Aug. 59) 

500. The axiom assuming that the difficult must be explained 
in terms of the easier, is legitimate, centripetal, regressive and mean. 
Why not explain the easy by progressive stages in terms of the 
more difficult, if we are to broaden our minds? (Aug. 59) 

The Second Note Book 

501. It seems to have been one of the regular comforts of 
Church Philosophers to believe that what cannot be thought can be 
said. (Aug. 59) 

502. Though it is possible to define fog perfectly clearly, such a 
definition will not aid one to find one’s way about in the fog. Sep. 59) 

503. The knife, by its being kept sharp is sharpened away. (Sep. 
59) 

504. The dialectic of existence as the war of having to take 
sides. To sponsor affirmation of the world (like Nietzsche or 
Schweitzer in their very different ways) leads to championing that 
side, leads to suicide, which is conquest and enslavement by the 
opposite. Then the whole process can be worked out on the 
opposite side by denial and satanism (Byron, etc.) when the 
counterpart suicide-as-conquest-and-enslavement by the opposite 
takes place. The average man crowds the middle areas, but his ideals 
all point to taking sides: when the pressure is put on he takes sides 
for all his pacific arguments. 

Suicide here is self-sacrifice to the acknowledged master as the 
necessary consequence of achieving mastery in affirmation or in 
negation. To be the complete master of affirmation is to sacrifice 
oneself wholly to negation and into its slavery, and then the 
suicide-death is simply a switch of the fundamental being to the 
opposite, with the switch from mastery to slavery ... (Sep. 59) 

505. The sense of ‘evil’—in addition to ‘fear of pain’—seems to 
arise as a consequence of an involuntary attribution of animateness 
to the inanimate or to the unseen. ‘Evil’ is thus inherent in the 
three Semitic religions and in Hindu philosophy (wherever 
animist). In Buddhism it falls away and leaves the basic experiences 
of pain and fear of pain, as they are and as they arise and cease.— 
The pictures of Max Ernst, in so far as they suggest animateness of 
the inanimate (which they undoubtedly do very strongly) stimulate 
the ‘sense of evil’ very strongly. ‘Evil’ arises from the conception of 
a ‘will’ alien to my own (other human wills, however hostile, are 
not thus alien, since they are human: God is always accompanied 
by the Devil). (Sep. 59) 

506. It is the nature of consciousness to look back and forward, 
when it arises, in time. But that proves nothing as to whether 

105 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

anything did happen or will happen. The a priori is a conascent 
perspective. (Sep. 59) 

507. Suppose we say that existence is life-and-death and that 
every time we use the word ‘to be’ and its derivatives we are being 
metaphysical? (Sep. 59) 

508. The honest man is describable only in terms of dishonesty. 
For his honest quality he possesses in the form of his acts. And acts 
are alterations made. But he is not his acts: he is not what he 
possesses: he is not honest or he is his acts: but then by acting he is 
a changing, and so cannot remain honest, or in other terms: he is 
what he is not, if he is what he has. (Sep. 59) 

509. Singularity is the identity of two; duplicity is the non- 
identity of one. Identity = ignorance of duplicity, duplicity = 
ignorance of identity. Need assumes the identity of what it needs 
and the duplicity of what it does not need (needs to reject). (Sep. 59) 

510. In the “flow” of time the only constant is space. In the 
“extension” of space the only continuity is time. Time is inconstant, 
space is discontinuous. Time is constant in one place, space is 
continuous in one moment. 

511. There are two ways of attempting to deal with the 
appalling difficulties of choice on the higher ethical levels (Truth/ 
beauty/goodness; family/country, war/peace, _ principles/ 
persons...): (1) one can attempt to justify a one-sided choice, and this 
is what philosophies of value and religions attempt to do through 
reason and faith (feeling,) respectively. But this always founders or 
is never safe from foundering. (2) Or the dialectic can be squarely 
faced in the fact that no one-sided solution of it is ever justifiable by 
reason or by faith. And here enters the question not of acceptance 
or refusal, nor of affirmation or denial, but of letting-go. The 
letting-go, however, is limited, in life at least (and without taking 
death into account) by the boundary of ability to let go. (Sep. 59) 

512. All action, regarded (mathematically) as a function of me, 
and I being a function of ignorance, action is a function of reflected 
ignorance. (Sep. 59) 

513. Does the escapable-from-ness justify the prison? 

514. Imperfection is the window through which the beauty 
appears in the world. Remove the imperfection, and no more 

The Second Note Book 

beauty. (Sep. 59) 

515. What he is is doing, what he does is having, what he has is 
being—the “circuit of ipseity.” (Sep. 59) 

516. In existence, goodness is no protection against ugliness, 
beauty none against falsity, truth none against evil. All three 
together do not avail against starvation and death. (Oct. 59) 

517. Religious people are like people who gather in a doorway 
(a favourite Italian habit), lean against the door jambs gossiping and 
block the passage—the passage leads, to other doorways, which give 
onto other passages. (Oct. 59) 

518. Pattern 

The ultimate aim is aimlessness (the ultimate meaning is 
meaninglessness). Whether the vista of aims (or meanings) is 
bounded—or infinite, it is the same. The dialectic of aim/no-aim 
(the affirmation-and-denial of meaning) swings from the idea of aim 
unaffirmed and undenied; it vanishes with liberation from the basic 
Idea (with cure of the disease of meaning). (Oct. 59) 

519. Where Religion takes refuge by identifying the Absolute 
with either universal Being or Consciousness, the philosophies 
deriving from Hegel elevate Action to the highest level, identifying 
that with the Absolute as an (economic) Becoming through Hegel’s 
of Being and Consciousness (object-subject). 

But Consciousness, Being and Action are all both, incompatible 
and co-present (hence the internecine quarrel). (Oct. 59) 

520. Belief as an inflation of knowledge (currency, size of a 
balloon): the skin of a rubber balloon is known in the sense that it 
is (deflated) an evident phenomenon. Knowledge is essentially 
involuntary (I cannot, by mere willing, unknow what I know): the 
balloon-skin lies in my hand as an evident fact. If the balloon-skin is 
inflated with a suitable gas hydrogen, say) it will float in suitable 
conditions. But the gas that makes it float miraculously) is hidden 
from knowledge by the balloon-skin while it floats: it is there by 
faith. If I try to convert this faith into knowledge by letting out the 
gas for inspection, the floating vanishes: the faith has died by being 
produced for inspection. The power of faith always lies in its 
voluntariness (as opposed to knowledge) being hidden: if exposed it 
is rendered powerless. Faith, in order to have absolute power, must 

107 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

be absolutely inaccessible to knowledge—and (here is the paradox), 
owing to the nature of knowledge, then faith is indistinguishable 
from knowledge. (Oct. 59) 

521. So long as one assumes death as an absolute fact, one must 
have, as an assumed absolute value based on it, the decision either 
to kill or to be killed in the last extreme (and this includes attitudes 
to suicide and to ‘natural death’). This alternative ultimately divides 
all people (who make that assumption about death) into two types. 
With a proper understanding of death, the decision (dialectic) must 
collapse on the laying bare of the assumption. Freud has remarked, 
that death is inconceivable to the Unconscious, a statement which, 
though open to the usual criticisms of F’s mechanistic assumptions 
about cons-ciousness, does point to a very important factual 
dialectic in assumptions about death. (Nov. 59) 

522. An act is the action of an actor; an actor acts a part; in so 
far as an action is the acting of a part it is the action of one who is 
pretending (pre-tending) to be what he is not: an act completed is 
thus a pretence or fraud or betrayal waiting for justification by 
History, which has no end. (Nov. 59) 

523. Absolute dictatorship as organization of dutie(s) without 
right(s): absolute democracy as agglomeration of right(s) without 
dutie(s); existing human societies float at different levels between, 
and they stand upon two feet: the claim of rights against duties, and 
the claim of dutie(s) against right(s), and on these two feet they 
“march forward.” (Nov. 59) 

524. The world is absurd and has no meaning; but it is not that 
the world has no meaning; for it always has a meaning, cannot be 
divested of it, is haunted and eaten up by it—but no single ultimate 
meaning can ever be identified. This is the absurdity, when it is 
seen. (Nov. 59) 

525. All old philosophies aim at one of the alternative absolutes 
of ‘pure being’ or ‘pure consciousness’; they subject action to this 
end as the means. A consequence is that this ultimate goal is beyond 
this life, has to be so. It is in the 19th century only, in Europe, that, 
with Hegel, pure being and pure consciousness are fused and the 
way prepared for subordinating both to action. Marx does this fully 
and, going further than Hegel, who remains suspended in the 

108 

The Second Note Book 

abstract, identifies action with economics. This identification is 
dialectic. In Marxism, logically everything is fixed in the movement 
of Action, identified dialectically with economics, and past history 
is involved in the movement of change: for not only is it being built 
but what is already past and built is itself being changed by action. 
The Judgment of History is thus a changing one. The ‘fading of the 
state’ is the fading of History itself. Consciousness is dependent on 
action (n. b.) and: being is action (also n. b.). (Nov. 59) 

526. It is not memory but forgetting which is the positive 
function in maintaining existence. It is partial forgetting that 
conceals the contradictions and makes what is not forgotten, to be 
possible. (Nov. 59) 

527. The fundamental existential choice (made by the 
individual in infancy) is the identification of I/me with a historical 
facticity, as_this-unique-body-of-behaviour-which-I-am-becoming. 
That fundamental choice, as part of its necessary facticity, must 
have a particular perception associated with it (my body is thus, not 
otherwise), a particular affectivity (it is a pleasant, unpleasant or 
indifferent choice, whence ‘I love life,’ ‘I am evenminded’ or ‘I hate 
existence’) and conative (in the sense that it is ‘voluntary’ or 
‘involuntary’, i.e., passive and imposed). (Nov. 59) 

528. In some ways a saint is no longer a saint as soon as he is 
recognized and proclaimed and worshipped. A saint is a saint in so 
far as his being influences the actions of others, without their 
reflexive awareness of the fact, towards the lessening of suffering. 
But as soon as he is proclaimed and worshipped then that state, in 
which his worshippers try to emulate (imitate) him impossibly by 
being his disciples (a disciple de facto cannot be or even imitate his 
master, whose being consists in not-being-a-disciple), then his 
influence is channelled away (in this respect worship is as 
dissipating as laughter) and (perhaps by some Hegelian ‘passing 
over into the opposite’) under the worship with love lurks the anti- 
worship with hate. The saint’s name has become stale and 
provocative of suffering. (Nov. 59) 

529. Temptations 

1. The temptation to make something positive, no matter 
what, of religion in this or some future life. 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

2. The temptation to commit what I shall call the ‘obverse of 
murder,’ i.e., suicide blamed on someone else or on some group or 
on society as a whole (‘you do not want me so I shall let myself die 
and that will be your fault,’ and ‘they will punish you or you will 
punish yourselves’), 

3. The temptation to deny and to cling to denial (denial of 
meaning in life, etc., etc.), which is the form of assertion opposed to 
affirmation. 

530. The evidence that constitutes the proof is connected by a 
leap to the truth that it is believed to prove. (Dec. 59) 

531. Being/consciousness/action.—It is only in terms of action 
that being can be critically assessed and only in terms of being that 
action can be critically assessed. To act, like all verbs, has its 
substantative essence-action. Being, like most substantives in fact 
and like all in potentiality, has its verb-to be. Consciousness (as 
knowledge or ignorance, n.b.) is no standpoint but is what has—or 
gives—a standpoint. It cannot of itself provide terms for critical 
assessment of anything since it simply knows (or ignores)—is 
knowledge (or is ignorance). Since all phenomena are what 
consciousness is not, it is in terms of phenomena purely negative. 
But phenomena have two incompatible and coexistent dimensions, 
namely being can be critically assessed in terms of phenomena that 
act, and vice versa. (Dec. 59) 

532. Being as action is changed identity; action as being is, 
identification. To be is to identify. To act is to change identity. 
(Dec. 59) 

533. The greatest possible joke would be the fact that the 
greatest joke of all was not a joke at all. The sureness of the joke 
would lie in its being found to be no joke. (Dec. 59) 

534. The ultimate meaning of meaning, to repeat, must be 
meaninglessness, and the ultimate aim aimlessness, the ultimate end 
endlessness. For an aim that has an aim beyond it is, in regard to 
that ulterior aim, not an aim but either a means or an obstruction. 
Therefore to look to an ultimate aim, however conceived, is to 
look to a state of aimlessness and to live according to aimlessness as 
supreme value. Those, on the contrary, who do not admit this must 
live without supreme aim, and doing so either in absolute 

110 

The Second Note Book 

aimlessness without any aim at all or with only a succession of 
relative aims assumed and then attained and replaced by another: or 
found unattainable and forgotten and replaced by another: and so 
on without foreseeable end (aim or meaning) in the ultimate sense. 
In any case, however stated in terms of meaning or end or aim, any 
situation that implies meaning (or end or aim) must ultimately 
resolve into or point to absolute meaninglessness, endlessness or 
aimlessness, for which eternity is a name. (This is very satisfactory 
and restful.) (Dec. 59) 

535. A gate-crasher never really gets inside: he only brings his 
outsideness inside. An ivory-tower dweller never really gets 
outside: he only brings his insideness outside. (Dec. 59) 

536. One can count forwards forever because one knows where 
to begin with ome (oneself?), But one can never start counting 
backwards because one never knows (inherently) where to begin. 
Why does time go in only one way (time as repetition)? Is history 
anything more than mere arrangement by enumeration? (Dec. 59) 

537. Matter: what, it is assumed, cannot contradict itself. 

Mind: what, it is found by experience, can contradict itself. 
(ec. 59) 

538. Other people: the innumerable outward vanishing points 
in the perspective ‘I’: the inner or central vanishing-point in the 
perspective. (Jan. 60) 

539. When silent all are in agreement. (Jan. 60) 

540. Existence described as a system of null-functions activated 
into partial non-nullity by ignorance. (Jan. 60) 

541. Anything whatever that is expressible is expressible in more 
than one way. Any expression of it is one among a choice of ways of 
expressing it. An expression of something is a verbal movement from 
here to there. There is no one way from here to there. (Jan. 60) 

542. Dimensions of Ambiguity 

1. The point = line from the eye through the point to infinity. 

2. The line (straight or curved) = plane (straight or curved) 
from the eye to infinity (conics?) 

3. The plane = space from the eye to infinity. 

4. Consciousness = all my time. 

5. Nothing = 1 myself (all negative statements have open 

1h 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

ambiguity, all positive statements concealed ambiguity). 

543. Any act assumes the role of an actor. The act interrogates 
the world. The result is the being satisfied with the world’s assumed 
reply to the interrogation. (Feb. 60) 

544. Being applies to all qualities and substances, both to their 
affirmation, and to their negation. It is thus quite vain to attempt a 
definition of being. A definition must be made from outside what is 
defined: but outside being is ... nothing. To the question “What is 
is?” the only possible reply would be “is is is,” which does not 
define but merely states the ambiguity of identity. (Feb. 60) 

545. All the questions asked about death are wrongly put. 
(Feb. 60) 

546. People who generalize: those who generalize from a single 
instance, and those who generalize from a statistical collection of 
instances. (Feb. 60) 

547. People who regard truth as something to be created and 
people who regard it as something to be discovered. (Feb. 60) 

548. The world is a collection of part-truths which invite one’s 
putting them together to form a whole. That is not difficult; but 
when it is done, always there are either some parts left over or some 
missing. (Feb. 60) 

549. Suppose the following advertisement were published 
everywhere: “Science has now discovered how to avert death: by 
calling at the nearest hospital and receiving an injection you can be 
assured of living forever barring accidents. Nothing else, however, 
is assured. Though science has not yet discovered how to control 
ageing it hopes to do so, given time.” Would I call at the nearest 
hospital, I wonder? (Feb. 60) 

550. Iam myself—I am what I have. 

Tam what I did: I shall be what I do. 

Iam doing my work: I do exist my being. 
Ihave to do to be: I have to be to do. 

Iam not what I do: I undo what I am. (Feb. 60) 

The Second Note Book 

551. Ambiguous Key Words 

Reason { the breadth of reasonableness the 
narrowness of rationalism 

I ‘T the unique subjective the “Ego” 
T spoken by everyone else 

is existence 
: many 
entity 
essence ANE 
truth beauty—valuable 

evil that exists—to be destroyed 

Consciousness { observed subjectivity if one 

observing subjectivity many 
all all of these but not those 

all of all without exception 
To exist { to be = to be static = death 

to become = to be dynamic = life 

Positive positive good 
positive evil 

and negative statements as: 
I know nothing § I have no knowledge 

T know what nothing is 

552. Dialectics or Same Things as: 

“Good” “Bad” 

patience weak-mindedness 
tolerance connivance 
service servitude, servility 
independence instability 
freedom chaos, crime 
liberty license 
popularization vulgarization 

113 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

law and order 
conversion 
rectitude 
sincerity 
virtue 

justice 
universal 
grace 

to sacrifice 
the incomprehensible 
honour 

slavery, rigidity 

apostasy 

bigotry 

priggishness 

constraint 

revengelulness, punishment 
insipid, colourless 

caprice 

to squander, to destroy, to betray 
the absurd 

conceit, arrogance, want of humility 

equality monotony (undiversity) 
fraternity nepotism 
End of the Second Note Book 

114 

ADDENDA 

(FROM NOTEBOOKS AND LOOSE LEAVES) 

ADDENDA 

GENERAL 

553. I admit that a theist might well counter that “with God all 
things are possible,” which clothes the nakedness of the Absurd 
with a seemly veil; but I should like to watch him actually 
undertaking to accept, without reserve, whatever is absurd as a 
proper object of faith as soon as presented simply because it is 
absurd—a square triangle, perhaps, and lots and lots of centaurs. But 
a further question arises: How does he choose the object as one of 
faith, how is he aware that it is really absurd at all, except by the 
action of understanding (knowledge), which he pretends he has 
castrated his mind of? More “mauvais foi,” I fear. 

554. God, they say, made man in his own image: thus what a 
mine of information about the nature of god is the behaviour of 
man! 

555. Why should I worry if threatened with a mortal disease? 
Have I not already within me the germs of that hereditary disease 
which no one can avoid or cure, namely, old age and death? 
(undated) 

556. If I must live like an amateur, let me die like a 
professional. (1949) 

557. Flour forms the basis of an enormous number of dishes—it 
is nasty when raw, and it is sensitive to skill in cookery. “Progress” 
is a sort of mental flour out of which people cook up a vast variety 
of food for thought. But it is just as easy to make a filthy, dyspeptic 
pudding out of the one as the other—and one has to admit that 
some of the cooks are awful. (Apr. 52) 

558. One thing modern science has done for Cupid is to give 
him new rubber wings. (Apr. 52) 

559. “These acts are right and those are wrong no matter who 
does them,” and “whatever dear so and so does is right, whatever 

117 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

filthy so and so does is wrong” are two threads which we weave 
together into the ambivalent texture of our attitude towards, and 
judgement of, other people. (Apr. 52) 

560. If, in present conditions one man (and this is not 
inherently impossible) were to develop in himself the power to see 
what is going on on the surface of, say the planet Jupiter in the 
same scale of detail as normal men see what is going on on the earth 
round them, this would at present be unverifiable by all other men. 
This knowledge (experience) would only be accessible to the one 
man. In what would this differ from a hallucination for so long as it 
remained inaccessible to all other men? If he announced his 
knowledge would he not be called mad? And rightly so? (Jun. 52) 

561. The dynamic conception of beauty is in the 
transfiguration of the ordinary or the ugly. The static conception of 
beauty opposes beauty, per se and absolute, to the ordinary and the 
ugly. The first is unlasting, the second incomplete. (Aug. 57) 

562. A saint who has achieved liberation would seem to be less 
free than an ordinary man, since an ordinary man can be sometimes 
saintly and sometimes not, whereas a saint is never allowed to be 
not saintly. (Apr. 56) 

563. One advantage in having no friends is that one cannot let 
one’s friends down. And those who live on the hard ground cannot 
let themselves down. (Jan. 53) 

564. I have been unable to find any one rule with universal 
application, that is “absolute’—there is always more than one 
unique rule: anything that I can call a self (vide Hume); any two 
pairs of exact opposites (‘yes’ is not the exact opposite of ‘no’). 

565. There is always some point from which any passion seems 
comical and is ironical. —That is a hard saying. 

—Then why not put it the other way round? 

—Silence. (Sep. 57) 

566. There are certain controversies which involve one in 
untruth, whichever side one adopts, such as the existence or non- 
existence of god. (Sep. 57) 

567. An absolutely objective thought is as sterile as an 
absolutely hygienic copulation. (Sep. 57) 

568. Truth as the Good and the Beautiful overlaps, but is not 

118 

Addenda 

coextensive with and is incomplete in comparison with, truth as 
“acts and facts,” which again are incomplete without the 
constituent negative mediant of consciousness as manifested in the 
individual that makes lies true. (Aug. 57) 

569. The mistake (if that is a legitimate phrase) lies in 
attempting to remedy dialectical instability by logical rigidity. 
(Oct. 57) 

570. The argument that God cannot have created the world 
because of the suffering, misery and ugliness in it (or some similar 
form) has always seemed to me as inconclusive for proof that there 
is no god as the opposite argument that ‘God must have created the 
world because of the order, joy and beauty in it’ (or some similar 
form) seemed for proof that there is a god. In either case it is 
presumed that one knows, can distinguish, what god ought to be. 
Both alike imply that the holders of each view will only believe in 
what they approve of, i.e., in what pleases them. 

Now, surely, is it not that assumption, that growth or surcease 
in one’s subjective self, that ought to be understood and faith in its 
subsidence cultivated? (Dec. 57) 

571. If I did not ultimately disagree with everyone else, if I had 
absolutely 70 secret at all from anyone else, I should not be ‘T at all, 
not even someone or everyone else. (Dec. 57) 

572. Is any historical fact worth remembering in itself so long as 
one remembers how to act? Surely, a man who remembers a fact but 
cannot remember either how to repeat or avoid it, is an object of 
pity. (Dec. 57) (Addition:) If you can act, why remember the fact? 

573. Most (and all the principal elements) of what I ever learned 
of vice (and that is not claimed to be much) was learned from the 
inventive condemnations of the indignant pious; what I learned 
from the vice-addicts was much detail but little generality in 
comparison; but I learned much virtue from some of them. (Jan. 57) 

574. The Train of Thought can have both a restaurant car? and a 
sleeping car. 

One’s baggage is then one’s conceits. They can be stolen or lost. 

3. Vittandhara? (= nutriment of consciousness) 

119 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

575. [must and can’t 
(what happens if I ain’t?) 
T ought and won’t 
(what happens if I don’t?) 

576. Two demons: one who insists that what is to be inferred 
by verbal processes must correspond to experience; and one who 
insists that what cannot be arrived at by verbal processes cannot 
correspond to experience. (Jul. 53) 

577. When we are children we are not quite deceived by the 
fairies with which our minds people empty places, or by the “let’s 
pretend”; but when we are grown up we forget that we imagine 
many things and so we no longer know the truth about the things 
we imagine (Nov. 53) 

578. Odd how people interested in religion spend so much time 
trying to convert the obvious meaning of their texts that are their 
authority. (Nov. 53) 

579. Mutual admiration societies, it seems to me, are quite 
admirable—so long as they indulge in private (as secret societies). It 
is when they make public exhibition of themselves that they invite 
the throwing of mud and stones. (Dec. 53) 

580. The whore-shop of publicity. (Aug. 56) 

581. People who live only in and for towns and spend all their 
time in socialities and business with no knowledge of or feeling for 
wild animals and trees and rocks and oceans, are no longer more 
than half human. (Aug. 56) 

582. Transparency = sameness on different levels. (Aug 56) 

583. ‘A place for everything, and everything in its place,’ say 
the devotees of tidiness—but they have turned their backs to, and 
are haunted by, the counterpart ‘No place for confusion, and 
confusion out of its place.’ (Apr. 58) 

NOTES ON PHILOSOPHY 
584. One must start in analysis with any complex situation or 
datum that, if anything, is basic. To work away from this by 

analysis or simplification or abstraction is not to arrive at the more 
fundamental or true, but only, perhaps, to sort out the relatively 

120 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

being is universal and covers the positive and negative as well. If I 
ask: What is this? An answer would be: a sheet of paper. If I ask: 
what is a sheet of paper? One of many answers (giving some quality 
or other) might be: it is white (and so one might go on for ever). 

But here comes the important point: I can equally well say: the 
paper has whiteness. So I might say, too, it seems: The paper has 
being (making being a category). But common sense will not agree 
that anything is what it has. Consequently, if this paper has being, 
it is not. But that would be nonsense—at least to common sense. 

590. Practically all that has been said about being is worthless. 
Its structure is that of positive and negative and requires the 
presence of consciousness for its structure. 

Nirodha as vanishing of being/not-being (see atthita/natthita). 

The voluminousness of Sartre is needed to undo, the tangle of 
European ontology. (Jun. 58) 

591. The ‘is’ of logic is perfectly valid where being (and non- 
being) prevails. But the question raises itself: does being (whether 
considered as a category and in both its positive and negative forms) 
exhaust every possibility without remainder? In other words, does 
cessation necessarily fall always under one or the other 
subordinately? This can only be established verbally by logic but it 
can be established in both ways—yes and no; and the dialectic 
cannot be solved. Consequently we can never say for certain that 
cessation is subordinate to being. 

592. In contrast with the extreme subtlety and fluidity of 
consciousness and being, language is angular and bitty. To try to 
represent this with word patterns is like trying to draw the 
structure of an atom on the back of a postage stamp with a 
carpenter's pencil, or like trying to construct a circle with a dozen 
dominoes. 

593. If you believe, you act in confidence and faith believing 
that what you believe is true. But if you know that you believe, you 
know ipso facto that you do not know. What happens then if you 
have no belief? The question has no meaning for to be conscious is 
to believe. Technically it is a “visualized” expectation of the 
direction of the actual “motion” which “is” consciousness. The 
belief expects the direction will be such: knowledge records it as 

Addenda 

memory that it was such: in between is the denial, the motion of 
view point that is called consciousness. 

594. Starting from Consciousness (being without nouns of doing). 

Without consciousness it is impossible to conceive at all: to 
conceive anything or nothing. Inevitably with the appearance of 
consciousness (in its widest sense) being/ existence is, and is 
simultaneously (because of consciousness’ presence), e. g. as 
existence/non-existence and as existence/essence. This doubt can be 
taken as (in Freudian terms) the “conscious manifestation” of the 
“unconscious” conception of a thing’s existence/being, which is 
then “consciously” either denied or asserted. Denied or asserted 
dialectically, the denial or assertion is then supported logically. The 
logical structure, if completed, leaves no room for consciousness 
whose dialectical decision supports it. 

Starting from being/existence (doing without verb ‘to be’) 

Without being/existence consciousness cannot be, or not be, or 
both be and not be, or neither be nor not be. (“Being” essentially 
belongs to the (Freudian) unconscious where what is, is so without 
denial or assertion, without distinction of positive/negative. This 
must never be lost sight of though the Freudian hypothesis remains 
only a hypothesis). Consciousness therefore does/does not. The 
propositions “consciousness exists (is)” or the converse, have no 
meaning, and are each as self-contradictory as the propositions 
“being cognizes/does not cognize.” 

595. What I am (what I identify my self-myself with) that | am 
for ever. But at another time I am similarly something else. There is 
no conscious transition. Moments of reflexion discover this 
contradiction, which is disconcerting and so covered up by 
forgetting it. I am this body when I leap back to avoid treading on a 
deadly venomous snake or when I am (or have the sensation of 
being) discovered by another in some discreditable act. I own this 
body of mine when I examine a pimple on it or take it to a dentist 
or a doctor for treatment. I disown it (i.e., its acts) when I am 
accused of some crime and decide to lie it out. / am not it when 
sitting quiet face to face with what seems certain death. (Aug. 57) 

596. As far as descriptions (and so philosophies) are concerned, 
it seems as if a System is ipso facto false, and that some sort of 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

“complimentarity” (in the atom-physicist’s sense) is nearer truth as 
fact. (Aug. 57) 

597. Above the plane of facts all that Science has done, is to 
screen phenomenological certainty by a cloud of statistical and 
historical probability. (Aug. 57) 

598. Taking, in the phenomenological sense, probability as the 
characteristic of the purely objective constituent of the world (the 
world of science) and certainty as that of subjectivity (the Cogito, 
etc.), then outward change will be change in my probabilities 
(alteration) and inward change will be change in my certainties 
(forgetting, which is, in its extreme sense, death, a change in my 
being). (Sep. 57) 

599. Motion 

I cannot discover any simple fact that corresponds to the word 
“motion.” First to take the facts objectively. 

Suppose (on paper) that A and B are approaching each other in 
a straight line with a constant speed. Then there is relative 
approach speed without angular velocity as the AB relation. The 
situation is inherently unstable because, assuming that the distance 
between them is finite, A and B must meet and the instant after 
their meeting (there is something contradictory about two points 
“meeting”) their approach speed must be transformed into 
recession speed. Suppose again that C is on a line at right angles to 
AB and not too far from B. Then A and C are approaching each 
other with a speed that is gradually reducing with increasing 
deceleration. The speed is combined with angular velocity which is 
gradually increasing in the ratio of a variable function 
proportionate to the decrease of the speed of approach. When A 
reaches B, then A and G have no relative speed and maximum 
angular velocity, after which the speed increases and the angular 
velocity decreases. This is the description in objective terms. Such a 
description conceals the assumption of a describer (I) who is 
observing these happenings on (let us say) the inner surface of a 
large sphere at whose centre he stands. For him the happenings are 
all experienced in terms of angular velocity only. He can “identify 
himself” with any of the three, A, B, or C. 

Still at this point we can say that the word “motion” has no 
simple referent but is referred to (a) speed of approach or recession 

124 

Addenda 

without angular velocity, (b) angular velocity without speed of 
approach or recession, and (c) a proportionate mixture of the two. 

It is only the description in terms of subjective experience that 
makes this difference quite clear. My experience of the direct 
approach of a body and me is absence of angular velocity at some 
point of the visual object body that otherwise “grows” (? Ed.) in a 
specifically proportionate manner. Such an experience is inherently 
unstable. Either angular velocity must be introduced into all parts 
of the object, or a “collision” will take place, which will either 
break up the flow of experience or transform the approach speed 
into recession speed. The last is also inherently unstable because it 
must end in “vanishing.” This corresponds to the AB relation above 
where “I” = B. 

1. I experience a visual pattern, which grows in a certain 
constant proportion (expands), and some point in that expanding 
pattern has no angular velocity, then this “I” call “approach.” If that 
continues unchanged there must be a “collision” followed by a 
break-up of that train of experience, or a reversal of it ending in 
“vanishing.” 

In the “objective” description we spoke of the decreasing 
approach speed mixed with angular velocity as the AC relation. But 
in the “subjective” description, if “I” am identified with C then my 
experience of A will be that of an expanding pattern no part of 
which is without angular velocity. There will be no “collision.” A 
moment of maximum angular velocity will coincide with a 
moment of no-expansion-no-contraction, followed by a train of 
diminishing traction and diminishing angular velocity, ending also 
in “vanishing.” 

2. [ experience a visual pattern, which expands in a constant 
proportion, and all points in that expanding pattern have angular 
velocity relative to me. This “I” call “motion.” Or I experience a 
visual pattern which remains constant in size, and all points in 
which have angular velocity. This too “I” call “motion.” 

But here something curious has happened. The objective 
“speed of approach” AB has been replaced by the subjective 
experienced proportional expansion of a pattern that contains a 
point without angular velocity. (To take it one step further, the 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

objective angular velocity as replaced by what I shall call angular 
kinaesthesis, to distinguish it from accelerant kinaesthesis =“I am 
moving”—but this may be left for the moment). While the 
objective speed of approach AC has been replaced by a subjectively 
experienced expansion of a pattern containing no paint without 

angular velocity. Instead of the 
“motion,” approach-speed and o} 
only (a) partial ordered angular 

two components of objectivized 
bjective angular velocity, we have 
velocity (expansion excluding one 

point) and (b) total ordered angular velocity, of a given pattern. 
There are in fact here not two different components but only one 
(expansion =ordered angular velocity differently organized). Now 
we said that the “objective” description concealed an assumed 
observer not in the special plane ABC of the happenings described. 
Similarly the “subjective” description conceals an assumed observer 
later in time than the “I” of the “experience” described. The second 
is therefore correctly, an objectivized subjective description. It is 
perhaps nearer to completeness but it is not complete because the 
“later I” has escaped through a hole in it and continues to do so. 
(From the Second Note Book, July 54) 

600. The Function of 

Psychology is to produce and collate data on behaviour of 
mind. 

Biology is to produce and collate data on behaviour of animate 
‘matter.’ 

Psychology is to produce and collate data on behaviour of 
mind. 

Logic is to produce and collate data on rules for coherent 
speech. 

Philosophy is to produce and collate data on values to guide 
choice: (includes or should include ethics and training directed 
towards the good of this world, by considering birth and death). 

Religion is to produce and collate data values to guide choice: 
(includes or should include ethics and training directed towards the 
good of ‘not-this-world’ by considering the ‘before-birth-and-alter- 
death’). 

126 

Addenda 

The following two items are from a sheaf of loose leaves 
labelled ONTOLOGY, containing chiefly definitions and analysis 
of words and terms, extracts from books, etc. They were probably 
meant as material for essays planned by the author under the title 
BUDDHISM AND ONTOLOGY, on which see the end of the 
next section “Notes on Dhamma.” 

601. Ontology cannot be discussed without the use of words. 
So something will have to be said with words about words. But so 
much has already been done in this way that there seems to be no 
end to it all. The whole subject seems to have long since got quite 
out of hand. 

Nevertheless something can still be done by confining oneself 
to certain aspects of the use of words, say to their inherent 
ambiguity, and to their field of reference, in general. 

A word refers both to the speaker and the hearer, to something 
other than it. 

What they refer to may be either other words or what is not 
words. In the first case, words can refer to words which refer to 
words and so on indefinitely. Some have claimed this and no more 
is what words do and that even the logical proper name (‘this’) 
simply refers to some word or proposition. Words are then a closed 
world, which there is no getting into and no getting out of. 

602. Difficulties on ontology 

The difficulties arising from a badly chosen notation are well 
known in Mathematics (i.e., Newton’s and Leibnitz’s notations for 
the calculus). Language is notoriously ambiguous (vide Freud), 
metaphorical, utraquistic, punning and vague. 

2. Any definition is always ad hoc, never of universal validity 
(see Wunter) 

3. It is in the nature of description that the terms of the 
description are parallel to what is described (the illumination of the 
unknown by the known), and that nothing can be described 
successfully in terms of itself, not even in terms that include itself 
(this touches on the Theory of Types). But Being is posited as 
universal. Consequently it is indescribable and can only be pointed 
to in one of its instances by a demonstrative: a logical proper name 
= “that.” Being therefore is indicatable, but not describable as 

127 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

“whatever is common to a ‘that’ or ‘this.” It is then being opposed 
to the being of non-being. In its general aspect, it is being, but in 
particular aspect it is the existence (of a being). 

Notes ON DHAMMA 

603. Dhamma has no conflict with Science proper. Its methods are 
much the same (i.e., investigation of experience, remembering what 
has been investigated and forming a true view to accord with the 
factuality of experience investigated); but the material is different. 
Reputable science (Physics) confines itself to the outside world and 
all science restricts itself (or should do) to publicly observable 
behaviour. Dhamma is concerned with investigating subjective 
mind, recognizing the outside material sphere, but leaving it to 
those who are interested in it. The purposes are different. Science is 
or should be guided by curiosity only and has no ethics; any ethics 
it employs are unfounded in it or borrowed from religions or 
philosophies which it rejects. It has no techniques for handling the 
subjective (pain, etc.) and can only handle behaviour illegitimately 
equated with pain (illegitimately because a scientist only knows of 
the existence of pain (in himself) by taking an unauthorized look 
into his own subjective unscientific experience). Dhamma is 
concerned solely with the elimination of pain, to which all else is 
subordinated. (Sep. 56) 

604. Amata in the Dhamma is ‘absence of death because of 
non-arising’ (all that arises is subject to decay and death). It is not 
the non-dying, i.e., eternal duration of what has arisen (= western, 
idea of immortality). 

605. Sarkharas have the characteristic as action of putting 
(states) together (into an order) or as state of, a collection of states 
put together in an order. 

The first listed of the savkharas is touching, which implies that 
the order, whether (1) in succession of time (action) or (2) 
simultaneous arrangement (state) is that the states must touch (1) 
either by temporal succession or (2) simultaneous co-presence. 

Touching is an aspect of every consciousness (tinnam satigati 

phasso). 

128 

Addenda 

606. Group kamma 

What is a group? Racial, regional, linguistic, geographical, 
political, occupational, etc., etc.? These cut across each other and to 
say that each has its own kamma is like saying that the torso, the 
arms, the lungs, the guts, the head, the nose etc., each has its own 
kamma which is nonsense. 

Also kamma implies (a) “continuity” in one life and 
(b)“continuous continuity,” i.e., succession of lives—not the 
inheritance by one continuity of the result of kamma performed by 
another continuity (j.e., Jataka) etc. This view is hammered at by 
the commentaries but is merely implied by the suttas—should it be 
taken as an exclusive generalization or as “the normal thing” only? 

No “kamma” as such in the Abhidhamma bar “kamma- 
paccaya.” 

607. Nutriment is nothing more than a term for material used in 
creating. Also it is the process of impermanence regarded 
teleologically. The process not so regarded is either entropy or bare 
change. It is axiomatic that where there is consciousness there must 
be change ordered teleologically, which is the parent of nutrition. 
Nutrition therefore is primarily an essential to life and living 
bodies, secondarily to creation of works of art or to utensils, and 
tertiarily to thought processes (?). It is conversion, in the sense of 
conversion to a use. 

608. The concept of nutriment depends (a) upon association and 
(b) upon impermanence and (c) upon hunger. Hunger, seeking for 
satisfaction, devours x, which is associated with y that gives it 
satisfaction; but the satisfaction given is impermanent and thereby 
renews the hunger. “I” hungering for satisfaction, devour (x) food 
(eye object, taste, smell, touch object), the contact of which is 
associated with (y) pleasant feeling that gives satisfaction; but the 
satisfaction given by pleasant feeling is impermanent and by 
changing renews the pain of hunger. 

609. For nama-rupa, mentality-materiality, too, is a makeshift 
and ‘name-and-form’ in some ways preferable. ‘Name’ (see Path of 
Purification; ch. XVII, n. 4) still suggests the function of nama as 
‘naming’; and ‘form’ for the rapa of the ripakkhandha (materiality- 
aggregate’) can preserve the link with that of the r#payatana (there 

129 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

‘visible form base’ instead of ‘visible-object base’). Especially 
‘materiality’ (or ‘matter’), too, as used in this translation needs to 
be treated to start with rather as an algebraical sign till contexts and 
definitions make it evident that any metaphysical Matter as a 
‘substance behind apparent forms’ is quite excluded. For instance, 
Matter is taken to be an inherently unknowable substance only 
inferable by modern science from the appearance of its qualities. 
But an inherently unknowable and unverifiable objective substance 
has no more place in Buddhism than its subjective counterpart ... 

610. The concept materiality is based on three elements 
(mahabhiita; no-upada, Dhs 647) comprising the object touchable 
by the bodily sensitivity (photthabba),’ which elements are the three 
primary data categorical of hardness, temperature and distention- 
cum-movement (see Dhs 663). That primitive matter is reinforced 
(upada) by all the subordinate data-categories furnished by the 
primitive objects of the other four sensitivities (visible form, sound, 
smell, taste) and the five internal ‘material’ sense bases. These make 
up the crude five sense objects. This is again reinforced (upada) by the 
secondary data supplied only by the mind’s object (the five internal 
and the four external bases), (?) sex, life, intimation, space, (water— 
cohesion), material lightness, wieldiness, malleability, material 
setting up, continuity, ageing, impermanence, and physical 
nutriment. 

611. Sati-sampajanina (“Mindfulness and clear comprehension”) 
should be examined carefully from the point of view of the 
centipede who could not walk when she thought about how she 
moved her limbs. And also from the point of view of absorption in, 
say artistic creation and detached observation of it. Absorption in 
piano playing or painting seems to be “successful” but detached 
observation or enjoyment of “my playing” or “my painting” seems 
to have the centipede effect. What are the facts here and what is the 
lesson to be drawn? 

612. Sketch for a system of the salayatana (the six bases). 

My eye (1) ajjhattam a) subjective (negative): the organization of 
visibility, b) objective (positive); (2) by hearing: nil @G-4) by 
smelling and tasting: nil (5) by body: the ‘eye ball’ as touch, say by 
a finger; (6) by mind: various concepts. 

130 

Addenda 

613. Salayatana 

(1) Ajhattikayatana = the organization of experience. (the 
internal sense-bases, i.e., sense organs) 

(2) Bahiddhayatana = the experience as organized. (the external 
sense-bases, i.e., the sense objects) 

Experience as a cleavage between organization and the 
organized (which are inseparable but distinguishable). 

(1) is distinct from (2) in that (with ignorance) the organization 
appears “pointing” to a “centre” which is the “I,” while (2) has the 
character of the inert, the resistant, what hides or screens (and so 
suggests “substance” behind it). 

The cleavage is the necessary basis for phassa (the “contact 
between” the two sides of the cleavage and between them and the 
“negation” constituted by consciousness (vifiviana). 

614. Presumably the Unconscious (or Subconscious), if 
assimilated to the Dhamma, should be assimilated under nama and 
not under vififiana. Unless the Unconscious is defined as 
materiality (which is, I think, not usual) it must be regarded as 
mental: a mental fiction needed to explain certain behaviour 
patterns. As described it consists of memories repressed beyond the 
horizon of consciousness but still active. Therefore it is ipso facto 
not consciousness. The behaviour explained by it is nama-ripa. As 
memory (ati), it is a sankhara. As repressed it is a fiction (even if 
useful and productive of practical results) it still remains under 
santkhara as a complex associated with ignorance. 

Identification of the Unconscious with bhavanga citta is, on 
this assumption, if not wrong, at least in need of elucidation, on the 
lines that in the Abhidhamma citta, strictly, is not on all fours with 
vinnana, the latter being bare awareness (with a minimum of 
memory) but the former being viviviana regarded in the affective 
light of its concomitant cetasikas. 

Citta affected by the unconscious (memories) can be regarded 
as (a) a cittuppada with the repressed object as its object and with a 
minimum of memory, followed by (b) another cittwppada with a 
black-out of that memory; (a) is then regardable perhaps as a 
bhavanga citta and (b) as some other appropriate kind of 
manoviniitanadhatu. 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

615. The following verbal pattern will reflect something of this 
sort: 

If we take individualization (wppdda)* as the characteristics of 
being (bhava) displayed in the formula of Dependent Origination 
(paticca-samuppada), then in the counter formula (paticca-nirodha) 
we have absence of structure (nirodha), such structure (rodha) 
appearing in the form of construction (anurodha), obstruction 
(pativirodha), and destruction (virodha). 

616. In the Round (i.e., Paticca-samuppada) as arising, 
ignorance must function, on the pre-logical level as forgetting and 
as infinite transcendence, and on the logical level as forgetting and 
the presence of the Assumption (i.e., the impersonal God/ 
Godlessness or the personal Absolutism/Relativism). 

In the pre-logical, ignorance is omnipresent, ie., as 
transcendence and as change (—forgetting); but in the logical, it can 
be pushed aside partly, because the possibility of right view 
appearing partially and intellectually and patchily, though what the 
realization of cessation of craving is, is a cataclysm. 

617. Suffering is made to cease by the cessation of its paccaya 
(tanha);> but that is not said of the paccaya (tanha), or else the 
regression would be infinite. Consequently this particular paccaya 
is controllable. In other words, dukkha is a structure or a function 
(dependent variable) of tanha. 

618. Feeling as the ruins of past actions, and Craving as the 
jungle that overgrows them—clear the jungle and the three feelings 
will become clearer. 

619. Feeling (vedana) 

(1) Bodily and mental feeling do not by any means always 
coincide. Painful bodily feeling may be accompanied by pleasant 
mental feeling (as in masochism). And each has a number of levels. 

(2) One’s fundamental choice (investigate this further) is that of 
least affliction. This is the overall choice. This overall choice 
comprises many different levels of pleasure and pain and neutrality 
both bodily and mental. 

4 
5. 

Literally, “arising”. 
—condition (craving) 

Addenda 

620. Idappacayata® is represented by ‘imasmim sati” etc. The 
principle involved is contingent association in two forms: (1) that no 
‘this’ can arise alone without conditions, (II) this contingency is both 
temporal and special. By the latter is meant that any ‘this’ to appear 
at all (whether as a principle dhatu), idea dhamma), thing (sarkhara) 
or act (kamma) must do so in association with conditions different 
from itself spatially, and different from itself in time (the preceding 
moment and subsequent moment.) (A) The ‘spatial’ contingency is a 
contingency upon other things and ideas at one moment. (B) The 
temporal contingency is a contingency of the ‘present’ moment upon 
(an immediate) past and (an immediate) future. 

(A) (With consciousness) mamaripa, saldyatana, phassa 
constitute the spatial contingency (vedand the affective aspect). 

(B) Ignorance and craving/clinging constitute (with 
consciousness) the purely temporal contingency. They are 
influenceable by will. Consciousness is the absolute negation in 
virtue of which ignorance and craving can pose the positive 
‘world.’ 

Bhava which is positive, describes the constitution of the 
moving spatio-temporal contingency which is (a) possible in virtue 
of the negation consisting in consciousness, and is (b) factual in 
virtue of the limitations of viewing things imposed by ignorance, 
and limitations of time/action imposed by craving/clinging. 

(Pencilled note at the end of page:) 

621. Craving (tamha): Subjective aspect (second Truth); my 
craving as felt Fuel (upadana): Objective aspect (first Truth); (a mode 
of craving’s behaviour) my or others as seen objectively in the form 
of a mode (i.e., the four kinds). 

622. I find I am now inclined to use, for myself only, the 
following equivalents for Paticcasamuppada terms (in addition to 
those mentioned earlier): 

5. Salayatana = the sixfold facticity (of self in the world). 

6. Phassa = presence 

7. Tanha = need 

8. Upadana = consumption (on physical level) and assumption 

6& — —conditionality 
7 “if this is....” 

133 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

(mental and other levels). To assume (adsumere) is “to take upon 
oneself .” 

Also 

Uppada =arising (appearance, phenomenality) 

Anurodha=construction (favouring modes in uppada). 

Pativirodha = obstruction (opposing) nirodha=destruct(-ura-) tion 

Further, the following vague notion about the P/S crossed my 
mind: the full formula of uppada, starting with avijja and ending 
with jara-marana, describes the state of the puthwjana (and nirodha 
that of the Arahant); but in the form used by the Buddha in the 
Samyutta to describe his discovery, as the Bodhisatta, of the 
“ancient way,” on the point of his attaining full enlightenment, he 
proceeds backwards from jara-marana as far as vifitana, and then 
turns back to mama-ripa. The point of interest here might be (in 
the formula as used in this special context, i.e., to describe the 
attaining of enlightenment and abandonment of avijja) the 
replacement of avijja and of saikhara by an infinite reflexive 
regression of vififtana-namaripa, vikiana-namaripa ... Avija has 
no place in enlightenment, and sankhara as kammapatha, are only 
performable in the world of things, actions and persons which is 
held together by avija and tanha. Arahants do not “act” in that 
way, by kammapatha. 

One other point in this connection. I have been seeking three 
convenient compendious terms for the three sections of the Paticca- 
samuppada formula, and I toy with the following words, 
unsatisfactory though they are: the blocks are (a) = 1-2, (b) = 3-9, 
or 10, (c) = 11-12. So, (c) I call the Historical-Temporal (past and 
future simultaneously mutually incompatible), (b) I call the 
Personal-individual (simultaneously mutually indispensible), and 
(a) [ call the Impersonal General (simultaneously compatible). 

(a) is the least satisfactory. (From a letter to Ven. Nanavira, 3/ 
7/59) 

623. Ideas: put very crudely the situation is this: in so far as 
anything is an object of five-sense consciousness only, it is not an 
idea, but a visible form, sound, odour, flavour, or tangible. But “of 
these five sense faculties mind is their ‘home’ (MN 43) and the 
mind’s object is an idea. Experience is always a fusion of mind and 
five-sense-faculty. That is, in terms of the Sixfold Base. Otherwise it 

134 

Addenda 

can be expressed in the form of the twofold description of sankhara 
(determinations) and dhamma (ideas) when the opposition is 
between ideas and action-cum-action-results. An idea (dhamma) is 
in itself neutral (as an essence, sabhavato dhamma), but if 
‘cathetectic’ by choice (cetana), moved by lust, hate or delusion and 
given effect to samadinna, then it becomes an action (by body, 
speech or mind) according to the way of organizing association of 
the indriyas. Action is not in itself a Dhamma except in so far as it is 
object of mind-consciousness. 

624. Explanation and Rebirth 

What is one trying to do in explaining rebirth? This 
consciously organized life is like a home garden in an endless jungle 
the edge of which is like death. To explain death and rebirth is like 
trying to explain the jungle in terms of the house and garden. Or 
again, the house is built of bricks and tiles made of clay, and beams 
made of jungle trees. Explaining rebirth is like trying to explain 
clay and trees in terms of the familiar made-up bricks and fashioned 
beams. . (Jul. 56) 

625. It is important to remember that if the notion of motion is 
described as desantaruppatti then also stationariness should be 
samanadesuppatti. Nothing continues. Consequently the argument 
based on tadagamma for the existence of Nibbana is false. 

626. Metta 

In English one is used to the one word love (= amour, amore, 
amor), which has to serve for all. Greek discriminates eros & agape, 
which duality is very hard to render in Latin or English. English 
inherits much of its crude matter-of-factness and empiricism from 
the vulgar Latins who had only the one word, amor, (and Latins of 
today make do with only /(amour) and I(amore). 

In Pali one finds there are three: kamacchanda, sineha and 
metta: (physical lust or desire for sensuality; sentimental affection 
or attachment to individual persons; and loving-kindness or 
benevolence extendable as a universal attitude to all beings). 

Lust is selfish desire seeking satisfaction mainly through the 
sense of touch and is not interested in the well-being of its object at 
all. Selfish in the first degree. 

Affection can be accompanied by physical lust or not and seeks 

135 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

satisfaction in association with the object (physical nearness, 
though not necessarily contact). It is interested in the welfare of the 
object, though unconcerned about anyone else, and does not 
exclude the harming of others for the benefit of its object. Thus it is 
selfish in the second degree. 

Metta starts from sineha, but by generalizing becomes unselfish 
and chooses welfare of all. 

627. The P/S (paticca-samuppada) is not so much a description 
as a group or sets of descriptive terms. The sets have certain 
features: (1) each member is recogizable in ourselves by 
introspection, (2) each pair of the sets of terms is so connected that 
(for reasons which vary in each case) one of the pair is evidently 
necessary for the others, much in the way that the cogito is linked 
(to the s#m). (3) It has several forms. In its long form we find that 
this linkage takes us through three principal levels of generality. 
Ignorance and determinations are both general and always present. 
With Consciousness and the rest down to Clinging we have in each 
a particular (non-general) aspect always present. Being (bhava) is 
again general and always present. Birth, Ageing and Death are 
general necessarily, but not always present since they are mutually 
exclusive in temporal succession. This is the reason why in some 
Discourses the formula at Consciousness “turns round on itself” to 
Name-and-Form again, at one end (SN 12; Digha 15), while at the 
other it sometimes begins with Craving or Clinging, working 
backwards to Ignorance by the question, at each instance, ‘What 
gives this its being?’ (MN 11; MN 38). The long form may perhaps 
be taken as emphasizing the aspect of action, that turning back with 
Consciousness as emphasizing consciousness, and that applying 
being in each from Clinging backwards, as emphasizing being 
(bhava). The ‘vulnerable point’ is always where the process is 
attackable: where Craving meets Feeling since Craving is an 
element that can be brought under control. Descriptions that end 
here emphasize how the process can be broken. 

One only of the middle members (salayatana) can be omitted, 
or rather not omitted but absorbed into Name-and-Form. 

It (the P/S) is not a temporal cause/effect chain: It is not 
symbolic since, if we look, we can find each member in ourselves 

136 

Addenda 

by introspection. Its various presentations have no historical 
significance. It is not handable by Aristotelian logic any more than 
the Cogito. 

To the question: “What are these sets of terms intended to 
describe?” we may answer tentatively that they are intended to 
describe experience of any possible kind where ignorance (that is 
lack of personal realization of the Truths) is present. It is in the 
nature of both such experience, and of descriptions that no simple 
description can be complete. Experience itself contains paradoxes 
which no philosophical system has succeeded in solving, and it is in 
the nature of any description that what it describes does not include 
its own terms: if we then want to describe those terms we must 
leave them and take up a position in what has just been described, 
in order to do so. 

Disregarding the numerous and strange European 
interpretations, logical, symbolic, historical, etc., of the P/S the 
best approach to it from the European position is probably from 
Descartes’ Cogito ergo sum. That famous formula, which still guides 
European Ontology, is not a logical (syllogistic) proposition; nor is 
the P/S. But there is more than that. Ignoring ‘Descartes’ synthetic 
reasoning an the matter of substance imposed on the cogito, one can 
hardly fail to notice the parallel between cogito and vifiana on the 
one hand and sum and bhava on the other. What is common to 
both is the interdependence of the terms. In stead of falling back 
upon unverifiable hypostasis to support the formula, the P/S 
pursues the element of interdependence by successive links between 
the two, each pair being open to introspection. At each end, too, 
we pass by a link from the particular to the general. 

628. ‘All creatures subsist by nutriment’ (sabe 
sattaharatthitika). Extraordinary as it may seem the philosophical 
implications of the necessity for nutriment as a condition for 
conscious existence have never been faced by European 
philosophers. 

629. Religion is derived by the Concise Oxford Dictionary from 
religo, to bind (esp. to God). Consequently, Religion (which under 
the question “Is the Dhamma a Religion or a Philosophy”)* I had 
equated provisionally with silabbatapararamasa, ‘adherence to rites 

137 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

and rituals’) should rightly be translated by yoga (=bondage), but 
the Dhamma is the way to the anuttarayoga-kkhema, ‘the 
incomparable safety from bondage.” 

630. Phassa’ 

The in-oneself and external are a duality expressed: as “that in 
the world by which one observes the world.” In their simplest 
elementary form they constitute a spatial duality expressed as “a 
line of two points” (adjacent). 

For this duality to appear as a phenomenon at all it must be 
observed from some position in a line at right-angles to the line of 
the two points (adjacent too). 

This being-at-right-angles on the part of the (self-unobserved) 
observer to his observed duality can be called perpendicularity. 

This perpendicularity of the (self-unobserved) observer to the 
fundamental duality of his observed (field) is, in fact, the triple 
relation of phassa. (It is not representable as a triangle, since that is 
an “objectivised” observer observed by a second (self-unobserved) 
observer himself perpendicular to the lines in the (perpendicularity 
contained as objectivised) in the triangle.) 

Phassa is thus the fundamental perpendicularity of 
consciousness to the duality (the in-oneself and the external) of the 
observed field. 

External (bahiddha) = + I; in-oneself (@jhatta) = observer =0.!° 

631. The Four Mahabhitas!! and Five Khandhas!* 

The simplest solid is disregarding the sphere) a tetrahedron: 

Let us provisionally equate as follows: 

(a) Rapa (form) = space enclosed and occupied 
by the tetragon. 

(b) Vedana (feeling) = affective appropriation 
inseparable from any perceiving. 

(c) Satha (perception) = the outline (and 
contained divisions if any) appearing at any moment as a 

% See p. 000 

‘Contact’, five-sense contact and mental contact. 

See “The Essential Relation in Observing”, p.214. 

‘The Four Great Primaries, or basic constituents (elements) of matter. 
‘The five Categories or Aggregates, of personalized existence. 

Addenda 

phenomenon (transcendence accompanies perception). 

(d) Sankhara (formations) = changes in a, b, or c. 

(ce) Vittiana (consciousness) = primarily that which is not the 
observed tetrahedron phenomenon and not the observed not- 
tetrahedron-phenomenon, not a, b, c or d, and “time now” (This is 
unreflexive; vifitana might reflexively, be objectified as an 
“observed observer observing the tetrad,” but it would then be 
perpendicular to the primary “observer-now.”) 

1. Rapa is describable on the basis of the four mahabhitas; 

2. Vedand safitta sankhara are describable on the basis of phassa; 

3. Vinridna is describable in terms of ndma-ripa, or on the 
bases of in-onesel{/external. (MN 109, MN 38) 

The four Mahabhiitas can probably best be equated with (a) the 
spatial rigidity (tangible or mental), (b) cohesion, (c) componibility, 
and (d) dislodgeability (or as rigidity, cohesion, temperature and 
movement). 

In the tetrahedron they are present respectively in: 

(a) its resistence to deformation (rigidity), 

(b) its endurance and susceptibility to “phases” (cohesion) when 
moved, 

(c) its creatibility, i.e., that it can be brought into being and 
made-up (componibility), 

(d) its mobility, he fact that it is always in a state of motion 
either as “uniform in a straight line” or as “accelerated” (dis- 
lodgeability). 

ONTOLOGY AND BUDDHISM 

Editor’s Note: All the following Notes have been taken from a sheaf 
of loose leaves topped by our first item (No. 632) which gives the 
table of contents of the planned book of essays on Ontology and 
Buddhism. What follows are the only pieces of connected writing 
in that fascicule; the other leaves contain chiefly a large number of 
quotations from the Pali texts, lists of Pali words, terms and 
phrases, with source references, which the author intended to 
utilize for the planned book of essays. 

139 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

632. Ontology and Buddhism 

It has been said by someone that the weakness of Buddhism is 
that it has no Ontology. But it can be asked, “Is it a weakness or a 
strength?” The object of these essays is to inquire into that. 

I. Sketch of classical Ontology @ la Lavelle 

IL Sketch of Existential Ontology a la Sartre 

III. The syllogism and its constants ALL and IS (sabbam and 
bhavo).—Dialectic. 

IV. IS and ALL in the Suttas. 

V. Ontology, its origin, cessation, and the Path to its cessation. 

VI. Dependent Arising. 

VII. Cessation—is, is not, both-is-and-is-not, neither-is-nor-is- 
not: all ave and are not nibbana. 

633. My point simply hinges on the question of translating 
bhava by ‘becoming’ as is usually done. It is generally argued 
against translating bhava by ‘being’ that ‘being is static’; but while 
admitting that, ‘becoming’ (1) offers no solution since in the 
Concise Oxford Dictionary, ‘to become’ means ‘to begin to be’, (2) it 
completely severs the hoti of the (incipient) syllogisms, e.g., hoti 
Tathagato parammarana ...’ and other vaguer uses of hoti (bhavati) 
and, indirectly, atthi from connexion with the Paticca-samuppada, 
tending to make the P/S subordinate to syllogistic logic rather than 
the other way about; (3) it is incompatible with $ .... and It (and 
also with MN 131-4). ‘Becoming’ (and still more ‘werden’ suggests 
a flux where the future ‘becomes’ by ‘flowing’ through the present 
into the past, or ‘future things’ ‘become’ present and then past, 
while what is meant or implied by the constant and unavoidable 
use of the verb ‘to be’ is left unaccounted for. Hence, I argue, to 
translate (even to interpret to oneself) bhava by ‘becoming’ is an 
opiate that leaves the illusion of ‘being’ untreated. I doubt if that is 
what the Buddha intended. 

As [see it, the Buddha’s treatment of Ontology is most clearly 
set out, according to right view, in MN 38, which, yathabhitam, 
sets out how the illusion of ‘being’ (both in positive and negative 
forms—with the bhavatanhd and vibhavatanha of DN 9, 22, and the 
anurodha and pativirodha of MN 1), can and should be treated and 
eliminated. MN 1 and MN 49 are complementary: MN 1 describes 

Addenda 

the modes of asmi-mana (which is pre-logical) and MN 49 presents 
the same situation in ‘ontological’ terms, i.e., in the functioning of 
a logically formulated wrong view (while MN describes the 
prelogical and prereflexive asmimdna—the mandnusaya, the 
fundamental wrong attitude), MN 44 & MN 109 describe the 
logically formulated views which arise out of and are built upon the 
prelogical tendency—the connexion between these is shown briefly 
in MN 1 and forms the subject matter of MN 49. 

634. As I see it at present, the importance of the paticca- 
samuppada lies not so much in the twelve (or Jess or more) members 
as in the relationship imasmim sati ... (and its undoing imasmim 
asati) which is underlined in DN 15. This firstly implies complexity 
in experience (no complexity: no experience). The choice of the “12 
members” is less philosophical than psychological, which is why it 
is variable. The undoing, as I see it, is the “detail of voidness,” 
which is the ethical key to the, Dhamma, since it is the 
“Abschattung” (shading off. —Ed.) of voidness in samsara itself that 
renders it impossible in the Dhamma to ascribe absolutiveness to 
any particular value (such as divine grace, justice, etc.) and so enter 
upon the “War of philosophical systems of the absolute.” The 
formula imasmim sati, ...’ (applied psychologically by a choice of 
interrelated-instances) is used as an instrument in DN 15 to describe 
and analyse the mental process of naming (function of mdma-ripa) 
and language (mirutti, etc.), and in MN 38 to describe and analyse 
the peculiar nature of consciousness (vi7ifiana) in its constitutive 
relationship (through mediate states) to being. But both can only be 
studied in the Pali with careful discrimination of roots... 

635. The ironical and amusing story of the Brabma- 
nimantanika Sutta conceals a profound meaning, which is 
ontological. That is, it presents the Buddha’s treatment of the verbs 
hoti, bhavati (‘to be’) and the noun bhava (‘being’), both from the 
root bhi. Some prelate, I forgot who, said that ‘Buddhism’s 
weakness lay in the fact that it had no ontology,’ which, in simpler 
language presumably meant that no attempt had been made to 
prove that nibbana, the goal, was, or that it had being, with the 
latent objection that if this was not proved, then nibbana was just 
‘an abyss of nothingness.” 

141 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Now the Buddha has described the world (that is not just the 
external world but the consciousness that cognizes it, and not only 
other peoples’ consciousness objectified, but mine, too, and not 
only mine (of) past and future objectified but mine committed to it 
now—no matter who ‘I’ am.). His description of the way it works is 
the first two truths, while the last two deal with the escape from it. 
If we are interested in ‘being’ we must look to the Dependent 
Origination (D/O), of which ‘being’ (bhava) is the tenth member. 

I purposely avoid rendering bhava by ‘becoming’ because that 
word has a limited meaning in normal English usage, which would 
most nearly apply to the flux process which the D/O describes as a 
whole, and not to bhava, which is part of it. The point is extremely 
important, because if bhava is rendered by ‘becoming,’ then the 
word ‘becoming,’ which everyone from dukes to dustmen use all 
day and everyday, escapes our net entirely and we are in difficulties 
when we are perhaps told that the Buddha’s Absolute is Pure Being 
and so he merely taught diluted Vedanta. If we are in difficulties, 
they are due to our handling of English; they are not there in the 
Pali. ‘Being,’ ‘existence,’ and ‘becoming,’ all represent in Pali the 
roots bhit (is, exists) and as (is, there is, exists). We have no right to 
introduce the European mediaeval dichotomy of essence’ versus 
‘existence,’ which the Pali word dhamma makes superfluous. It is 
sometimes argued that ‘being’ implies permanence; even if that is 
so, outside the philosopher’s study it does not affect the issue; and 
that is only an additional reason why the word must be dealt with. 

‘Being,’ we said, is a member of the D/O, in other words, to be 
is to be dependent, or contingent upon something else. Whatever 
is, has being only in virtue of something else that lends it its being. 
Kim pabhava. 

Now let us consider the structure of the D/O for a moment. 
Firstly, it is not a logical proposition, nor is it a temporal cause- 
result chain. Such an approach makes an understanding of it 
impossible. If we stop to consider each of its components, they will 
be found to vary so enormously in scope from the particular to the 
general that it is hard to get a clear picture of the whole. The 
interpretations of European scholars have been, perhaps without 
exception, wild and bad guesses. 

142 

Addenda 

‘The Buddha’s purpose is to describe enough of the world to be 
able to show how suffering can be ended, not to produce full and 
detailed elaborations, which would be endless and arrive nowhere. 
But this particular description is aimed at including everything. 
And here a difficulty arises. A description must be made in terms of 
something other than what it describes, or it is not a description. It 
has to reproduce in other material certain structures that are in 
what it describes. This fact makes it impossible for a description to 
be a description and complete at the same time. How is the D/O 
complete, then? Or is it not a description after all? 

It is in fact both, but it attains that in a rather peculiar way. 
The best way to approach it from a European background is from 
Descartes’ “Cogito ergo sum”—(I think therefore I am). That is not 
a logical proposition; it is a description of interconditionality 
between consciousness and being. Ignoring Descartes’ theories of 
substance and taking only that bare formulation, we can compare it 
with the fact that ‘consciousness’ (vifiidna) and ‘being’ (bhava) are 
two of the most obvious members of the D/O formulation, which 
also is not a logical proposition. 

But now let us return for a moment to the ‘enormous scope 
from the particular to the general,’ which we noted earlier in the 
D/O. The right way of treating this fact is to take the D/O, not as 
an individual description, but as an integrated set of descriptions. 
Each member provides in fact a set of terms to describe the rest of 
the world. Together they cover the whole subjective/objective, 
positive/negative world. But when taken together, becoming and 
being, impermanence and (illusory) permanence come within its 
net. This seeming paradox represents what we actually live, but 
what we never face up to as a whole. ‘Being’ is applicable to the first 
nine members (see MN 38 & 11) though not to the last three (they 
perhaps constitute ‘becoming’ if we use that term philosophically). 

Any concept of Pure Being is always open to the objection 
that, if absoluteness is claimed for it, then it cannot be known; for 
if it is known it is accessible to consciousness and consequently no 
longer pure; consequently Pure Being and non-being cannot be 
distinguished. If absoluteness is claimed for any concept of Pure 
Consciousness (the Yogacara opposition to the Vedanta), a similar 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

objection arises; for if consciousness is pure it must not be, or it will 
be adulterated by being. Consequently pure consciousness has to 
have no being, which is tantamount to saying that it is not. By 
making both consciousness and being, in whatever form, subject to 
the D/O, the Buddha both closes the entry into this logical maze 
and offers us a picture which, if we only bother to observe, rather 
than malobserve, we shall find corresponds with our experience as 
we actually live it. Only we keep forgetting what we learn. And 
forgetting is ignorance. And ignorance, ‘the most reprehensible of 
all,” heads the D/O. It is one of the three ‘taints’ (@sava)—and so is 
being. 

So it is not that ‘Buddhism has no ontology,’ but that the 
Buddha has seen through what a modern writer has called the 
‘ontological mirage’ and set being into its true position. 

Nibbana is the cessation of ontology: bhava-nirodho nibbanam. 
It is not, however, the ‘abyss of non-being’, since that requires 
consciousness to cognize it as such. It is ‘absolute cessation,’ which 
includes the non-ascription, of either being or non-being: 
napahosim. 

Now while the D/O has the appearance of, and is, a complete 
description of the world (as we have defined it,) nevertheless, when 
nibbana is treated of positively in any of its terms instead of, as its 
cessation, a paradox will appear. Atthi ... abhittam..., or sabbato 
pabham, describes as cognized, to be (by consciousness) in terms of 
being. What nibbana is cognized by in terms of consciousness is 
anidassanam: the act of cognizing without ‘showing,’ ‘making 
seen,’ any positive determined (sarikhata) object. That this opposing 
of being and consciousness seems possible and not nonsense (the 
paradox) also indicates the ‘incompleteness’ of the ‘complete’ 
description. 

636. (1) Citta = to know; (2) cetasika = to do; (3) rapa = to be. 

‘Ritpa’ appears as some definite form and as such is entirely 
positive. To the question, ‘What is this?’ the answer can be given at 
once: ‘It is what it is.’ But to be what it is it has to be determined as 
such, and this determining is the function of sakhara (including 
vedand and saftha as two special instances of sarkhara, which we are 
entitled to do). To the question ‘What is a determination?’, we 

Addenda 

define it as an act of showing or determining an appearance that a 
form perceived ‘is this form, not that form.’ The negation in 
determining is only implied by, or employed by, determination but 
does not constitute an element of its being. Of that determination 
too it can be replied to the question ‘what is [?’, that ‘it is what it is’ 
(saftita, vedand, sankhara, phassa, samudaya). That form can be and 
be determined is only possible in the presence of consciousness. 

A peculiarity of consciousness at once appears introspectively 
in that it does not in itself appear positively as r#pa (form) and 
cetasika do. Quote MN 109 & 38 ... The capacity of negation 
appears to reside in consciousness which provides the “empty 
space” in which questions can be asked and “forms” (things) 
determined. If with the other two it constituted a plenum, there 
would be no questions and no acts of determining possible. 
Consciousness, then, begins to appear as the questioning element 
and it can turn the questioning on itself: ‘If lam what Iam.” 

637. Medieval European thought evolved the dichotomy of 
existence and essence, on which the ontological proof of the 
existence of God was built. It might be tempting to render the 
expression Sabbe sankhara anicca ... sabbe dhamma anatta in those 
terms on such lines as these: ‘All determined things, existing in 
themselves (sahara) are impermanent, all essences (dhamma; 
equated by the commentaries with sabhdva) are non-existent in 
themselves.’ But such an equation would be risky because the 
ontological appearance is largely a verbal one due to the peculiarities 
of European languages, but still more so because the clarity of 
medieval synthesis has been lost so that today in English the 
boundaries between ‘essence,’ ‘being’ and ‘existence’ are no longer 
definite in ordinary usage, and any definitiveness that they are made 
to assume in individual philosophies is largely an arbitrary one 
imposed on them. Consequently we must beware of importing into 
the Pali any specious clarity or any vagueness that rests solely on 
foreign linguistic habits, and thus have only regional value. 

638. To be is to be contingent: nothing, of which it can be said 
that ‘it is,’ can be said to be alone and independent. 

But being is a member of the paticca-samuppada as arising 
which contains ignorance. Being is only invertible by ignorance. 

145 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

The destruction of ignorance destroys the illusion of being. 
When ignorance is no more, then consciousness no longer can 
attribute being (pahoti) at all. But that is not all; for when 
consciousness is predicated of one who has no more ignorance then 
it is no more indicatable (as it was indicated in MN 22). 

AFTERMATH OF PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

639. If precognition is a fact (Rhine, etc.) then the psychologists’ 
complexes due to suppression can equally well be due to suppressed 
Precognitions as to suppressed memories. Then the death trauma is 
as important as the birth trauma. (Dec. 54) 

640. I shall postulate that certain aspects of character always 
form part of a human character but may be present in either a 
mainly “positive” or mainly negative” form. They tend to fall into 
unequal-opposite pairs. If one is exaggerated in conscious life, the 
other will find an outlet somewhere. Viz., take a person who is 
exaggeratedly sensitive to domination by others (usually called 
“weak and obstinate”). Without going into an elaborate analysis it 
may be found that the felt need for independence and fear of being 
trapped governs the major part of life and relations with other 
people in all ordinary activities. This leaves unsatisfied the opposite 
need for self-sacrifice or need to be guided and dominated and so get 
rid of the burden of responsibility and loneliness. So such persons 
may often be found to show exaggerated trust in doctors, and to 
take delight in treatment in a world of medical relationships where 
he can indulge the slave-master instinct by entirely subordinating 
himself to the doctor. This is thus done in a watertight world, and 
with a satisfactory doctor this can provide a release for the tension 
that otherwise might burst out in psychosomatic ailments. 

641. The Unconscious. Theories of the unconscious are 
“justified” by their ability to predict and control certain behaviour. 
They seem, however, to be a necessary fiction, as phlogiston was a 
necessary fiction in its time, necessitated in predictive calculation 
by the then inability to gather enough data about the process of 
burning to account for the new distribution of weight. Phlogiston, 
in fact, filled the gap left by those components of matter, (steam, 

Addenda 

etc.) which escaped the net of observation of the process of burning 
up matter. The Unconscious does the psychologists a somewhat 
similar service today. The technique for describing the behaviour of 
“conscious matter” is incomplete. Between the patches of observed 
behaviour “things have happened” unobservably and that is stated 
to have taken place “in the unconscious,” as the loss of weight in 
burning was said to be due to the “addition of the minus weight of 
phlogiston.” The Unconscious is thus a necessary fiction at present, 
but none the less a fiction. 

In the last century and a half of physiology, neurology has 
succeeded in tying up invariable relationships between material 
organs and nerves on the one hand and conscious experiences 
(pains, etc.) on the other. Investigation of the brain, though, is still 
in its infancy. It seems more than possible that much if not all the 
so-called “Unconscious” may not eventually become much more 
conveniently describable in terms of material brain changes, 
materially (i.¢., visibly) measured and tied up with certain feelings 
and experiences. 

Two things, however, remain: (1) just as physics has got to a 
point where it has reached an incompatibility, namely the 
behaviour of electrons as either waves or particles, so much brain 
investigation may lead to a mutually incompatible double vision, 
though how this may manifest itself it is not yet possible to say. (2) 
Consciousness, i.e., the purely subjective and unique experience of 
awareness (with some degree of memory) will remain unapproached 
and unapproachable by such methods. Expressed in physical or 
material terms, consciousness must always be describable as 
“nothing.” That “nothing” has one kind of relationship to the 
world of physics and another to the world of physiology. (Jan. 56) 

642. It is said that animals (even chimpanzees) have a very short 
conscious memory (I do not mean conditioned reflexes, learnt 
habits, etc.). It is one of the radical differences between man and all 
animals that man is ashamed of sex. The reason probably lies in 
conscious memory. The change in values between lustful 
consciousness and non-lustful is profound (more than that with 
hate, probably). In man non-lusting consciousness is scarcely or not 
at all remembered when lusting consciousness is present, because 

147 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

the latter overrides all the former’s values absolutely. But it does 
not last. When it has switched back to non-lusting consciousness, it 
is the memory of how destructive the lusting values are to the non- 
lusting that makes the intrusion of the memory into the open 
public intolerable; hence shame, which keeps the memory tidily in 
oneself. Were there no memory of it (as probably it is with 
animals), as women are said to forget the pains of labour, and as one 
tends to forget sea sickness, then there would be no objection to 
going naked. (Sep. 56) 

643. Practically all inquiries into death, immortality, existence, 
being and consciousness are stultified at the outset by a 
presumption that they are desirable (or the reverse). The only 
reasonable approach is to observe what facts there are to be 
observed and make one’s choice on the basis of these—afterwards, 
not before. 

644. Bodily pain is a component of waking life, but not, 
apparently, of dream life. The advent of bodily pain destroys 
(breaks up or kills) a dream and transforms existence into waking 
life. Bodily pain in others seems when increased to a certain amount 
(not measurable because it is only inferred) to result in “lapse of 
consciousness” (i.e., interruption of the life-process) or destruction 
(.e., breaks up the waking life or kills it). That can only be inferred 
of others and cannot be a waking experience in myself (without a 
radical development or alteration in conscious continuity as we 
ordinary people know it). 

The (desirable) stability of waking life is gained, it seems, at the 
expense of (undesirable) bodily pain. Give up the pain, and with it 
the stability and I return to the instability of dreams. 

Death in others is the break up of the bodily stability in an 
observed body with the cutting off of a relationship with an 
inferred other’s consciousness. That particular looking-glass in 
which I see the “face” of my own consciousness has become 
corroded and no longer reflects it; it only shows the shadow of my 
“conscious body” as a stone or earth shows the shadow, but not the 
reflection, of my material body. 

By “my conscious body” I mean here no more than the “shape 
of the inside of a hole”—consciousness being taken here as 

148 

Addenda 

equatable with nothing in terms of matter, and the “conscious 
body” as the aspects of the “surface of the hole” (—the contact of 
“matter” with “nothing”). 

645. Can one take an experience to have up to five essential 
dimensions—three dimensions of space (i.e., right-left, front-back, 
up-down) and time (before-after) and consciousness (attraction- 
repulsion)? 

There are two independent ways of describing experience and 
manipulating knowledge: 

1. By conceiving experience in terms of things or interaction 
between things (“chosisme”—Aristotelian logic). “Things” are all 
impermanent. Knowledge of their relationships is always out of date. 

2. By conceiving it in terms of structure (mathematics—other 
logical systems?). Structure is ‘permanent’ and knowledge of it is 
cumulative. 

646. All thought hitherto has been stultified by the failure to 
know what the verb “to be” [signifies}* (“this” “is” “that*; “there-is” 
“nothing-there”; “he” “is” “not-here”). [*—added by Ed.] 

647. In a syllogism (1. All men are mortal. 2. Socrates is a man. 
3. Therefore Socrates is mortal), the generalization (all men are 
mortal) must have been arrived at by induction. No inductive 
process is ever absolutely certain. There is always the leap, the 
assumption, of generalizing and therefore one of the premises of a 
syllogism must have an element of uncertainty. So it cannot prove 
anything with certainty. 

A syllogism is therefore a signpost pointing where to look for 
direct experience, but can inherently never give information that is 
100% certain. But a syllogism (on metaphysical subjects) can also 
point to what can, inherently, never be experienced; then it is an 
anomaly. 

648. Is there something wrong somewhere in the claim that all 
mental objects are only five-sense-experiences or rearrangement of 
memories of them? 

649. Physicists accept the inseparability of time and space. 
They are concerned with ‘what happens in space,’ The 
inseparability works out as plainly true (i.e., consistent) as far as 
any thing to do with space is concerned—no time, no space, in fact. 

149 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

But does the converse apply, i.e., is time (i.e., consciousness of 
change) impossible with a coordinate experience of space? 

650. Descriptions etc. —To the question “What is description?” 
(or better perhaps: ‘how is description described?’) a convenient 
answer might be that it is the application of sieves. This implies: (A) 
distinguishing by a fixed pattern of, say, (a) holes of a certain size in 
an otherwise impenetrable medium, (b) an amorphous mass of 
particles, and (c) an act of sieving. Sieving for size in this way will 
have no power to discriminate between different-coloured particles 
either below or above the critical size of the sieve—(B) For 
distinguishing colour an entirely different sieve and sieving act 
must be applied, with two or more independent discriminating 
acts. In this way a description can be made of classes. The step to the 
description of an individual seems to consist in the application of a 
varying number of different acts of sieving followed by a decision 
“This number of acts of sieving (this list of characteristics) is 
enough. By it the individual is described.” Objectively, and without 
the subjective “I”- sense, this is the nearest that one can get. The list 
judged adequate is always liable to be proved inadequate in new 
circumstances (uncertainty principle) and a new sieve must be 
applied and a new “adequate” judgement made—but there is no 
limit to this. (Jan. 58) 

651. Treatment according to strictly objective scientific 
technique absolutely precludes the possibility of ascertaining the 
“identity” of an “individual” at two different time-places. Events 
can only be sieved and sieved by new sieving processes; but the 
judgement: “This is the same person.” or “This is the same thing.” is 
supplied from the subjective observer and is consequently 
unscientific though a necessary component of experience. 

652. The space-time relationship of relativity is based on the 
observed fact of the speed of light. The fifth dimension (see 
Eddington) might lie in the element of negation or nothingness, 
which is pure subjectivity and which cannot be demonstrated in the 
objective world, which is perhaps rightly argued to be a ‘plenum.’ 
Things (which are multiple) and even space and time (which 
equivocally claim unity; but what about dreams?), are what they 
are (are themselves), are positive in their own right. Consciousness, 

150 

Addenda 

however, considered separately, is only describable as different, or 
positive, in terms of what it is not. It is what is not. It is one. 
Multiplicity appears to be imposed on it by its association with 
what it is not. It is the lack, the flight, the incompleteness, the 
hunger, the negation, the nothing. The ego is the particular 
behaviour line of the surface of a given positivity against nothing. 

653. All such dogmas or deductions as (1) “The space-time 
world is a plenum,” (2) “The physical material universe is orderly,” 
etc., are only understandable if the words plenum and orderly are 
distinguished against (a) their opposites vacuum and random as well 
as (b) against their undifferentiated matrix (the unconscious 
categories plenum-vacuum, order-randomness, etc.—see Freud). 

Consequently if all these definite (or positive) attributes are 
projected onto the external objective world, their shadows (or 
negative opposites) will lie in the internal subjective observer of 
that world. The external world thus conceived becomes positive, 
replete, lifeless and rigid and is only animatable by the element of 
hungry negation in the internal consciousness element (itself 
nothing and only observable by introspection of its emotional 
modes). (Jan. 58) 

654. “Actual Matter” is any actual experience involving 
excitation of one or more of the five senses (a ‘hallucination’ is only 
a badly-organized five-sense experience, and a ‘real experience’ is 
only a well-organized one). ‘Matter’ is that and also all imaginings, 
ideas and memories of now, of past or future five-sense experience 
‘imagination’ is only a badly or insufficiently organized one). 

655. 1. Words (like paints) reproduce or reflect a structural 
pattern in reduced dimensions. 

2. “Omnis determinatio est negatio” (Spinoza): no determination 
can be made unless from a viewpoint. Any viewpoint has horizons. 
The negated lies beyond the horizons. Horizons are an essential 
component of any determination (or any conscious experience). 

3. An action is a changing (transitive). Actions’ result is 
memory (a.) conscious memory, and (b) unconscious memory, 
including learning). “We are what we have thought and done.” 

4. A division of the world (I and my universe) is: 

(1) ‘TP’ @bsolutely unique subjectively; but not objectively, 

151 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

which includes ‘my body’); (2) ‘other people’ (their bodies—their 
‘consciousness’ being only an inference); (3) inanimate things. 

5. Action (see 3) as (my) thought changes thought and my 
behaviour; action as speech changes (my) thought and ‘other 
people’s behaviour.’ Action as bodily action changes my thought 
and other people’s behaviour (sometimes) and inanimate things 
(sometimes). 

6, All bodies are incomplete from any one point of view, but 
my body is so in a unique way (I see it from through my own face 
as it were, inside my head, but that is a construct). 

7. Can plurality be ascribed to consciousness except through 
plurality of bodies? What are the consequences of this? 

8. ‘T’ is one conceit (the ‘internal’ one), ‘matter’ one form of the 
external one, which every set of appearances (sense or mind) points 
to be... 

(Here the Manuscript ends; a few interlinear additions are 
incomplete) 

656. Cause and Effect. Is the question of “cause and effect” any 
different in essentials from that of “shape’? “A shape” is a succession 
of plane sections seen simultaneously. If they were seen serially, 
then we should have the experience of certain series of plane 
sections (say those of a man or a tree) repeating themselves in 
experience and we might then say that the “previous” plane section 
of two ankles was the “cause” of the “subsequent” plane section of 
the waist. The notion of “cause and effect” seems to come from the 
inability to see a “world line” simultaneously, but the ability to see 
it as a temporal series of 3-dimensional sections. The point of this is 
to suggest that the “law of cause” is not essentially different from 
the “law of shape.” “Spatial objects” “are” “certain shapes” which 
we see simultaneously. “Cause and effect” groups are temporal (or 
space—time) shapes which we see as a series of 3-dimensional 
sections. The law (if any) which holds cause and effect together, 
therefore, should be of the same kind which holds a shape together, 
i.e., makes it a “unit.” What this is needs investigating. 

This apart, “cause” and “effect” seem misleading shorthand 
words for the “principal (i.e., most noticeable) condition” (out of 
the many conditions) that is concerned in the production of an 

Addenda 

emergent new state. That these series repeat themselves seems to be 
due rather to the arbitrary nature of the world: just as the plane 
section of the two ankles is arbitrarily followed later by the plane 
section of two knees, waist, etc.,—given humans in the world and a 
fixed order of series. (This is a description in terms of an external 
world existing independently of an observer). 

If the universe is expanding, the nebulas getting apart, is 
everything expanding? Are we getting larger, and the earth on 
which we stand? If we and the earth are getting larger in proportion 
we should not notice our change in size because there would be 
nothing to make the comparison with. But if the expansion were 
accelerating we should find the earth pressing against our feet, 
which is just what we experience through gravity. What are the 
constants? The speed of light? The relative increase in rapidity of 
expansion in proportion to the distance? (Jan. 52) 

657. Solalterism versus Solipsism—Dialectic 

The solalterist description of the world, as used openly by the 
Behaviourists, and as used covertly by such scientists as Ross Ashly, 
contains a hidden ‘dishonesty principle’ (i.e., active functioning of 
ignorance as self-deception) when it claims and believes its 
description to be subjectively adequate and altogether complete. 
The difficulty of the “Theory of Types’ which questions, the 
validity of any ‘complete’ description of ‘all’ because it cannot 
include itself, need not be brought in here. The ‘dishonesty 
principle’ is evident in Ross Ashly in his, on the one hand, 
admitting that he is not dealing with consciousness and, on the 
other, claiming that pain ‘is’ a certain physical behaviour pattern. 
Association (whether absolutely co-essential or not, is not known) 
of purely subjective pain is identified with that behaviour pattern, 
which, unlike the pain aspect, is describable in purely physicists’ 
terms. That includes the two principles of Adaptation and Feed- 
back. Resting on that identification, which is false, the conclusion 
that conscious man is only an elaborate machine follows, and it 
proves that he has no soul. This proof has nothing to do with the 
Buddhist proof of anattd. 

The illusion created by the apparent completeness of 
behaviourist-physicist description is reinforced by the absence of 

153 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

any strict solipsistic (correspondingly inversely false) description to 
oppose to it. All solipsistic theories so far have been badly self- 
deceptive on the point that they have never been pursued with 
scientific and logical ruthlessness and have always contained a large 
element of properly solalteristic material mixed up. They are thus 
easily shown to be absurd and consequently solipsistic thought has 
been bullied and frightened off the subject. 

The difficulty lies in re-stating and purifying the true solipsistic 
from injected solalteristic material and in finding a set of terms in 
which to describe it. 

What is essential therefore is (a) to show clearly where the 
solalterist treatment (absolutely necessary as it is) must necessarily 
end in incompleteness (which can only be glossed over by false 
identification with the purely subjective) and where it deceives 
itself and others by covertly smuggling in (properly) solipsistic 
material (pain) and (b) to make a correspondingly adequate 
solipsistic description showing where the deception and the 
‘smuggling-in’ or injection of solalterist material lies. (Sep. 56) 

658. ...And this is so not only with technicalities as these but 
also with theories of importance current in Western thought, about 
Perception, Causality, Consciousness and Being. It is said that the 
(strictly objective and so most respectable) sciences have abandoned 
speaking in terms of ‘causes’ and ‘effects’; and Hume remains 
unrefuted where Causes (as usually conceived) are upheld. There is 
no agreed theory of Perception. That, perhaps most fashionable 
now, which (tacitly treating consciousness as an ‘“epiphenomenon’) 
looks for its justification to the laws of Physics, to Neurology and 
to Protoplasm, is an admitted makeshift at best and ultimately 
vitiated by its failure to take proper account of the subjective side 
of experience (to deal with ‘T’); for it remains awkwardly 
incontestible that all data are ultimately private. Should 
Consciousness be taken to include, or not, also the ‘Unconscious’ 
of the Psychoanalysts, which Existentialists deny? Fear of solipsism 
seems to have shepherded the main body of thinkers towards the 
opposite, perhaps more insidious, fallacy of _ solalterism. 
Schopenhauer described the Solipsist as ‘a madman shut up in an 
impregnable blockhouse’. But the Solalterist, who ignores the 

154 

Addenda 

observer,—the Behaviourist who only admits the existence of ‘the 
Other’—may perhaps be considered scarcely more sane and to have 
shut himself out of his house, slamming the door with the latchkey 
inside: ‘the philosophy of the subject leaving himself out of his 
calculations,’ to quote Schopenhauer again. Then the indispensable 
words ‘being’ and ‘existence’ (there are and is—as copula or as 
absolute), with their ambiguity and the homeless family of 
fundamental assumptions that they are often made to shelter, are 
normally taken for granted (the otherwise critical authors of The 
Meaning of Meaning, for example, are strangely content not to 
examine them at all), or they are left to the more inaccessible of the 
post-Hegelian ontologists. It has even been complained that there is 
no longer in European philosophy any agreement on what these 
words stand for. Such conditions have made of European Ethics, as 
it were, a displaced person: she has to take shelter where she can. 

[The above fragment is the contents of a single typed sheet 
paginated as 25, seemingly part of a larger philosophical manuscript 
which the author may have discarded as no other pages belonging 
to it, were found among the posthumous papers.] 

659. Animism leads logically to the Gods of Olympus. From 
there to Jewish or Hindu monotheism, with its impersonal 
counterpart of pure substance such as the Matter of scientists, 
Hegel’s History, the Hindu Brahman, etc. The obsessive solipsistic 
claim of the unique ‘T is held in check by the uniqueness of God, or 
of the external substance. But if that is denied, as non-existent, then 
the Kirillov'> Idea takes over. God is the theistic safeguard against 
this and Substance the Atheistic safeguard. Psychology 
(Behaviourist) plays an equivocal part, and while denying god and 
not affirming substance, it refuses recognition to solipsism by 
hiding in the solalterism of “the Other.” Buddhism is unique in 
avoiding all these pitfalls and makeshifts by exposure and analysis 
of the illusion of ‘I’ (asmi-mana) and personality (puggala) and the 
contingency of being (paticca-samuppada, ‘Dependent Arising’). 

660. If the Absurd is the proper object of faith, and 
Understanding (=knowledge) is to be mortified and excluded (vide 

13. See Dostoyevsky, The Possessed—Ed. 

155 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Tertullian), then amy form of absurdity is a fit object for faith, and 
no discrimination between forms of absurdity can be made 
whatever by faith alone, but only by understanding (knowledge) 
that is ruled out. 
661. “There is little of the true philosophic spirit in Aquinas. 
He does not, like the Platonic Socrates, set out to follow wherever 
the argument may lead. He is not engaged in an inquiry, the result 
of which it is impossible to know in advance, Before he begins to 
philosophize, he already knows the truth; it is declared in the 
Catholic faith. If he can find apparently rational arguments for 
some parts of the faith, so much the better; if he cannot, he need 
only fall back on revelation.” 
Bertrand Russell, History of Western Philosophy (p. 463) 

This criticism is excellent—while enquiry remains enquiry 
only in the realm of ideas and has either no counterpart in action or 
while any such counterpart action can always be abandoned before 
it has unpleasant consequences. The end may be either interesting 
or boring but will not destroy the enquirer. But the course of 
action flows on like a river and there is no stopping it for a second. 
If its course is directed, it is hard or impossible to get it back again. 
We think we know its average course and we think it might be 
made worse than it is, so we mainly tolerate it as it is. We have our 
system of contexts built up by experience, for dealing with 
situations as they arise (assisted by the automatic reactions of self- 
preservation). While this physical “safety” endures it is possible, 
pleasant and “safe” to embark on mental enquiries whose end 
cannot be foreseen and apply to physical existence and action what 
attracts us therein. But will anyone argue from that we should 
embark on an experimental course of action whose end cannot be 
foreseen? And yet this is exactly what science as evolution seems to 
be doing. Science does not admit the pleasure-pain element which is 
“personal” and therefore “unscientific” because it is outside the 
capacity of its measuring instruments. This is alright; and when it 
says, “What is contrary to science is false,” it seems partially sound. 
But it is when Science begins to exert a claim on the mind to be the 
sole source, point of reference, measure and limit of truth, (saying) 
“What is not capable of being dealt with by Science is non- 

156 

Addenda 

existent,” then it is certainly unsound. 

662. The importance of an orthodoxy is that it is essential to any 
ordered thinking. By that I mean not orthodox thinking but any 
ordered thinking; for that implies either approval of or rejection of 
(in whole or in part) some orthodoxy. Unorthodoxy is impossible 
without some orthodoxy against which it is unorthodox. (For 
revolutions see § 258.) Any orthodoxy has constantly to be 
maintained and combated in order to survive. A judicious measure 
of the two is called progressive development. If the mixture is 
injudicious it may manifest itself as tyrannous bigotry or as 
constant abortive rebellion. A rebellion, to be successful must 
destroy the orthodoxy which it rebels against, whereupon it is 
automatically transformed into a new orthodoxy. A period of 
anarchy or seeming anarchy may intervene, but (if true anarchy has 
any actuality) it seems naturally impossible to sustain anarchy for 
long against a tendency to crystallize, and once that happens, 
orthodoxy has set in again. Whether orthodoxy can be 
universalized without or with oppression and suppression is not 
the point here. (Sep. 56) 

663. If we say that “happiness” (as the “greatest good”) consists 
in things, then the only standard by which we may know which 
things bring happiness is according to the reaction of a majority 
(the “greatest number”) or of an aristocracy (the “best”) to those 
things. This (a) takes no account of the fact that canons of taste may 
and do change, and that respectively the “minority” (‘enemies of 
the people’) or the inferior (the ‘masses’) risk being crushed and 
oppressed and prevented from fulfilling their needs. 

If we say that happiness consists in any person’s attitude, then 
the only standard is the state of happiness or otherwise of any given 
person. But this criterion will not indicate what things may be 
expected to make any person happy and the result is anarchy 
among things and a process of continued trial and error. 

It is now held tacitly or openly that (a) all people should (must) 
like what the majority likes; the minority should be educated to 
this—by a combination of encouragement and neglect (if liberal- 
socialist) or by emotional propaganda and forced labour camps (if 
totalitarian); and (b) that the canons of what should be liked must 

157 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

be laid down and their development guided. The need for a “party” 
and a system of politico-philosophical myths (aims that cannot be 
realized now) such as “the next world” or the fading away of the 
state (this world as Utopia). 

The whole of this edifice with all its facades has no place for 
death. 

The “next world” as a means of coercing people in this, is one 
attempt of getting round the problem death sets the exponents of 
this world. People are mostly more useful to society alive than 
dead, so it is mostly a crime to die unless you do so “for society.” 
For society regards itself (rightly) as cheated by death unless it 
profits by it. 

But to go back to “happiness”: suppose a man finds firstly that 
of all the things it is possible to do he does not want to do anything 
more than he is doing now—this would seem to be the nearest one 
can get to the definition of a state of “happiness.” He can then 
educate himself so that that does not obstruct others enjoying the 
same and they might increase their happiness mutually by 
cooperation and by eliminating needs which entail obstructing 
others. This might be possible—at least it does not seem inherently 
impossible. 

But again a man who looks at the world and at himself 
critically, finds that while the world of his circumstances may be 
such that it can maintain his needs, yet it can, inherently, never 
satisfy them: that he and his world are so constituted that no set of 
circumstances can ever give more than a temporary relief and can 
never fully satisfy him. Every meal he eats ensures that his ability 
to be hungry again is maintained. 

One can forgive the politicians (the bishops of today) anything 
except their claim to answer all needs. 

664. “The sole evidence it is possible to produce that any thing 
is desirable is that people actually desire This, however, being a 
fact, we have not only all the proof which the case admits of but 
which it is possible to require that happiness is good, that each 
person’s happiness is a good to that person, and the general 
happiness therefore a good to the aggregate of all persons.” 

J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism (p. 52) 

158 

Addenda 

Is “happiness” here separate from or combined with 
“pleasure”? in either case it is not disputed that the majority are 
capable of it and that they desire it and that the attainment of it is 
largely (some say entirely) dependent on outside circumstances. But 
the step to the “general happiness” seems to be made without 
reckoning on (or at least accounting for) the fact that once an 
adequate living has been provided for all, there is no set of 
circumstances which will bring happiness to all—or even which 
will bring happiness to the majority always. The individuals who 
make up the majority are both all the time being replaced and all 
the time themselves changing in the pattern of their appetencies. 
The important thing is that each individual is satisfied only by the 
set of circumstances that fit the pattern of his appetencies at any 
particular stage of his development. The point is therefore that if 
the “general happiness” is to be brought about, the method of doing 
so will never be by determining by some method or other a set of 
circumstances which will give “happiness to all normal beings.” 
The only way to set about it would be to maintain a bureau for 
maintaining a continual flow of information concerning the 
present state of the changing average pattern of appetencies of the 
majority. The first will only lead to strife, the second seems 
impracticable. 

665. All the following “good” things are entirely dependent on 
“bad” things for their existence: 

A B 

rescue, liberation is dependent on oppression 

heroism 2 i great odds 

good judgement ie . the possibility of making 
errors 

charity ae ” poverty of others 

endurance is i fe suffering in oneself 

pity Estee: ” suffering in others 

love (desire forunion)” —” ” separation 

energy, striving ee Hs ” privation (not having 
what oneneeds) 

hero worship inability to beoneself; 
what onewants; 

orfrustration 

159 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

patience * ® ” the presence of 
unsurmountable 
obstruction 

thrift 4 ” insecurity (amongother 
things) 

temperance a ” temptation 

If this world is “improved” so that all those things in column B 
are eliminated there will be no opportunity for the exercise of the 
“virtues” in column A. 

666. Eating is surely an entirely repellent and _ utterly 
unjustified process. The enjoyment of the senses of taste and smell 
and the satisfying of hunger are, in fact, enjoyable and “innocent” 
only if one shuts one’s eyes to all those things that eating 
necessitates, such as killing of animals, etc. To become a vegetarian 
is no escape at all, for then one’s eating still involves the killing of 
millions of animals in the cultivation of vegetables and the killing 
of vegetables themselves, which are alive in their own way. The 
vegetarian has nothing to do with meat, but by his eating he still 
destroys life on a huge scale. Not to eat is to suffer and to cut one’s 
life short, for no kind of existence is possible without eating. When 
T eat I think of the people who haven’t got enough to eat, and then 
my eating cannot be justified except by my arbitrary choice and 
decision that I and not they shall eat, for which I alone am 
responsible, and for which I have no ultimate justification. But if 
the world were better organized, which it could well be, and 
everyone had enough to eat, and if I lived on vegetables alone, still I 
am not justified, except by my own arbitrary choice, for that 
destruction of animals and plants that is necessitated. I have chosen 
to live and to take part in this destruction simply because I want 
to—because to live is to destroy, just as to create is to destroy; it is 
only a process of change to which I can equally well apply the word 
“creation” or “destruction,” according as I choose to feel about it. I 
know all the arguments used to justify such things. They stand, but 
the opposite standpoint remains unaffected by them. It is, in the 
end, I who am responsible for this state of things, for this eating 
and for the destruction that it necessitates. Then why not stop 

Addenda 

eating and die? What, and be at once be reborn again, having 
forgotten what I have learned in this life, and start eating again? 
There is no way out there. The choice is not between eating (and 
living) and not eating (and dying and being reborn). 

667. Questions Raised 

1. Is not Buddhism selfish? —No, because no personal end, 
such as heavenly bliss, is sought. 

2. Is the withdrawal from the world with the purpose of self- 
development compatible at all with the English social and public 
school tradition of self denial by team-spirit?—(1) Self-denial by 
team spirit, if developed for competition is an enlargement of the 
selfish end from the individual to the team; each individual hopes 
to gain more personally by the limited sacrifice of some personal 
ends to the team. The subordination of self-will is compatible, but 
the aim of competition for worldly gain is not.—(2) The now 
classical English liberal education incorporating the teaching of the 
‘humanities’ contains two radically opposed basic principles: team 
spirit and the inviolable sanctity of the individual person and his 
conscience; only the English genius for compromise seems to 
weave these two together successfully. That education is a code, 
like the stoics’ code of behaviour, which takes a philosophical 
system or a religion (it is not important what) for its ultimate 
justifications. In England both Christianity and Greek philosophy 
serve this end, but the code could attach itself to the Dhamma 
equally well, with some adjustments. 

3. Is not the position of the Christian clergy and of the Sangha 
to the laity radically opposed since the clergy are devoted to social 
service? 

This is a narrow estimate of the Christian clergy based on that 
of the C of E in England, and perhaps the C of R in England, U. S. 
A. and other countries where it works on a missionary basis, but it 
ignores the history of Christian monasticism, and the status, for 
example, of the Trappists and Poor Claires,—monasteries in, say, 
Belgium, Ireland, Italy, and Mount Athos. 

4. Does not the Buddhist conception of heaven and hell 
amount in the end to much the same thing as the Christian one?— 
No, because they are not penitentiaries and places of reward set up 

161 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

by a Lord Creator for the punishing and recompensing of his 
creatures who sin against or believe in him. (In Buddhism) the 
pattern of existence works itself out through kamma into the hells 
and heavens and the world we know, just as social life works itself 
out into prisons, jobs, public honours, etc. 

5. Suppose the Dhamma were successfully spread over the 
world, would it be a lasting benefit?—It would be a temporary 
benefit, but not a lasting one. The world is comparable to a hotel or 
a station waiting room, it can be made better or worse by the 
people who pass through. 

6. What do the laity get out of Buddhism?—See the story of 
Visikha (Vinaya Mahivagga Kh. 8 & S. LV, 53).—The saigha is 
open to any layman to join who wants to practise renunciation. It 
maintains the Buddha’s teaching and that opportunity for him. 
What does a layman get out of a hospital? 

7. Still the precepts seem to me negative—instead of refraining 
from taking life why not say that one should preserve life2—Would 
that not involve favouring one against another, in the case of those 
who prey upon each other?—But isn’t there a hierarchy of 
importance of life? If I see a tiger attacking a man, should I not 
shoot the tiger to save the man’s life?-—If that is admitted then one 
is justified in stealing and lying to save another's life; “bon pere de 
famille est capable de tout”; “the end justifies the means.” The 
negative precept “Do not take life’ is restraint (comparable to the 
ploughing of a field) and renunciation. The positive precept 
‘preserve live’ sets life as the highest positive good (whether my 
own or others’ makes no difference) and supports attachment and 
clinging to specific lives. And what if, instead of a tiger it is a man 
who attacks another man. But why is the question put in that 
form? Why not ask first at least, ‘Am I justified in killing, to save 
my own life, a tiger (or a man) attacking me? Do I expect my 
neighbour to kill to preserve my life?” 

8. Is Buddhism simply intellectualism?—No, intellectual 
knowledge is like teaching how to swim or reading a cookery 
book. The Dhamma is to be lived, like swimming or cooking. 

9. If the Buddha’s teachings require faith in the development of 
faculties, then a Christian is justified in arguing that it is merely a 
matter of developing faculties to be able to perceive the revealed 

162 

Addenda 

dogmas, and so the Buddhist cannot vanquish him in debate on that 
point. 

The Buddha’s teaching does not require belief in the 
development of new faculties to perceive outward worlds hitherto 
unperceived, It is not concerned with new outward worlds but 
with the clear vision of the world of experience as instable and 
unsatisfactory, and that this is due to craving. The assertion made is 
that a line of conduct will reduce the craving and the suffering 
consequent on it (which can be tested) and the belief required is 
that that line of action can be carried to the point at which craving 
ends and suffering ends. 

668. Questionnaire or Catechism 
What is self (atta)? Wrong view of personality. 

What is eternal (zicca)?_ ~~ Only non-arising, non-passing-away, non- 
changing of what is present. 

What is altogether? Nibbana and the Path. Pleasant (sukha)? 

What is beautiful? (subha) Metta, the Brahma world, the Path. 

What is Truth (sacca)?_ ~The four Truths. 

What is a person? A chain of deeds and the result of deeds. 
What is a soul? Wrong view of personality. 
What is a god? An impermanent consciousness or 

personality with a body less grossly 
material than the human and less subject 
to pain or not subject to pain, or one 
with no material body at all: or a fine 
material body with no consciousness. 
None is omnipotent or a world creator. 

163 

MISCELLANEA 

Poems; 
Tale; 
Story; 
Dialogues; 
Words; 
Today’s fallacies and half-truths; 
Impressions; 

Canticle. 

Poems 

Look 

Look at the world they make that can be made 
To shake and shiver and shift as if 

It were a raft adrift Dragged by each draft 
Towards a rift as by a drasm 

In wrong enthusiasm reft. 

(Author’s Note:) ‘drasm’ is the noun from ‘drastic’ that is, 
something between a ‘flap’ and a ‘drastic’ spring-cleaning (as seem 
from a spider’s angle). 

“A drasm is a dreadful thing, I wot.” (Oct 56) 

Ina letter to Rev. Nanavira: 

The (above) verse, entitled “Look”, will perhaps express 
something of my sentiments on motion. “Drasm” is an old friend, 
whom you may remember. Rule for this verse is that it must be full 
of rhymes but none must appear at the end of any two lines”. 

Look Again 

When I look in a looking-glass 
How is it that it comes to pass, 
What is it, too, that there I see, 
The looking-glass, myself or me? 
If caged alone, the turtle dies; 
But if he in reflection spies 

His image in a glass, he lives: 
Such is the food illusion gives. 

So when I see you face to face, 
Seeming your person there to trace, 
What do I see there—which is true?— 
The world, part of myself, or you? 

167 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

You see yourself and I see you, 
Only through me do you see you; 
While you see me, I myself see, 
Only through you do I see me. 
fall the points of vanishing 

In the perspective of the world, 
‘That opposite to me is present 
And [am that which isn’t there. 

Song 
My song is simply what it seems: 
A tangle of too many themes 
‘That never whispers but it screams, 
Fusing reality with dreams— 
As’t were a swirl of counter-streams 
that with a school of clashes teems 
Whereon the froth of fancy creams 
The rippling of bubble-beams, 
Of crystal-flaws, of leaden gleams 
And winking dust of carbon-seams— 
What then if there is none esteems 
This tapestry of enthymemes 
All ragged with unfinished schemes 
To bleed the wits with lancet-fleams, 
And what if none but scandal deems 
This word-play of raw verbal teams 
Brawling across the paper reams? 
Yet furze-flame a boat’s bottom breams: 
My song is surely what it seems. 
Come, let Philosophy now crack her whip: 
And by her thumping the Grammatic Drum 
The Infinite and Absolute shall come 
With All and Nothing at her will to skip. 
Condemn Disorder to detentive slum 
To lie in chains with Ignorance; declare 
The roll complete. “Tis fatal to despair 
To give a name to each; for can the dumb 

168 

Miscellanea 

Command? or the unnamed obey? Beware! 

O find a name—to save her leadership— 

For the unnamed, which ever gives the slip 
Whose naming kills and has it born elsewhere. 

(Will not this naming the unnamed ensure Work for 
Philosophy for evermore?) 

Ina letter to Rev. Nanavira: 

—I rediscovered a sonnet I made a few months ago & had 
forgotten; while not quite a propos, I shall nevertheless quote this 
bit of pastiche, ... I think the distribution of rhymes is quite neat 
and the thought nicely rounded—but I am no judge of verse.” 

Self-Mastery (A Palinode) 

The lowly stoic Epictetise 

Wouldn’t write a single treatise: 

The utterances of the man 

Were copied down by Arrian. 

Imperial Mark Aureliorse 

His bibliophobia was worse: 

He wrote a book himself instead 

Where “Throw away your books!’ he said.'* 

TALE 

There is a village in which a postman and a scientist are living. The 
postman has a rule (his own, made arbitrarily by himself, but 
invariably kept) which is to ring the bell twice on Mondays, 
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and four times on Tuesdays, Thursdays 
and Saturdays, once a day when he brings the post; and even when 
there are no letters to deliver, he still rings in the same way to ask if 
there were any letters for the outward mail. On Sundays he takes a 
day off and does not ring at all. For a long time, for many years, the 
scientist used to answer the door when he heard the bell ring twice 

\ Editor’s Note: The title refers to an essay in which Mark Aurel’s advice 

to throw one’s books away, had been echoed. 

169 

Miscellanea 

bell ring like that: and he still got no post, and still the letters he 
wrote piled up. He would not discuss his troubles with visitors 
who called; for after all he was a scientist and they were not. Then 
he remembered the public holidays such as Easter-Monday, 
Christmas Day, and so on, and he revised his calculations again, 
making them still more accurate; but still he never heard the kind 
of ring he was expecting. And so it goes on with his taking into 
account leap-years and Holy Years, and what not. And all the while 
he gets no post and the letters he writes and cannot post pile up so 
much that he will soon be pushed out of his house. But now the 
postman no more rings the bell since no one has answered his two 
and four rings for so long, and so he takes home the letters 
addressed to the scientist (they are very few by now) and makes 
some of them into spills to light his pipe in the evening when he sits 
by the fire, working out on the back of others the football pool 
averages by which he hopes to win a fortune one day. (Nov. 57) 

STORY 

The door to the dark empty room (ave) containing nothing. The 
darkness makes the ignorant fill it with fancies. A Church is made 
to lock the door and guard against entry, which church points to 
the other door, that of the tomb, which leads to heaven, but can 
only be entered by dying (in voluntary ignorance of what is behind 
the forbidden door). 

Rival churches, since the doors are profitable, spring, up and 
paint forbidden doors on walls (rocks) and guard them. 

The secret known perhaps to some of the first Churchmen, is 
that behind the forbidden door there is nothing. That known to 
the second Church men is that there is no door in their church 
(which comes to the same). 

A man enters the Church as a churchman. Perhaps he 
discovers that secret, but it is not worth his while divulging it, and 
no one would be better off if he did. 

171 

Miscellanea 

My Conscience: You can’t eat the cake and have it, you know. 
I: Should I have it? Should I eat it? 

Me: The proverb says: eat or be eaten. 

I: Then I should eat my cake before it eats me? 

My Conscience: That is not what I meant at all. (Mar. 56) 

* 

A: One can’t be too particular about these things. 

B: No, one can’t, can one? 

A: If one is too careful and choosy, one’ll never get anything 
done. 

B: But still, one can’t be too particular about these things. 

A: Can’t one then? 

B: If one is not careful enough, one never knows what one 
may have let oneself in for. (Jun. 56) 

ee 8 

A: Eternity is that whose beginning can be indefinitely 
pushed back and whose end can be indefinitely postponed. 

B: Eternity is all time. 

A: Eternity is the opposite of time. (Jul. 57) 

eo OF 

A: ‘Take what you will’, says Emerson, ‘but pay the price.’ 

B: How can I? I have no money. 

A: Oh money; that is only for material things. 

B: What then? 

A: Pleasures of the mind, for instance: see what Schopen- 
hauer says! 

B: How are they paid for? 

A: By paying attention, of course! You give attention to 
them, don’t you? 

B: Yes, but where did I get this from? 

A: Gilence) 

B: Have I borrowed it from pain? Are pleasures paid for by 
attention demanded back by pain? 

A: (Silence) (Sep. 56) 

173 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

A: Is there a next life? 

B: Of course. 

A: How, then? 

B: Why, you are living it now. 

A: Now? 

B: Yes, this is the next life after the last one. (Sep. 56) 
* 

A: I have the seeds of an incurable sickness in me. 
B: Good gracious, what is that? 
A: Ageing and death. (Aug. 57) 

a) 

A: Lam the victim of an incurable drug habit. 
B: What habit? 
A: Eating. (Aug. 57) 

ee 8 

A: Wouldn’t it be far simpler to regard myself as a machine— 
as purely mechanical? 

B: You can’t. You have free will and you must exercise your 
will and choose. 

A: I said ‘myself I did not mean ‘me.’ 

B: Are you not yourself today? 

A: Let it be. As the Existentialists say ‘I am condemned to be 
free’? Is that what you mean? 

B: If you put it like that, yes. 

A: But then surely that suggests the view regarding myself as a 
purely mechanical machine, and the very statement that I (who am 
free) must exercise my will, must choose, must change world history 
(as the Marxists say), am condemned to be free (as the Existentialists 
say) shows that myself is a purely mechanical machine. 

B: So that’s what you believe. 
A: Did I say that? 
B: What then? 

A: My point was that whether you (or I) Argue that there is 
free will or that there is none the result is the same: determinism or 
mechanicalism. 

174 

Miscellanea 

B: But didn’t I just say: “So that’s what you believe?” 

A: Did I ever say that? I said that that is what any argument 
about freedom and will must come to. But what has that to do with 
belief? 

B: I don’t follow you. 

A: No. (Nov. 57) 

oF 

A: What don’t you believe in? 
B: This world. 

A: Why not. 

B: Because I know it. 

Worpbs 

intertwangledIerminous = furry 

erroriousa reverberose type 
immortalitarianoppositious 

professor of myopicsmoralysis (fr. moralising) 
Ceremoniacsacrilegion 

a drasm (n. fr. drastic)Anthropomorphia 

a coefficient (one good at teamwork) 
embrambled = caught up 

TODAY’s FALLACIES AND HALF-TRUTHS 

That it is possible to ascertain with certainty what is the happiness 
of the greatest number. 

Give everyone the necessities of life and all discontent will 
automatically vanish. 

‘The independent witness who is not committed to a side. 

The reality behind appearances. 

That every man knows what he wants and you have only to give it 
to him and he will live happily. 

That all men are equal in all respects. 

That all men are different in all respects. 

175 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

IMPRESSIONS 

1. [go out ona grey day in the rain. The rain beats on the body and 
soft clouds cover the sky. The eye cannot see into the clouds and 
the mind is busy with the bodily sensation of dropping rain. This I 
call the world. 

2. I go out on a cloudless midday. The overhead sun beams and 
shines and glares and burns in a pure hard blue enamel sky (the blue 
of heaven). The eye cannot see past the blue and the mind is busy 
with the bodily sensation of burning heat. (Hateful is the dark blue 
sky vaulted over the dark blue sea—said Tennyson.) This I call the 
lower heaven. 

3. I go out on a clear night at full-moon. The trees milk the 
white light from the air letting it drip and lie in pools on the 
ground. The moon hangs a curtain of half-light behind the biggest 
stars. Though the eye cannot see through the curtain, the mind is 
half quiet. This I call the higher heaven. 

4. I go out late on a clear moonless night, long after even the 
zodiacal light has sunk down. The sun is directly underfoot. There 
are only stars in the sky. The stars hard and sharp as spears, but 
have NO size (I know that even with the hugest telescope they 
subtend NO angle): and between the stars I see what is not there. It 
is quite plainly visible extended space: no feature neither with nor 
without atoms. The positive stars have no size at all; the negative 
void has infinite size. Neither upside down nor right way up I hang 
in that void neither in the middle nor near the edge. This, I shall 
call the external vertigo. 

5. I sit down in a room and consider a fugue. This I call the 
lower inner heaven. 

6, I sit down in a room and consider that in me there is that 
which can recognize a fugue and its structure. This I call the higher 
inner heaven. 

7. L sit down in a room, quiet and half dark and watch the act 
of breathing—the bodily sensation of air touching the tip of the 
nose: I experience sensing the bodily sensation at an interval of 
space. I can place the bodily sensation in space as sensed from the 
direction in which I am. But when I follow that direction back and 

176 

Miscellanea 

look for the “I,” then I am no longer there but in another place. I 
have no place in space. I see and sense space and the “things” in it 
from a place where I am not. Space is complete without “I” and 
there is no room for “I” in space at all. This I call the inner vertigo. 

CANTICLE 

‘The only one is the many; and many the ones: The only one that is 
the many is only one of the many. The only infinity is finiteness; 
and finite the infinities: 

The only infinity is finiteness; and finite the infinities: only 
that the infinity which is finite is infinitely finite. 

The only eternity is time; and temporal eternity: only the 
eternity which is temporal is temporarily eternal. 

The only permanence is the impermanent; and impermanent 
the permanencies: only the permanence which is impermanent is 
impermanently permanent. 

eo OF 

Only death lives for ever; and the life-everlasting is, death. 
Only life dies for ever; and the death-everlasting is life. The lifeless 
has died for ever: the deathless will live for 

ever. Is there another life? Of course, you are living it now. 

eo OF 

The Absolute receives absolution only from consciousness, and 
by that act its absoluteness is very particular. 

The Incomprehensible is only incomprehensible when 
comprehended as such: uncomprehended, it is comprehendible as 
incomprehensible. 

Do I know the ignorance of unknowledge, or am I ignorant of 
the knowledge of my ignorance? 

The most illusory of all illusions is the illusion that there is no 
illusion. 

What is certain? Probability. What is probable? Certainty. Can 
I doubt that I know with certainty my own doubt? 

177 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

To exist is to be condemned to freedom and to be free for 
condemnation. 

How to achieve in Christian Theism safety from the Sin 
Against the Holy Ghost? How to achieve in Marxist atheism the 
safety from becoming an Enemy of the People? 

Who can say that he is free as long as he is not freed from 
freedom? 

All religions are one: but which one? 

178 

FROM LETTERS TO VENERABLE NANAVIRA 

I 

About phenomena and being. I by no means disagree with your 
statement that what phenomena are is other phenomena. That 
description describes phenomena in terms of themselves (identified 
with being), which is, of course, perfectly correct—since there is 
nothing else in terms of which to describe them. Phenomena are 
being, being is phenomena. The two are one and the one are two 
(my description had the clause, if I remember rightly, that if they 
could be held to have a distinguishing peculiar characteristic it 
might be ... etc... 

The only thing I might alter now would be to say that “being is 
hidden” instead of “has nothing beyond it,” thus when the hidden 
being (“capable of appearing”) is disclosed it appears as a 
phenomenon. So while your description emphasizes the identity of 
the two, mine emphasizes the duality in the identity). But while 
phenomena and being—the two are identically one (phenomena are) 
at the same time we cannot dispense in thought and speech with 
either of the two, replacing either one entirely by the other, which 
since they are identical, is absurd (but the world is absurd). What is 
an identity? It is the essential oneness of two entities whose 
difference, if any, does not count. 

I underlined the words in “to be is to be phenomenal—i.e., “to 
appear or to be capable of appearing” (attributed by you to me as 
“my view”) because this raised the same difficulty as Whateley 
Carington’s ‘cognita and cognizables.’ But that which is “capable of 
appearing,” if it has not yet appeared, cannot be known to be either 
capable of appearing or incapable of appearing; or, if it is known as 
“capable of appearing” it is because it has already appeared as 
“capable of appearing”; consequently the distinction as a class 
founders in both cases. The phenomenon called (I think 
misleadingly) “capable of appearing” or “cognizable” in this sense 

179 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

(which might suggest that it exists independently of our knowledge 
of it) is, I think, more simply termable as a phenomenon that 
appears (present) in the mode of absence (temporal or spatial, etc.). 
I see the “capability” as a mode arising from tensions due to 
patterns of presences and absences in the different fields of the 
salayatana. But “phenomena capable of appearing” as a category 
opposed and extra to “appearing phenomena,” I regard as bogus, 
even if specious. The Realist/Idealist controversy by-passes this 
point. 

I love logicians and mathematicians. Also I regard Irrationalism 
(often called “Rationalism”) as no alternative to, or escape from, 
logic, but only a (futile) defiance of it in its own valid field, which is 
that of “bhava'> assumed” (like Satanism before god, perhaps), and it 
(the irrationality) falls entirely within logic’s own domain. Neither 
Logic nor Irrationality, as rational-or-irrational—anti-logic, are 
niyyanika.'© But within the all-extensive bhava-assumed, logic rules 
unquestionably and irrationality keeps the logicians awake and 
angry. 

A witticism (witty schism if you like) occurred to me yesterday 
about “necessity.” While the proverb speaks of “making a virtue of 
necessity,” Kant (with his “Categorical Imperative”) speaks of 
“making a necessity of virtue.” Now this raises a point about 
descriptions and errors therein, and fictions: Kant (and others since) 
claimed that human personality has a special faculty, a “moral eye”, 
which “sees” intuitively and directly (as the eye sees visually visible 
forms) what Ought to be Done. This I hold is not so since I find in 
myself no such faculty, only a certain sense of caution and 
expediency, which comes perhaps under judgment. This, then, I 
hold to be an outstanding example of a bogus description, and this 
kind of description I regard as potentially dangerous. 

With phenomena and being in the air, the word “essence” 
knocks at the door. “Essence” (from the verb esse, to be): a medieval 
logician’s concept, initiated by Aristotle (parallel to the Pali 
commentarial use of bhava), is used by logicians and philosophers 

8. Pali: ‘being’ 
6 2 Pali: ‘leading out’, ‘liberating’ 

180 

From Letters To Venerable Nanavira 

as a synonym) for “characteristic” (particular phenomenon) 
peculiar to an individual or to a class by which that individual or 
class is recognized to be itself. This ontic metaphor from subjective- 
objective being to purely-objective characteristic is a pun-by- 
metaphor of fundamental importance, and indispensably useful for 
those (Religions, Doctors and scientists, say) who need to employ 
the “Utraquistic Subterfuge” (which is so valuable for verbal 
presti(di)g(itation) e—remove what is in the ( ) and see what 
remains). But a characteristicphenomenon, called “essence” (le 
phenomene de l’étre), is then that of something which has that 
essence, and consequently, is not it (whether that “something” is 
regarded as a Kantian “Ding-an-sich” or as an Abhidhamma 
constellation-of-dhammas-with-no-self-substance, or what you will, 
makes no difference here): it is that special phenomenon by which I 
recognize what this which has it, is, and believe this to be what it 
itself is. Now this characteristic, by the utraquistic ontic metaphor 
of “essence” applied to it, renders it possible to appear to verbally 
externalized Being and so to objectivize it entirely. So it is now 
easier (apparently) to handle “existence” (that same thing’s Being) as 
just another external attribute, namely that thing’s (“quality-of 
existence”) predicatable of it. The fraud is now nearly complete; 
and if the logical copula is (the being assumed and agreed on as one 
of the basic assumptions of logic, and a logical constant) can only be 
passed off as quite divorced from being or existence with the 
mediation of the metaphor of “essence” externalized, as a 
characteristic and attribute, then we can forget about it, forget that 
it is the true verbal symbol for existential being, and forget that it 
contains the (hateful subjective) element of self-identification. This 
play with the “essence”-metaphor is possible precisely because of 
the actual existential miragic identity-relation of ambivalence 
between consciousness and being and between _ being-and- 
phenomena. This ambivalence which remains in the copula is 
anathema to logicians, and they seek any means to hide it away. So, 
now we have split being into two, tried to drain being away from 
the copula by means of the “essence”-metaphor, and now we can 
make believe that the copula is not really being at all (which is quite 
untrue) since it remains being on the verbal plane; and if it did not, 

181 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

statements would not correspond at all to life, and, logic could not 
possibly ever have any connection with existence at all), and so the 
copula can be exempted from all questions and analysis when we 
are investigating being and its structure, and what is more, this 
investigation can be handed over entirely to logic, which, since the 
copula (its constant) exhibits this most serious and crippling error: 
cogito ergo sum / “if cogitatio is, then esse.” 

(3) The Form of the Statement: I believe it is legitimate to 
paraphrase “AB implies A” by “If AB, then A”, and to take them as 
equivalent. If that is correct,’ then, in their second form, the 
statement looks superficially to be similar in form to “imasmiz sati 
idam hoti” expressed in the form “If this is, then that is” or the 
cogito expressed in the form “If I think then I am.” But it seems to 
me there are these most important differences: (1) In “AB implies 
A” (or “If AB, then A”) the individual matures of A and B are 
completely unimportant so long as they are merely different and 
suitably combinable and they are thus level one with the other. But 
on the contrary, in the cogito (where the first person is unique) and 
in imasmim sati idam hoti (which is only legitimately expandable 
into the Paticcasamuppada formula) the natures of the concepts 
employed are of fundamental importance; for the cogito would be 
valueless if it did not specifically employ the unique first person, 
and consciousness and being; and likewise imasmim sati idam hoti 
whose expanded from (it is not like a Law of Thought a quelconque 
generalization) the concepts’ particular natures are of absolutely 
fundamental importance; for it includes the constituents necessary 
for asmi-mano (the first person singular “I”) and consciousness, and 
being. So while “AB implies A” is, in its form, quite general and 
impersonal, both the cogito and imasmim sati are inseparable from 
the special unique concepts they incorporate. 

(4) Self-Identification within the Cogito and the Statement. The 
ontological act-ol-self-identifying is quite differently treated in the 
Cogito and the Statement. The Cogito implies “When I think, then I 
am self-identifying self identical on return “(making be)” while the 
Statement implies “When A and B are combined then A remains 
unchanged on return to, or repetition of, A”. Or the Cogito says “I 
am conscious whenever I am my self-identity” but the Statement 

From Letters To Venerable Nanavira 

says “Self-identity is always valid”, which is something quite 
different. The Cogito shows my self-identity of being as contingent 
upon consciousness as subjectivity; but the Statement only declares 
that the self-identity of A does not change on a return to self (A). 
(And here I remember that the “invariant of a transformation” on 
“Invariance in transformation”, as the third characteristic of the 
sankhata, is, such as it is described, subject to its relation within the 
wider description “Avijja-paccaya sankhdra ... upadana-paccaya 
bhavo). 1 certainly agree with you that it is dangerous rationalist 
mauvaise foi to doubt what is certain (just as it is dangerous 
religious irrationalist mawvaise foi to believe what is uncertain), and 
I think we agree in regarding the Cogito as a true description and as 
unquestionably certain and verifiable by reflexion; and likewise the 
Paticca-samuppada formula. But I do not, for the reason stated, 
accept “AB implies A” on this footing at all. That I, when I cognize, 
identify I do not doubt; but that an identification made can never be 
doubted I do most certainly non admit. I] est dons mon étre question 
de mon étre. 

(6) Certainty. I do not know how far we agree on this matter. 
“AB implies A” assumes that A remains unchanged in the 
repetition, in the return to it by self identification; but how can I be 
certain that it has not changed meanwhile (thitassa afftathattam 
panmayati)? And if it has, then “AB does not imply A” is 
appropriate. For myself, I am certain that I cognize and that I am, 
but Iam not certain what it is that I cognize, or what it is that Iam. 
Whether I am myself or not is quite open to doubt even in ordinary 
usage, since I can on one day be “quite myself,” on another “not 
quite myself,” and on another “Quite beside myself.” I am certain 
that when I see, that I see; but though I identify what I see 
(recognize it), I am not certain what it is that I see; hence the 
constant question “What is this that I see?” which is always liable to 
be reopened however well answered. [am certain that “I am doing” 
but my identification of “what I am doing is uncertain. True it (the 
other cases too) is, or seems, in pure immediacy, certain what I am 
doing; but any pure immediacy is only part of a wider immediacy, 
and so on in infinite hierarchy; so that what I am doing now, 
namely (certainly) writing this letter in one immediacy, is part of 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

spending-a-day-at-Polgasduva,!”? which is part of living-at-the- 
Hermitage, and so on, but ad infinitum—but N.B., the “infinite 
here” is “indefinite”, so while I am unquestionably certain that “I 
am doing”, I am only relatively certain what I am doing in any 
immediacy, and I am quite uncertain what it is that I am doing (in 
its self-identity), since that recedes always into the infinitely 
indefinite. 

(6) Infinity: While the recourse to infinity gives maximum 
freedom of movement in proportion to the number of facts of a 
situation relegated to infinity and thus made indefinite, yet this 
infinity, owing to its indefiniteness, renders what is infinitized 
absolutely ineffectual existentially. Existence partakes of both finite 
and infinite, being the synthesis of both. Now grammar, though so 
greatly despised, is sometimes instructive: and here we find the verb 
has its infinite mood, in which it is depersonalized, relegated to a 
position not even admitting potentiality, and consequently quite 
neutralized as regards any effective (verbal) action on its part. It is 
perhaps one of the weaknesses of Berkeley’s formula “esse est 
percipi” that it is stated in grammatical infinitives (esse, percipi,) and 
so is depersonalized and abstracted from existence. If he had, like 
Descartes, worked in the finite form, the indicative, he might have 
noticed some of its deficiencies “I am, therefore I am perceived” 
does not claim the unquestioned recognition as an adequate valid 
description of reflexion that cogito ergo sum does; it then appears as 
étre vu, which invites completion, owing to its one-sided passivity, 
by involving, say God, by whom I am perceived in order that I can 
be. Infinity enters at once with double reflexion, and I think that 
conscious reflexion is not reducible below double reflexion. But esse 
est percipi forgets the finite percipiens in my definite finity. “AB 
implies A,” if considered in this light, can only belong to (side with) 
the infinite type of expression, and never to the finite, and so is 
abstract and ineffectual, though, of course, invaluably useful within 
the limits of infinity. 

(7) Law: If the Statement is regarded as a Law of Thought, then 
it is not a description: then the whole Legal Mode (derived as it is 

17. The Sinhalese name for the “Island Hermitage” where the author 

lived. (Ed.) 

184. 

From Letters To Venerable Nanavira 

from the manner of formulating laws from cases (as in English 
Common Law) is implied; for the mental machinery is the same, 
wherever laws are formulated. A court case, with the evidence and 
verdict or judgment, is comparable to a description, and any law 
formulated {rom it is comparable to a law abstracted from a 
description (or set of descriptions). Much more might be said on 
this, but I refrain I only remark that I regard the Cogito as a valid 
description {ree from errors (even if a little incomplete). I regard 
“AB implies A” as a statement of a law abstracted from (some 
description or descriptions not recorded). As such, it is on a 
different footing, and in a different mode; it is abstract (and in the 
legal sense arbitrary). If the two are confused (I do not say they are), 
it seems to me a mistake. 

In conclusion, if you mean (as I take it you do) that the Laws of 
Thought and “AB implies A” are objectively valuable witnesses to 
how being is maintained (rather as instruments of torture are 
valuable witnesses to the methods of the Holy Inquisition by which 
the Catholic Church maintains itself on occasion) then I agree with 
you. But if it is suggested (and I am not supposing that you suggest 
this at all) that they are subjectively acceptable as instruments for 
use in analysing being and, as such, are themselves subjectively 
niyyanika, then I dissent. What I am not clear about is what you 
mean when you say that a reflecting logician sees “AB implies A” 
on reflexion and no error can arise beyond error of description. 
(Grd February 1959) 

I 

The trouble about discussing wind, I find (1 here refer to 
discussions on this subject ‘fra me e me’) is that (a) they always 
ramify fantastically and (b) one always finds that one has not been 
talking about mind (either mano or vififiana) but only about nama- 
ripa. The committee called Buddhaghosa Thera made a parallel 
most grave and fundamental error in their Visuddhimagga’s 14" 
Chapter when they set out to describe the virtnanakkhandha 
second, next to the rapakkhandha, and before vedana, satifia and 
sankhara (that is why the description of the last two is so thin there, 

185 

A Thinker’s Noteboo! 

because it is these two, not vifividna that has been described second 
under viftiana and so there is nothing intelligible left to say about 
them beyond mere repetition). This is quite contrary to the Suttas, 
which never change the order for the vital reason that it is only 
after you have exhausted everything positive by the first four that 
virifiana remains (MN 140) and that is indescribable except on the 
basis of that due to which it arises (MN 38), or on the basis of 
nama-ripa (MN 109) which it is—not (in the mode of not-being- 
what-it-is-and-being-what-it-is-not), and unlike the other four, it is 
the only infiniteness among them (@afica—see the four aruppas) 
and so, phenomenologically it is the pure negative (“purer” than 
the first negation, dkasa the four drupas are Absolute Negation). 
From this you may safely infer that I quite agree with your earlier 
“glass-shelves” theory, with the reservation that an infinite 
hierarchy of infinitely extensive glass shelves is (are) 
indistinguishable from nothing except dialectically (what, by the way, 
does 002 signify mathematically, if anything?). This latter I regard 
as important. For if the partcakkhandha are assumed (upadinna)— 
and if they are absolutely not assumed there is no talking and no 
talked-about-then the assumption (consumption on the physical- 
material level) must, by its nature, be a dialectical assumption. But 
since, fundamentally all dialectic (which—in decision = anxiety— 
fear = pain) is unpleasant, one side of the basic dialectics has to be 
closed, more compulsively so in proportion to their existential 
importance (the consumption of food being one of the basic aspects), 
and is closed unilaterally by tanha and avijja. The other side, being 
left open, then becomes the object of faith, which, when pure, 
believes absolutely it is not open to dialectic. 

Here a further train of thought is, I find, waiting at the station 
with steam up ready to depart. Whereto? Let us see. You know my 
view of the necessary organic relation of faith-ignorance (saddha- 
avijja) in the puthwjana, when faith supplements, in action, the 
deficiency in knowledge (fidna) truncated by ignorance, and so 
makes action (kamma) not only possible but inescapable: Well, my 
train now seems to be heading in the following direction: Given 
faith’s intimacy with ignorance (take this in the worst sense, if you 
like), faith only functions well (as ‘bonne foi’) when ignored (perhaps 

186 

From Letters To Venerable Nanavira 

the mythico-psychological term for this would be “in the 
Unconscious,” which, otherwise translated, would mean “in 
overlooked behaviour patterns as regards the Other’—but 
subjectively, it means “in pure, unreflective action,” I think). But in 
proportion as faith is brought up by reflexion into full ignorance 
governed cognizance (i.¢., knowledge of the limited, I-positional, 
kind that must accompany the basically still unbroken-up faith- 
ignorance ménage) it either dies and turns into honest doubt, or it 
lives on as mauvaise foi. I say “it dies and becomes doubt” because it 
is an easily verifiable fact that if one knows (in this way) that one is 
acting on faith alone, one thereby becomes inhibited (simultaneous 
knowledge of this type is destructive of faith) and the action collapses 
(e. g., miracles (?), or Ogden & Richards’ “Centipede” or stage-fright 
or ordinary straight forward doubt, as, for example, one’s first real 
attempt at swimming, etc.) This, I take it, is because action is only 
an aspect or a function of faith-ignorance. (When action is analyzed 
into paticcasamuppada-nirodha, saddha vanishes and avijja ceases). 
The first three paths are then necessarily paradoxical and represent 
the opening of fundamental dialectics, of which two recognizably 
basic ones are consciousness/unconsciousness and being/non-being. 
It is these that indicate mirodha, I take it. The sotapanna’s 
aveccappasada as “confidence due to undergoing” (adhigama-saddha) 
is thus properly faith which is no more faith (MN 47) and owing to 
his loss of a measure of ignorance, his knowledge “ana is no more 
knowledge as the simple opposite of ignorance. Confidence and 
understanding (pa7i7id) are now both one and two until the Arahant’s 
revolution terminates the absurdity (see also MN 95). The train of 
thought has now stopped. Where are we now? Where are the station 
name-boards? What does it mean? 

[think you are quite right to bring out the fact that the Buddha 
while giving definitions, never gives a single definition as absolute, 
and all really basic ideas; like the saccani are most delicately 
balanced, too, in the matter of negation. If any single definition 
were absolutely valid determinism must result, and then no 
brahmacariya is possible for the ending of suffering. (26'" June 1959) 

187 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Il 

. There are no absolute opposites, Complexity denies the possibility 
of anything arising alone, since an event a always complex. If any 
thing or quality (is) discriminated (as) the opposite of another, each 
will be associated with other qualities that are not opposites, thus 
apparent-oppositeness is only partial. Perhaps if a complete 
opposite is not an impossibility, and were found, something 
frightful would happen. 

. What is said and thought about anything is always reflexion. 
Without reflexion nothing comes to light. The moment I say ‘Iam 
doing this,’ I am reflecting, not ‘doing this.’ 

.« Complementarity (a la Bohr), i.e., any description that claims 
complete coherence is incomplete by omitting to deal with 
incoherence. This appears in the “complementarity” of wave- 
particle descriptions of the percept-bodies called electrons, and 
again in the ajjhattabahiddha aspects of the subjectively-experienced 
and objectively-perceived body. Perhaps this principle shadows 
every generalization, the more general, the closer. 

. Continuity-discontinuity: There must be same recondite 
fundamental tie between the (as it were) seunction of the Quantum 
theory and the converse continuity, the flow, that is an undeniable 
experience (giddiness and nausea). The simile that comes to mind is 
that of my walking up a down-going escalator: I proceed by steps 
(my step-function or quanta), which conforms to the shape of the 
flow, but the steps flow against me and, as it were, fuse my acts. By 
this means I have to step and flow simultaneously to stay put. (10' 
September 1957) 

188 

Preamble 

The assertion is made here that the event of observing at its simplest 
must of necessity be complex. Without comparison (confrontation) 
no observation could be said to have been made at all. For (a) 
without simultaneous (as it were ‘spatial’) confrontation of 
difference in the observed (“This—not that”) no observation could 
be said to happen at all since there would be no way of 
distinguishing the alleged observation from non-observation; and 
(b) without difference between observed and observer (observable 
by successive, as it were, ‘temporal’ comparison as “difference in 
the new observed”) no observation could be happening either, since 
the alleged observer could not be distinguished from the observed. 
An “observed that is indistinguishable from the non-observed” will 
be regarded as unconstitutable as likewise an “observer with no 
observed,” an “observed with no observers” and an “observer and 
observed indistinguishable inter se.” (Fragment) 

A. The Division 

1. Unless there is division between observer and observed, no 
difference can be compared and no observation can take place. 

2. Unless what is observed by the observer is itself divided 
(from what is not observed), no comparison can be made (and 
without comparison in the observed, no difference can be found 
between the observed and not observed) 

3. The simplest, minimum, elementary division in the observed 
can be called the “affirmed/denied/” the “this/ not that,” “yes/no.” 
Since each counterpart excludes the other (so regarded), they can be 
symbolized by the signs + and —. The two elements of the 
observed, so divided I shall call adjacent to each other), and 
observed as such. 

4. Division thus appears as a necessary factor (sine qua non) of 
observation: division (a) between observer and observed, and (b) in 

189 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

the observed. The observer, so divided from the observed, I shall 
call also adjacent (to the observed), but unobserved. Since observer 
and observed are also mutually exclusive (but not in the same way 
as the two divisions of the observed) they can be respectively 
symbolized by 0 and 1. Each is, in fact, ‘0’ in terms of the other— 
the ‘divided’ and the ‘undivided’ and my equating ‘0’ with the 
observer is an arbitrary, if convenient, decision of a choice, which 
cannot be escaped if a statement is to be made—(it could be made 
conversely). 

5. The observed, therefore, in order to be observable at all, 
must appear to the potential observer at least as a duality. (N. B.: a 
“potential observer without any observed” and an “as-yet- 
unobserved observable” are convenient fictions at this stage, but 
will vanish). The two divisions of the observed I shall call the 
elements of the observable, and these together with the potential 
observer I shall call the elements of observation. 

6. The division in the observable allows the differentiation of 
“this/not-that” = +/-. The division between the observer and the 
observable is expressible either as the difference of nature, namely, 
undividedness/ dividedness, or as the observability of the 
observable and the unobservability of the observer: the observer 
can observe the observable but cannot observe himself. (The 
objection will be made that all this ‘observer-cum-observed’ is being 
observed by some other observer, e. g. the writer of this paragraph. 
That is legitimate, but it must wait for treatment till later (§ 20).) 

Here only a mental note need be made that in symbolizing the 
observer by ‘o’ I have intended to signify also an essential 
incompleteness, which the unavoidable introduction of the observer 
(with his comparing) brings automatically with him. The 
description of the situation is thus structurally (skeletally) 
“completed” by the addition of “nothing” (the observer = 0), but is 
nevertheless still incomplete since it still “lacks nothing” (an 
observer of the observer = oXoX...); the mere ramification by 
division/ confrontation in the observed ‘completes nothing’ in this 
sense. The apposition 0:1 is asymmetrical. Observation is originally 
asymmetrical. 

The Essential Relation in Observing 

B. The Constitution of the Observed as a field or Unity 
7. The ‘observable’ (+1; -1), which, to be so, must be divided (§ 2), 
is only constituted as a unity when the confrontation of the 
divisions is constituted by the presence of the observer (‘o’) in the 
Event of Observation (in which Event also the potential observer is 
constituted qua observer). This divided unity thus constituted I 
shall call the observed field (+1 X -1). 

8. But, for this constitution to be effective, it is necessary (sine 
qua non,) that the observer should be unmistakably different by 
nature from the observed (i.e., unobserved) and that the two 
divisions of the observed should be unmistakably different by 
nature from each other and, in a different way, from the observer 
(+1 x-1, 0). This can be stated, for convenience, spatially as follows 
the constituted duality + <->—cannot be so constituted as a line 
(of two points) except from a standpoint not in the same line 
(expressible as ‘o’ in terms of that line). This “linearity” of the 
observed field constituted from outside I shall call Rectangularity 
(the “Rectangularity of a straight line”). 

9. But in order that what is essentially different in the Event of 
Observation may not absolutely fly apart, it is also equally 
necessary (sine qua non) that all three constituents of the Event have 
something in common to bind them. That, in fact, is ‘nothing.’ The 
‘nothing’ that the divisions of the observed have in common is 
their not being the observer (‘o’), who while observing that they 
have ‘nothing’ in common with each other, has ‘nothing’ in 
common with them. This state of being bound together 
the divided observed field as a unity I shall call Conjunctive 
Adjacency. 

10. The constitutive power of the observer in binding the 
observed from a (rectangular) standpoint outside it (in virtue of 
which he is ‘nothing’ in terms of it) I shall call Disjunctive Adjacency. 

11. The Event of Observation, with its three elements, so 
minimally constituted (by divisions and binding) I shall call the 
Relation. (There is no relation unless the two observed elements are 
constituted as a unity by the third element, the observer, who is 
‘nothing to them.’ Therefore Relation has a minimum of three 
elements sine qua non). 

191 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

12. That the three elements of the Relation ‘have nothing in 
common’ makes it incorrect to say that any one has an ‘absolute 
opposite’ within the Relation. 

13. At this point I shall note that there are four possible 
confrontations (neither less nor more) to be made by the observer 
in the observed field. They can be symbolized as follows: 

+X 4, $X-, -X4, oX-. 

‘These can be regarded as four unoriented pairs, four “states of 
the observed field” (spatially simultaneous). Their stated order—an 
order of simultaneous pattern not in succession—is arbitrary (b 
only one of the possible permutations). But without this 
arbitrariness no order can be stated. It is not possible to invert any 
of them since they (as yet) lack the orientation between themselves 
that would make any inversion observable by comparison (+ x + 
inverted is undistinguishable from + X +, not inverted). “Change” 
and “alternative” have not so far emerged; only “and” and 
“difference” have emerged (space is implied, but not time). 
Observation, as the Event (but not an event), has now been 
constituted. 

(The balance of the manuscript page has been left blank (for 
addition?), with the following pencilled note:) 

Asymmetrical observer and observed are not “equal and 
opposite.” 

C. Change in the Constituted Observed Field 

14. But a calamity occurs. If this Event, so carefully constituted, is 
expressed symbolically in the terms I took care to choose, it must 
appear as follows: +1 > -1) X 0, (But, as everyone knows, the 
result of that is ‘o’ ! How absurd! My sums must be wrong or else 
there is No Event). 

15. The sums are not wrong, and there is an Event. But the act 
of the constitution of the Event is also the act of its annihilation. 
While there is, it seems, no constituting it otherwise, the 
constitution automatically reduces it (the Event) again to nothing. 
Now ‘nothing’ is ‘o’, and ‘o’ is the observer. But the observer 
cannot be an observer without an observed field. Consequently the 
act of annihilation must be, cannot help being, an act of 

192 

The Essential Relation in Observing 

reconstitution. And so on ... (in retrospect as, it seems also, in 
prospect). (his “reconstitution” from ‘o‘ cannot be expressed in 
mathematical terms; for mathematically a specific proposition, once 
reduced to zero by multiplication with ‘o’ cannot be resurrected). 
This “... constitution/ annihilation/reconstitution ...” (can it be 
conceived as a flow?) I shall call Successive Adjacency. (Time as well as 
space is now implied: and what cannot happen in time & space? 

16. This is another way of saying that “space without time is 
impossible,” since, by its being observed, it is simultaneously 
asserted and denied. Another decision is necessary. And, 
consequently, it follows that time has no nature of its own beyond 
that of the division between and succession of adjacent space. 

17. With simple constitution (up to § 13 end) the observational 
Relation I have described was only a generality, as The event, and no 
alternative comparison was possible. This could only be effected by 
another division, namely, by the introduction of succession (§ 14) 
expressible as ‘change or difference in time.’ By this means, the four 
pairs (see § 13) become oriented with regard to each other. This has 
rectangularity to the ‘conjunctive adjacency’ (§ 9) since it is 
expressible as 0 in terms of them. 

18. The introduction of succession transforms the generality of 
The Event into a plurality of events, and adds to ‘simultaneity’ also 
alternativity, adds ‘or’ to ‘and.’ Consequently, while (in §§ 7-12) 
only simultaneity was possible as, for instance, “yes; no” (yes and 
no), now the alternative “yes”, “no” (yes or no) is possible. 

19. At this point the four confrontations earlier stated as 
unoriented pairs (§ 12) can be stated as successively oriented pairs as 
follows: 

++-- 

tide 
4-4 

(The ‘pairs’ are now oriented, or, as it were, ‘charged.’) But 
whereas earlier (§ 12) the event was ‘fixed’ arbitrarily as to the order 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

of the four pairs though inversion made no difference, now, while 
the order can be changed, inversion makes a difference. 

ys 
bat 
+ + 
etc. 

Consequently any statement of an event must, further, be an 
arbitrary instance of (one of the permutations of) the Event. This 
arbitrary element, which enters in as soon as the division comes 
about (§ 4) I shall call the dialectic. 

20. However, conversely, whenever any arbitrary expression 
of the event is stated, the structure of the Event necessitates certain 
consequents and excludes others. This I shall call the logic. 

The Dialectic and the Logic imply one another (they ‘coin- 
cide’ and are ‘at war,’, but they are never ‘congruent’ and no ‘final 
peace’ is possible). The Dialectic is the “if” (if this statement of The 
Event is made) while the Logic is the ‘then’ (then it follows that the 

pattern of orientation will be this, not that); but the ‘if’ is arbitrary 
and ‘precedes’ the ‘then.’ 

Arbitrariness (ofmode)=the particular expression — (which 
automatically excludes thealternative) 

Element =the two parts of the observed,and the 
observer 
Adjacency =conjunctive adjacency of the twoparts of the 

observed, anddisjunctive adjacency of 
observerand observed 

Relation =the triple relation between theduality of the 
observed field andthe observer 

Event of Observation =the mutual interconstitution ofobserver and 
observed 

Division =(rectangularity) 

D. The Bracketing of the Observer ‘o’ 

21. The four alternatives (§ 19) can be interchanged, and, being 
oriented, can also be turned upside down. With the constitution of 

194. 

The Essential Relation in Observing 

the observed field (§§ 7-13) the confrontation of “and” takes place, 
while with the annihilation and reconstitution (§ 14) the succession 
of “or” becomes possible. With the possibility of alternative, 
confrontations in Successive Observations the question arises, 
“What of Successive Observers?’ Now, while the basic division in 
the observed field as +:- leads to its ramification in the presence of 
the observer (‘o’), no such ramification takes place in the observer, 
who is ‘nothing’ and, whatever is ‘done to’ nothing, may be -o 
remains ‘o’. (I shall leave aside for the moment the proposition - 
'= ~), The consequence of this is that, in order to multiply the 
observer I must describe him in terms of his observed, since no 
other way is possible, and this would seem to be a fiction. 

22. The observer does not appear in his observed field in any 
way at all, which ‘lacks nothing’ (§ 7), which is why he is 
symbolized by ‘o.’ While he is everywhere, while he is absolutely 
essential, he ‘does not count’ at all. Whether he is one or many it is 
impossible to tell except from the field or fields that are being 
observed. But this anticipates. Consequently, while his singularity 
or plurality may be a matter for consideration in an inquiry into his 
nature, in an inquiry into the nature of the observed he can be 
disregarded (so long as I remember that there I learn nothing about 
him). I shall therefore, for the moment at least, put him in brackets 
(‘o’) and forget him (remembering, of course, that I have forgotten 
him). 

This is what all Objective Science claims to do (and often 
forgets to do) and for which admiration is commonly expected. 
(The results of this I shall call ‘Solalterism’ or the ‘Science of the 
Subject leaving himself out of his calculations’). Since He counts for 
zero in the observed, which is not observed without him, he can 
easily be reintroduced. It is, of course, the converse of the opposite 
procedure, where results are usually condemned without trial as 
detestable and are commonly called solipsism’ or that of the 
‘madman who has shut himself up in, an impenetrable 
‘blockhouse.’ [See § 369] 

Here the manuscript ends with a blank page carrying only the 
chapter heading: 

195 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

E, The Ramification of the Observed 

(The following text, obviously belonging to the preceding treatise 
was found in a different file among the late Author’s posthumous 
papers. The sheet was not paginated and had no paragraphing 
linking it with the above treatise.) 

Existence is an operation. Operation comes into being with a 
leap, and at once extends back to infinity and forward to infinity, 
yet with the personal horizon that conceals both infinities. 

The necessity for the observed duality (+1, -I) to be in relation 
with an observer (0), in order to exist implies: 

(i) that the observer (0) has perpendicularity to the observed 
(+1, -D, 

(ii) that spatially the observer has no status (=0) in terms of the 
observed (+I, -1), 

(iii) that temporally the observer (=o) is structurally related to 
(=multiplied with = added to) the observed (+I, -I) and so 
spatially annihilates it by introducing change as temporalization, 

(iv) that existentially (consciously) that observer (=0), having 
annihilated the observed (=+I, -I) must reconstitute it (he, the 
observer, cannot exist as o—cannot ‘non-exist’"—except against the 
observed), immediately reconstitutes the observed (as thus 
reconstitutable = +I or +I), 

(v) that in the reconstitution of the observable (+1 or #1) by 
the observer (0), a choice must be exercised whether the observable 
is to be constituted as this or that alternative (ie., + or—). N.B., the 
term “observable” refers to the just-annihilated observed, neither 
more nor less, 

(vi) this unavoidable choice exercised in the reconstitution is 
arbitrary. Once exercised the world is determined logically, but 
subject to immediate annihilation. 

ok oe 

The Essential Relation in Observing 

Motion is spatial (change is temporal) 

Motion existentially establishes space. Change _existentially 
establishes time. In space-time, when no motion is observed there is 
no time, and where no change is observed there is no space. 

Just as motion is relative ie., it is impossible (purely 
existentially) to ascribe absolute motion (or stationariness) to any 
body (acceleration introduces features other than motion), so too 
change is relative, i.e., it is impossible to ascribe absolute change or 
stability to any state. The “absolutely motionless” and the 
“absolutely unchanging” (whether temporary or ‘eternal’) depend 
as such on consciousness functioning with the unique “I.” (The 
consequence seems to be that all are relative.) 

197 

PATHWAYS OF BUDDHIST THOUGHT 

BUDDHISM: A RELIGION OR A PHILOSOPHY? 

Sometimes the question is heard: “Is Buddhism a religion or a 
philosophy?” And sometimes the answer comes readily: “It is a 
religion.” “But why?” “Well isn’t religion a matter of observances? 
And the Eightfold Path is largely observance, with Right Speech 
and so on. So Buddhism is a religion, like any other.” Or it may 
come just as readily: “It is not a religion; it is a philosophy.” “Why?” 
“Because it doesn’t rely on blind faith but emphasises 
understanding. It is the way of Reason. And isn’t Right View 
philosophy?” Or someone may say: “It is neither a religion nor a 
philosophy; it is an ethico-philosophical system.” Who is right? Are 
they all right, some right, or none? 

We may have read somewhere that religion is a matter of 
emotions and that philosophy is rational. If we fly to the 
dictionaries for help, we may well come away in this case more 
uncertain than before, as to define “Buddhism,” “religion,” and 
“philosophy” from the dictionaries is no easy matter. (But if we 
once begin to inquire from them what exactly the word “is” 
implies, we shall soon find ourselves in a pretty tangle, as anyone 
can see for themselves if they would like to try.) 

But if we are not sure what we mean by religion or philosophy 
(let alone the word “is”), can we attempt to answer the question at 
all? Suppose we do agree on a meaning for those two words; are we 
right in supposing that the question is rightly put, and put in such a 
way that some correct answer is possible if it can be found? 

Are, in fact, all religions and philosophies each just a religion 
and a philosophy among a crowd, and is Buddhism necessarily one 
among this crowd? What then would be the unique Olympian 
point of view, able to survey all those religions and philosophies, 
and able to class them and pigeon-hole them so readily and neatly? 

198 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

There used to be a recognized type of question in ancient 
Greece which committed the answerer equally, whether he replied 
affirmatively or negatively. One was “Do you use a thick stick 
when you beat your wife? Answer yes or no.” Now, whether the 
answer was “Yes” or “No,” the retort was “So you do beat your 
wife, then.” There are many questions of that type, and some of 
them not at all evidently so. 

Why not pause (there is no hurry) before plumping for a one- 
sided answer, and take a quick glance at the way in which the 
Buddha handles and presents his whole teaching. 

One thing among many others to be noticed here is that he is 
careful to spread a met with which to intercept all speculative views. 
This is the Brahmajala, the “Divine Net,” which as the first 
discourse of the whole Sutta Pitaka forms as it were a kind of filter 
for the mind; or to change the analogy, a tabulation by whose 
means (if rightly used) all speculative views can be identified, traced 
down to the fallacy or unjustified assumption from which they 
spring, and neutralized. This Net, in fact, classifies all possible 
speculative views (rationalist or irrationalist) under a scheme of 
sixty-two types. 

These 62 types are not descriptions of individual philosophies 
of other individual teachers contemporary with the Buddha (a 
number of those are mentioned as well elsewhere in the Suttas), but 
are the comprehensive net (after revealing the basic assumptions on 
which these speculative views all grow) with which to catch any 
wrong viewpoints that can be put forward. (Ultimately, these must 
all be traceable to the contact of self-identification in some form, 
however misinterpreted, but that cannot be gone into here.) 

But why bring in this here, it may well be asked. Because, 
instead of accepting the question “Is Buddhism a religion or a 
philosophy?” and attempting an answer straight off, we can step 
back for a moment. We can ask ourselves if, by replying “It is a 
philosophy,” we may not be making out that the Buddha was 
actually teaching one of the types of wrong view catchable in the 
Divine Net, against which that net should protect us. Then the 
Buddha denounces ritualism (silabbata-paramasa) as a vain waste of 
time bound to lead to disappointment. If we take practice of rites to 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

be a religion, or unjustified and unverifiable emotional beliefs, to 
then say “Buddhism is a religion” is to imply that Buddhism teaches 
the very rite-ridden blindness of gullible credulity that the Buddha 
himself so plainly denounces. 

There is, of course, no end to the arguments that can be 
churned out on both sides. The dialectic goes on oscillating with no 
resolution, till cut short by sheer weariness, or till some eloquent 
plea lulls us into thinking the matter is settled once and for all. Or 
we may just accept one side and forget about it for the time. But it 
will be reopened again for sure sooner or later, and the dialectic will 
resume its pendulum-swing. With the best will in the world, 
though, and the most tireless patience and brilliant dialectic skill, is 
there really anywhere to go, any solution to be found, on these 
lines? What are we to do, then? 

In the Anguttara Nikaya, the Buddha divides questions into 
four kinds. Some can be answered unilaterally (yes or no). Some 
have to be analysed before answering. Others must be dealt with by 
a counter-question (making the questioner produce material out of 
himself that shows him how things are). And lastly there are some 
that cannot be answered at all. (They are like the one above about 
thick and thin sticks, for they make the answerer affirm an 
assumption, whatever he replies.) These must be entirely set aside. 

Now a question, as long as it remains a question, is a dialectic; 
and when it is answered, the dialectic is unilaterally resolved. 

In his fourfold classification of questions (dialectics), the 
Buddha may be taken to be communicating how to treat dialectics. 
There are two forms of communication. They have been called the 
“didactic” and the “existential.” The first says, “This is like this; this 
is what has to be done,” while the second tends to set forth the 
basic elements of a situation and leave it to the other to discover for 
himself the act-of-discovery that can be made on the basis of those 
elements set forth. Didactically one can tell someone how to cook a 
dish by communicating the recipe, but the satisfying of hunger, the 
discovery of cooking, and how good the dish is in the eating, can 
only be communicated existentially. It must be lived. 

Now to return to the four types of questions and ways of 
communicating answers, as communicated to us by the Buddha: 

200 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

first, any question is a dialectic. The first type of question is 
answerable didactically. It is the kind of dialectic where both sides 
are already evident, which can and ought to be resolved by a 
unilateral answer (the authority for such a resolution being always 
accurate observation with out forgetting what has been accurately 
observed). Examples of such unilateral decisions would be: 
choosing giving and not avarice; choosing kindness, not hate or 
anger; choosing unilateral keeping of the five precepts unbroken 
(since the Buddha observed that breaking them entails pain, such 
being the observable nature of existence for a Buddha who sees how 
it is), and so on. The highest form in which this unilateral decision 
is expressed is in the form of the Noble Eightfold Path, in choosing 
the Right and rejecting the Wrong. (Regarded in this way, the Path 
appears not as an observance, a rationalist scheme or a duty, but as 
a practical way to end suffering.) This is a didactic communication 
which communicates the unilateral resolution of a dialectic for a 
clear reason without mystification. 

The second type of question (that answerable after analysis) 
can be regarded as a dialectic, one side of which is hidden or partly 
hidden, both sides of which need bringing clearly to light, and one 
whose ambiguity should be displayed didactically. Whether it can 
then be answered, or partly answered, unilaterally is here of 
secondary importance. The important thing is not to “buy a pig in 
a poke” by answering unilaterally a question one has not yet fully 
understood. The doxbleness of the dialectic involved, until it has 
been brought to light by analysis, lurks concealed, can be harmful, 
and mislead. Such a question would be “Does the Buddha condemn 
all asceticism?” Before answering, the main debatable points 
involved should be clearly displayed. 

The third type has to be dealt with by a counter-question. It 
makes the questioner dig out of his own mind the elements that 
prompt him to ask it. These, when thus brought to light by himself, 
give him the opportunity to discover how he went wrong in 
formulating his question. He can discover for himself that the 
supposed dialectic of his question is fictitious and that the truth lies 
elsewhere. This is not a didactic communication at all but an 
existential one. The questioner is not told didactically what to do; 

201 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

he is existentially given the opportunity to discover for himself. 
(What is discovered may be didactically communicable, but the act- 
of-discovery is not.) The Buddha’s teaching (that of the Four 
Truths together) is at heart an existential communication in this 
sense. (An example would be the “Ganaka Moggallana Sutta,” MN 
107.) 

The fourth type of question, which must be avoided, is that 
which traps the answerer, either purposely or unwittingly, into 
affirming an unjustifiable assumption, whether he answers 
negatively or affirmatively. (It is well recognized in logic how a 
denial necessarily implies the prior affirmation of what is denied or 
negated.) The best examples of such questions are this set of four: 
“Does the Tathagata exist after death?” “Does he not exist after 
death?” “Does he both exist and not exist after death?” “Does he 
neither exist nor not exist after death?” None of these the Buddha 
consented to answer. “Was it because he was an agnostic?” some 
people have asked. But that very question shows that the existential 
communication has failed in the questioner. For besides the fact 
that to describe the Buddha (the Awakened One) as agnostic is 
rather a quaint contradiction, the point is overlooked that the four 
questions about the Tathagata existing after death or not all contain 
an assumption which the answers yes and no alike affirm: they are 
all ultimately begged questions. 

We may seem to have by now wandered rather far from the 
original query: “Is Buddhism a religion or a philosophy?” But two 
things have come to light. The first is that if we answer in too much 
of a hurry one way or the other, we may unwittingly be making 
out that Buddhism “is” either one of the speculative views which 
are caught by the Buddha’s own Divine Net (the Brahmajala), or 
that it “is” one of the ritualistic observances of blind faith 
condemned by the Buddha as bound to disappoint. The second is 
that, before undertaking to answer, we may ask ourselves which of 
the four types of questions this one falls under. 

Yet before we start doing that, which might well involve us 
again deeply in dialectics, let us take another look at the way the 
Buddha sometimes gives his teaching. He was, in fact, asked a 
question whose essentials were much the same though the details 

202 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

were different. It was the night of the Buddha’s Parinibbana, and 
the wanderer Subhadda went to him and asked: “Master Gotama, 
there are these monks and divines with their congregations, 
teachers of congregations, famous philosophers whom many regard 
as saints... Have they all direct acquaintance of what they claim, or 
none of them, or have some and some not?” The Buddha’s reply 
was this: “Enough, Subhadda. Let that be. I shall teach you the 
Dhamma.” And he went on to expound the Eightfold Path. Now 
the Noble Eightfold Path is one of the Four Noble Truths. The 
Noble Truth of Suffering, the Noble Truth of the Origin of 
Suffering (which is need), the Noble Truth of the Cessation of 
Suffering (which is cessation of need), and the Noble Truth of the 
Way leading to cessation of suffering (which is the Eightfold Path). 
These four Truths- (termed “truth” (sacca) because they do not 
deceive, are founded on actual experience and nothing else, and 
cannot disappoint) are called the “teaching peculiar to Buddhas,” 
(Buddhanam samukkamsika-desana), since it is precisely this 
teaching by which a Buddha is recognizable and distinguished. 

Religion tends to rely upon faith alone, and philosophy on 
understanding alone. But the Buddha, in his teaching of the Truths, 
stresses the even balancing of five faculties. They are those of faith, 
energy, mindfulness, concentration, and understanding. While 
mindfulness can never be overdone, the others, if one-sidedly 
overdeveloped or repressed, may distort the character, outlook, and 
spiritual health that resides in their even balancing. Faith alone is 
blind credulity and gambles against disappointment. Overexerted 
energy agitates and distracts. Too much concentration tends to 
sleep and quietism, while understanding unsupported by the others 
degenerates into craftiness and cunning. When all are being 
properly managed, faith functions as confidence in the ability of the 
others to resist opposition and to reach their fulfilment in 
liberation from suffering. 

All the five are perfectly familiar because they are present to 
some extent, however small, in everyone. No one can act at all 
without at least faith that his act will bring the desired result. 
Everyone has the energy to show life. Without mindfulness 
nothing at all could ever be remembered or recognized. Every time 

203 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

we hold a thought for the shortest space of time we concentrate. 
And no one could ever place their faith at all, however strong or 
weak, without making some judgment, however bad, where to 
place it. Such are these five faculties at their bare inescapable 
minimum. And these same faculties, the Buddha says, “end in the 
Deathless,” which is the end of greed, hate, and delusion, the end of 
suffering. They are with us always. 

The Eightfold Path has eight factors: right view, right 
intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, 
right mindfulness, and right concentration. The five faculties are (to 
repeat) faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and 
understanding. What has the one set to do with the other? Faith 
(which is faith in the other four faculties) undertakes the three path 
factors that constitute virtue, namely right speech, action and 
livelihood; for these are first undertaken (like any other action) in 
the faith that they will lead to the development of the rest and to 
the ending of suffering. Energy is right effort. Mindfulness is right 
mindfulness. Concentration is right concentration. Understanding 
is right understanding and right intention. In this way, the five 
faculties correspond to the Eightfold Path. They are the Path’s raw 
material. In this way too the Eightfold Path is clearly faith alone, 
and so is not adequately or rightly described as an observance 
(observance of ritual), that is, as a religion. It is equally clearly not 
understanding alone, and so is not adequately or rightly described 
as purely rationalistic in the sense of limited to logic (suffering is 
not a logical category, nor is liberation), that is, a philosophy. 
Again, while it certainly has its ethical and philosophical aspects 
(the first steps in the Path are right intention, speech, action, and 
livelihood; the second, mundane right view), and is certainly 
systematic, not chaotic or incoherent, yet it is not adequately or 
rightly to be pigeon-holed as an ethico-philosophical system. The 
Buddha said, “I teach only suffering and the liberation from 
suffering,” and he said, “As the ocean has only one taste, that of 
salt, so my teaching has only one taste, that of liberation.” That 
seems hardly a mere system. 

But is Buddhism a religion or philosophy? Would the reader 
not like to deal with this for himsel{? 

204 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

Does SADDHA MEAN FAITH? Part I 

Sheer ignorance, gullibility, credulity, belief, faith, trust, 
confidence, certainty, knowledge--set out like that, the words seem 
to form a sort of spectrum with faith (most disputed of all the 
shades) somewhere in the middle. 

Perhaps it is that very middle aspect of faith which makes it so 
liable to distortions in opposite directions; for not only is it in the 
middle in that sense, and not only is it an essential mediating 
relation between subject and object, but also it stands in between 
lack of knowledge and the need to know. So some see it only as 
pure limpid spontaneity of Truth and the noblest Human Faculty, 
for which no price is too high to pay, while others deride it as a 
wretched, even worthless, substitute for knowledge. Many try a 
hand at defining it, arriving at oddly diverse conclusions. 

Bewildered from time to time in this way by his betters, some 
ordinary man (whose knowledge is limited and who wants to 
believe something) may ask, “But what does the word ‘faith’ mean? 
What are we talking about?” At once the extremists chip in again: 
“Faith is the Noblest Attribute of Man,” “Faith is a drug for fools,” 
“Tt must be cherished for ever,” “It wants chucking out good and 
proper,” they cry. Then the ordinary man, looking for a 
compromise, mostly uses his native faith in order, ostrich-like, to 
hide his head in a dune of euphemisms, saying perhaps something 
about “needing confidence.” But “You can’t always trust your own 
ears,” he mutters incredulously to himself. 

Others less procrustean may say (driving wedges between 
words) “To believe only in possibilities is not faith,” (Sir Thomas 
Browne after Tertullian), or (making specious definitions of the 
faculty itself), “Belief, like any other moving body, follows the path 
of least resistance,” (Samuel Butler), or (attempting to define its 
object), “The essential characteristic of a materialist doctrine is 
‘belief in something not dependent on our knowledge of it,” 
(W.W. Carington, quoting Prof. J.B.S. Haldane, in Mind, Matter 
and Meaning), or else (painting word-pictures), “I’ve caught belief 
like a disease; [’ve fallen into belief like I fell in love,” (Graham 
Greene), and so on. Fanned by these doldrum gusts, the ordinary 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

man drifts this way and that; he doubts here, puts his faith there, 
and sometimes he is right and often wrong. 

Now a dispassionate glance into matters of the heart is 
notoriously difficult. But, if the effort is made, it can be perceived 
that exclamations about “Noblest Attributes” and “wretched 
substitutes” are just evocative haranguings, ways of trying to push 
people into thinking as one does oneself, or as one thinks they 
ought to think (as the case may be), perhaps with the best of 
motives. They appear as an aspect of human behaviour telling quite 
a lot about the speaker's personal attitude, but precious little about 
faith considered as a component of experience: whether it is, for 
example, good or bad in itself or unavoidable. ‘Tending covertly as 
they do to the extremes of rationalism or irrationalism, none of 
them (not even the subtle ones) examine experience or even 
attempt an inquiry into why the ordinary man does not just 
gullibly do as he is told. Why does he not? Is it because, when 
pushed too far, his common sense tells him that he can’t? 

Let us look a little closer. Let us consider for a moment the 
question of action (of doing, or even saying or thinking, 
something). An ordinary man sees the past as decided (“What’s 
done can’t be undone.”), but the future as semi-foreseeable though 
undecided (“You can never be sure how it will turn out.”). So when 
he acts purposively, intending to do what he does (which always 
happens now), he seems to do so guided by what he remembers of 
the past and by some measure of faith (or expectation) that his 
present acts will not have a too inappropriate result in the rather 
uncertain future. Still he can never be quite sure: doubts haunt him 
constantly. 

‘That indeed is the pattern of the ordinary human situation: a 
state of being committed in a changing scene, of (moral) certainty 
about a definite-seeming past, of present knowledge of acts by 
restricted free choice which there is no escaping, and of guessing at 
a more or less indefinite future potentiality, which one hopes (with 
a grain of justification) to influence because one believes that things 
will go on happening roughly as they have done. That too is the 
pattern which makes life valuable and tolerable for the gambler. 
And who never gambles in his heart? 

206 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

On that basis, if such a very rough sketch is provisionally 
accepted, faith—or call it what you will—give a dog a bad name and 
hang it, but a rose by any other name is just as sweet) as a chancy 
expectation of results is, it seems, inevitably present in some form 
in every act done; there would be no doing anything without it. 
While one has knowledge of what one is doing now, even if it is 
only that one is sitting still and doubting, faith alone can cope with 
the unknown future (as it is apprehended) and decide why one does 
what one does. Such humdrum faith as that neither needs any 
special advertising as “noble” nor can it be “chucked out.” It is 
simply a commonplace necessity. 

So it is that parents send children to school in the faith that 
what is taught there will help the children to make a living. Those 
same children, when adults, delegate some of their influence by 
vote to governments in the faith that society will thus cater better 
for their needs. Through faith in the order of Nature those same 
adults, when old, sense death edging nearer: an impending 
ambivalent catastrophe that as surely blots out from their certainty 
all form of the future as it seems an inescapable plunge into it. 

Faith is left a free hand here though men have a general 
intellectual certainty that their physical death will take place 
(regardless of any considerations of immortality). Other people’s 
bodies are seen to die, but, it is pointed out by Freud, the 
Unconscious, while accepting that, absolutely rejects its own 
mortality. Though material bodies only too publicly die and 
disintegrate, at the same time no materialist theory is capable of 
proving (in any sense of that word) that physical death is the end, or 
physical birth the beginning, of conscious activity. Hence the 
ambivalence of the catastrophe. Hence too the fact that faith is 
forced willy-nilly to exercise a free hand here. 

Faith normally manifests itself as one of three particular types 
of belief, that is, it must absolutely take on one of them so long as 
there is ignorance and action. It is, (1) a dogma asserting that 
something of them will survive the catastrophe, or (2) a dogma 
asserting that nothing of them at all will survive, or (3) radical 
agnosticism denying that any knowledge beforehand is possible. 
Depending on which of the types of belief people assume (and one 

207 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

of the three apparently must be assumed) their behaviour will vary. 
Any act whatsoever, then, involves (where there is ignorance) one 
of these three assumptions indirectly or directly. To be born is to 
die, and to live as the ordinary man does is to act; to be in space- 
time is to be unsure of a future one is sure to encounter. 

The reservation “where there is ignorance” has been made, for 
ignorance, as we shall see, has an organic relation with faith (which 
is what the ignorant have to rely on in the acts they are obliged to 
perform). Will anyone deny that the ordinary man is constantly 
bothered by immediate ignorance (about the weather tomorrow; 
the contents of an examination paper; what the person he is talking 
to is thinking; the price of goods next week; whether his memory 
can be trusted or not; what will happen to him), or that he is ever 
without some measure of it, let alone ignorance of what is going on 
beyond his horizons, and may burst into his world? Then since he 
cannot avoid doing things (“But what are we going to do, if 
something happens?”), he has to take risks, to supplement by faith 
his lack of certain knowledge, to act as if the weather will be such 
and such tomorrow, and this kind we may call first degree 
ignorance, which goes with simple faith. “Take what you will, but 
pay the price,” says Emerson. 

But the ordinary man is also subject to desires, needs, fear, and 
pain. Because he attaches importance to the results of his acts, the 
lack of certainty inherent in faith is often odious to him (for all that 
he may like a gamble now and then). Whenever facts do not 
prohibit his doing so, his desires prompt him to treat the faith, by 
which he acts, as if it were knowledge (“It’s a dead cert!”), and he 
may well quite honestly forget that he does not know. His defence 
against fear and pain is forgetting (a mode of ignorance, which, at 
its deepest, takes the form of death). But if he cannot quite forget, if 
his forgetting mechanism fails him, he may dope himself with self- 
deception, refusing both to question his faith and to test its object. 
This we may call second-degree ignorance, which loses sight not 
only of the limits of knowledge but of truth as well. With that, his 
faith has become bad faith. “If bad faith is possible at all,” says a 
modern writer, “it is because it is an immediate and constant threat 
to every human project; it is because consciousness hides within its 

208 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

very being a permanent risk of bad faith.” Bad faith, however, is 
not a lie, since the essence of a lie implies that the liar is completely 
aware of the truth which he dissembles. “One no longer lies when 
one deceives oneself.” Bad faith, in short, both refuses to face all 
one knows and vetoes any investigation into whether the faith is 
well placed or not. “O take the cash and let the credit go,” says 
Omar Khayyam’s translator. (And if the cash runs out, they'll sure 
let us live on tie!) 

At any time an ordinary man may become fed up with the 
consequences of misplacing his own faith or by seeing the silly 
things other people sometimes do out of faith. Blaming the faith 
instead of the misplacing of it, he may decide to throw it overboard 
altogether (away with all bath water and babies too), and become a 
Cynic or a Rationalist. But has he not merely deceived himself once 
more in fancying it can be jettisoned like that, for he still has 
ignorance and still has to act? Even despair is no more than a mode 
of bad faith: faith that the situation is irremediable with refusal to 
seek an escape. The self-gulling goes on, and so does the risk of 
disappointment, anger and frustration. If he is healthy, young, and 
lucky, perhaps he can forget about it and begin all over again. 
Forgetting is a very useful kind of ignorance: it wipes the bad sums 
off our slates. 

What is the answer, then? Must one either leave the baby 
unbathed or bottle the bath water? Surely not. The first thing to be 
done is to reduce ignorance to the “first degree,” to become aware 
that one is ignorant and how one is ignorant, facing up to it 
courageously and remembering it, regardless of hopes and fears. 
That is enough for the Goal, isn’t it? What more can be done? After 
all, faith has been shown to be a practical necessity for the ordinary 
man. Without it indeed all profitable and unprofitable action, as 
well as all possibility of remedying suffering, must be paralysed. 
And how richly it ennobles! It is the source of all inspiration. The 
rapturous leap of faith at Great Moments exhilarates, uplifts, and 
transfigures. Faith attends all good things. Faith that the very 
ground will receive one’s foot prevents the vertiginous sensation of 
falling into a chasm every time one steps forward. Faith is Life, and 
it must be good in itself. How can it be otherwise? If the right 

209 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

dogma can be found, is not that the answer, the realistic answer? 
Why cry for the moon? 

True, faith is a practical necessity for the ordinary man. That is 
indeed what we have been trying to show. But how can the Right 
Dogma ever be found, and can it be absolutely trusted without a 
grain of bad faith as we have described it? And is faith then to be 
the goal, in which case is ignorance to remain with us for ever 
more? Examination of what both the theists and the atheist 
materialists have offered as dogma from the dawn of history down 
to the present day, a long time and a wide choice, is far from 
encouraging (consoling, doubtless but utterly inconclusive). The 
rather arid alternative seems to be Radical Agnosticism, which is 
what is usually meant by the phrase “no faith”; no faith, that is, in 
the heaven the theists offer only after death, or in the substance of 
matter here and now which the materialists admit can inherently 
never be known at all and doesn’t matter after death anyway. 

Why bother, though? Perhaps the world is not such a bad place 
after all. They say there is plenty of good in it if you look, so forget 
about the unpleasant side of it. Agnosticism tomorrow, then, and 
dogma today. “Gather ye roses while ye may,” as luck may be on 
our side. 

Dogma or agnosticism. But before we choose, before we risk 
our faith going bad on us, let us take one more look. 

(Editor’s Note: The following paragraph in handwriting was found 
among the late author’s papers, together with this essay and carrying the 
note “above at the end of Pt. 1.” Since the insertion of it would have 
necessitated adjustments in the given manuscript, it was preferable to 
reproduce this paragraph separately. Its fitting place would be before the 
second last paragraph of the above text.) 

Then if neither dogma nor agnosticism will do, why not be 
satisfied with some f of the critical humanism of 18th to 19th 
century Europe? Criticism has been incalculably productive, and 
we owe to it all the material advances we enjoy today. It is criticism 
that has allowed science a free hand to question and experiment. 
Granted that Criticism (as Inquiry) merits all that praise and far 
more. But that is as a means. If Criticism is to be made the goal, the 
summum bonnum, against what can it be tested? A fundamental 

210 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

weakness always remains in the position of the critic: if he discloses 
his own standpoint, that standpoint is open to criticism from some 
other. That is why it is rare that the academic scholar, who 
employs the so-called “higher criticism” can afford to state his own 
position in positive terms. When the English Prime Minister 
Disraeli was asked what his religion was, it is said that he replied 
“My religion is that of all wise men.” “But what is that, Mr. 
Disraeli?” “Wise men never say.” Criticism requires that the critic 
be uncommitted, that he is, or pretends he is, outside what he 
criticises. The professional critic’s very being depends on dialectics, 
the food that keeps him alive is other people’s standpoints. As a 
means this may be invaluable; as an end it can never amount to 
more than an ordered form of agnosticism. 

Does SADDHA MEAN FAITH? Part II 

To “Gather ye roses while ye may,” would be fine if there were 
“roses, roses all the way.” But will our simple faith really stretch 
that far? Hardly. 

Soon after the Buddha had attained enlightenment he surveyed 
the world with the new vision he had achieved. He did not see only 
roses. He uttered this exclamation: “This world is racked by 
exposure to the contact [of pain]. Even what the world calls self is 
in fact ill; for no matter upon what it bases its conceit [of self], the 
fact is ever other than these [which the conceit conceives]. To be is 
to become: but the world has committed itself to being, delights 
only in being; yet wherein it delights brings fear, and what it fears 
is pain. Now this Life Divine is lived to abandon pain” (Ud 3.10). 
He was not alone in this estimation of the world: “Here, bhikkhus, 
some clansman goes forth out of faith [saddha] from the home life 
into homelessness [considering] ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing and 
death.... Iam exposed to pain. Surely an end to this whole aggregate 
mass of suffering is described?” (MN 29). 

Now in this situation how does the Buddha show the function 
of faith? “One who has faith [saddha] succeeds, Mahanama, not one 
who has no faith” (AN 11:12). 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Here the question at once intrudes: Is the translation of 
“saddha” by “faith” justified? Let us try it out and see, for the 
contexts in which it appears will be the test. We shall be strictly 
consistent in our renderings. The Buddha speaks of five Faculties, 
or human potentialities, through whose means an ignorant 
ordinary man may emerge from ignorance to right understanding, 
and so from suffering to its cessation. They are faith (saddha), 
energy, mindfulness, concentration, and understanding (as “mother 
wit” to start with). If they can be maintained in being against 
opposition, they are called Powers (SN 48:43). Managed by 
reasoned attention (yoniso manasikara, awareness of the organic 
structure of experience), and carefully balanced, they build each 
other up. Maintained in being and cultivated, they merge into the 
Deathless (SN 48:57). 

The Buddha speaks of faith as one of the Seven Noble 
Treasures (AN 7:4), one of the Seven True Ideas (DN 33), one of 
the Five Factors of Endeavour (MN 8), as an Idea “on the side of 
enlightenment” (SN 48:51), as a Fount of Great Merit (Anguttara 
Tika 41), as one of the Three Forms of Growth (Anguttara Tika 
48), which “brings five advantages” (AN 5:38). 

And then, “Where is the faith faculty to be met with? Among 
the four Factors of Stream-entry.” (SN 48:8). “A Stream-enterer [of 
whom more below] has absolute confidence [pasdda] in the 
Enlightened One, in the True Idea [the Dhamma], and in the 
Community, and he has the virtue beloved of Noble Ones” (SN 
55:1). Four other factors of Stream-entry are frequenting True 
Men, hearing the True Idea, reasoned attention, and the putting 
into practice of ideas that are in accordance with the True Idea (SN 
55:5). 

“What is the faith faculty? Here a noble disciple who has faith 
places his faith in a Tathagata thus: “This Blessed One is such since 
he is accomplished and fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge 
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of 
men to be tamed, enlightened, blessed.’” (SN 48:9) “If these five 
faculties are absolutely perfected, they make an Accomplished One 
[Arahant}; if a little weaker, a Non-returner; if a little weaker still, a 
Once-returner; if a little weaker still, a Stream-enterer; if a little 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

weaker still, One Mature in Faith or One Mature in the True Idea” 
(SN 48:12). “Those who have not known, seen, found, realized, 
touched with understanding, may go by faith in others that [these 
five faculties] when maintained in being and developed merge in the 
Deathless ... but on knowing, seeing, finding, realizing, and 
touching with understanding, there is no more doubt or 
uncertainty that when maintained in being and developed they 
merge in the Deathless” (SN 48:44). 

But then, does not the Buddha say in the Kalama Sutta, “Come, 
Kalamas, [do] not [be satisfied] with hearsay-learning or with 
tradition or with legendary lore or with what has come down in 
scripture or with conjecture or with logical inference or with 
weighing evidence or with choice of a view after pondering it or 
with someone else’s ability or with the thought “The monk is our 
teacher”? Is not that an injunction to have nothing to do with 
faith, to “throw away your books,” as Marcus Aurelius says, and 
listen to no one at all? 

If that statement of the Buddha’s is taken as a general 
instruction to disregard instruction, it is then impossible to carry 
out. For then one could only carry it out by not carrying it out (a 
well-known logical dilemma). But that is not what is intended, as is 
shown by the rest of the passage: ” ... or with the thought “The 
monk is our teacher.’ When you know in your-selves ‘Certain ideas 
are unprofitable, liable to censure, condemned by the wise, being 
adopted and put into effect, they lead to harm and suffering,’ then 
you should abandon them .... When you know in yourselves 
“Certain ideas are profitable, not liable to censure, commended by 
the wise, being adopted and put into effect, they lead to welfare and 
happiness,’ then you should abide in the practice of them” 
(Anguttara Tika 65). 

The ordinary man is affected by ignorance, and he cannot 
dispense with simple faith, though in good faith he may grossly 
misplace it, or dissipate it, and be said to have no faith (asaddha). 
But if he places it honestly and reasonably, he is called faithful 
(saddha). In the Buddha’s words, “A bhikkhu who possesses 
understanding founds his faith in accordance with that 
understanding” (SN 48:45), to which words may be added also 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

those of the venerable Sariputta: “There are two conditions for the 
arising of right view: another’s speech and reasoned attention” 
(MN 43). From this it emerges that an ordinary man has need of a 
germ of “mother wit” in order to know where to place his faith and 
a germ of unsquandered faith in order to believe he can develop his 
understanding. That is the starting position. 

Faith thus begins to appear as a fusion of two elements: 
confidence (pasada), and what the confidence is placed in. Faith as 
confidence is elsewhere described as a clearing of the mind, like 
water cleared of suspended mud by a water-clearing nut, or as a 
launching out (pakkhandana), like a boat’s launching out from the 
near bank to cross a flood to the further bank, or as a hand that 
resolutely grasps. (A grain of “mother wit” is needed to recognize 
the nut, to avoid launching out into a flood that has no other shore, 
to refrain from grasping a red-hot poker as a stick to lean on). Just 
as “Seeing is the meaning of the understanding as a faculty,” so also 
“Decision [adhimokkha] is the meaning of faith as a faculty.” 
(Patisambhida Nanakatha). When faith is aided by concentration, 
“The mind launches out [to its object] and acquires confidence, 
steadiness and decision” (MN 122). 

Choice of a bad object will debauch faith by the 
disappointment and frustration it entails. Craving and desire can 
corrupt it into bad faith by the self-deception that it is not 
necessary to investigate and test the object, and then, as well as 
error, there is disregard of truth. In one of his great discourses on 
faith the Buddha says, “Bharadvaja, there are five ideas which ripen 
in two ways [expectedly and unexpectedly] here and now. What are 
the five? They are faith, preference, hearsay, learning, weighing 
evidence, and choice of a view after pondering it [compare the 
Kalama Sutta quoted above]. Now [in the case of faith] something 
may have faith well placed in it [swsadahita] and yet it may be 
hollow, empty and false; and again, something may have no faith 
placed in it, and yet it may be factual, true and no other than it 
seems. In such circumstances it is not yet proper for a wise man to 
make the conclusion without reserve ‘Only this is true, anything 
else is wrong.’ ... If a man has faith, then in such circumstances as 
these he preserves truth when he says, ‘My faith is thus’; but then 

214 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

too he still does not, on that account alone, make the conclusion 
without reserve, ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ He 
preserves truth in that way too” (MN 95). The other four cases are 
similarly treated, after which it is shown how “preserving of truth” 
can be developed successively into “discovery of truth” (path of 
Stream-entry) and “arrival at truth” (fruit of the path of Stream- 
entry). The element of confidence has then become absolute 
because its object has been sufficiently tested by actual experience 
for the principal claims to be found justified. Another discourse 
concludes by showing how the value of rightly placed faith serves 
(as the means rather than the end) in the progress from ignorance to 
liberation: “Bhikkhus, I say that true knowledge and deliverance 
have a condition, are not without a condition. What is their 
condition? The seven Factors of Enlightenment [Mindfulness, 
interest in the True Idea, energy, happiness, tranquillity, 
concentration, and onlooking equanimity]. ... What is the 
condition for these? The four foundations of mindfulness 
[contemplation of the body, of feelings, of cognizance, and of ideas] 
... What is the condition for these? The three kinds of good 
conduct [of body, speech and mind] .... What is the condition for 
these? Mindfulness and full awareness .... What is the condition for 
these? Reasoned attention .... What is the condition for that? Faith 
.... What is the condition for that? Hearing the True Idea [the true 
object of faith, the saddhammal] .... What is the condition for that? 
Frequenting the company of True Men [sappurisa]” (AN 10:62). 
This shows plainly the need for a reliable guide. How is he to 
be found? One should be an Inquirer (vimamsaka) and make the 
‘Tathagata the object of research and tests in order to judge whether 
confidence in him is rightly placed. The Buddha says “Now 
bhikkhus, if others should ask a bhikkhu [who is an inquirer] 
“What are the evidences and certainties owing to which the 
venerable one says “The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the True 
Idea is well proclaimed, the Community has entered upon the good 
way”?’ then, answering rightly, he would answer thus: ‘Here, 
friends, I approached that Blessed One for the sake of hearing the 
True Idea [Dhamma]. The teacher showed me the True Idea at each 
successively higher [level], at each superior [stage], with the dark 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

and bright counterparts. According as he did so, by arriving at 
direct knowledge here of a certain idea [namely, one of the four 
paths] among the ideas, [taught] in the True Idea, I reached my 
goal: then I had confidence [passaddhi] in the teacher thus: “The 
Blessed One is fully enlightened, the True Idea is well proclaimed, 
the Community has entered on the good way.”’ When anyone’s 
faith in a Tathagata is planted and rooted and established with these 
evidences, these phrases and these syllables, then his faith is called 
supported by evidence, rooted in vision, sound, and invincible by 
Monk or Divine or Mara or Divinity or anyone in the world” (MN 

47). 

Faith as the indispensable means, but not the goal, transparent 
in itself, is debased or ennobled by the mode of its employment and 
by its goal. As understanding grows, it approximates to knowledge, 
while the risk of its degenerating into bad faith diminishes with the 
diminishing of craving. 

But there are still two problems. First, it was argued earlier that 
faith involves not knowing the future. So if faith becomes 
knowledge, does that not imply that the future can all be known 
and is therefore predetermined? Second, with craving unabated 
would not knowledge of everything be unbearable; would it not be 
Hell itself? How does craving diminish? 

The key to these two locks on the gate of liberation lies in the 
Contemplation of Impermanence. Let us take the second problem 
first. It is part of the constraint imposed by ignorance and craving 
together that an ordinary man is led to speculate on time and 
permanence, and to ask such questions as, “What was I?,” “What 
shall I be?,” “What am I ?” (MN 2), unanswerable questions to 
which philosophers go on furnishing many an unquestionable 
answer, disproving each other as they do. But progress towards 
liberation from ignorance transforms and transfigures the world. 
One who is liberated asks no more questions (akathamkathi). The 
Buddha tells his listeners, “Bhikkhus, material form [and likewise 
feeling, perception, determinations, and consciousness] are 
impermanent, changing and altering. Whoever decides about, and 
places his faith in, these ideas in this way is called Mature in Faith. 
He has alighted upon the certainty of rightness. He has alighted 

216 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

upon the plane of true men and left behind the plane of ordinary 
men. He can no more perform action capable of causing his rebirth 
in the animal world or in the realm of ghosts and he cannot 
complete his time in this life without realizing the fruition of 
Stream-entry” (SN 25:10). Such faith decides in advance that 
nothing arisen can reveal any permanence at all, however brief. 
Since all subsequent evidence supports the decision, if that evidence 
is not forgotten, craving is progressively stultified in the 
impossibility of finding any arisen thing worth craving for, and is 
progressively displaced by the joy of liberation. The first problem, 
though, that of time, is properly a matter for insight (vipassana) and 
can only be dealt with here by hints and pointers because of lack of 
space. As has already been said, the ignorant man questions, but 
one who is liberated does not. The Buddha tells his listeners, “Let 
not a man trace back a past or wonder what the future holds .... 
Instead with insight let him see each idea'® presently arisen” (MN 
131). He includes the Contemplation of Impermanence under the 
Four Foundations of Mindfulness: “He trains thus: ‘I shall breathe 
in... breathe out contemplating impermanence” (MN 10). 

Now it is in the very nature of ignorance to perceive the bare 
conditions for consciousness in terms of things, persons and 
hypostases, and to project upon these percepts a varying degree of 
permanence, a misperception which it is the task of true vision and 
mindfulness to correct. During the period of transition, while 
understanding that “to be is to be otherwise” is still immature and 
helped out by faith in the impermanence of every-thing that is, the 
faith must be tested and the outcome of the tests remembered. This 
needs concentration and energy. 

“When one gives attention to impermanence, the faith faculty 
is outstanding.” And in the cases of attention to pain and not-self 
the faculties of concentration and understanding are outstanding 
respectively. These are called the “hree Gate-Ways to Liberation,” 
which “lead to the outlet from the world” (Patisambhida 
Vimokkhakatha). When the Stream-entry path is reached, a new, 
supramundane faculty, the [-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown 

8. Dhamma: “thing” or phenomenon, material or mental. (Editor) 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

faculty (@nanfatanfassamitindriya) appears, to be subsequently 
followed by the new and supramundane final-knowledge and final- 
knower faculties (a#indriya, afitdtavindriya). These are gained in 
this life with the attainment of Arahantship. 

Meanwhile, however, “The characteristic of impermanence 
does not become apparent [as universal] because, when the constant 
rise and fall of determinations!” [things] is not given attention, it is 
concealed by continuity (Visuddhimagga Ch. 21). In fact the 
Buddha said, “There is no matter or feeling, perception, 
determinations, or consciousness whatever that is permanent ... not 
inseparable from the idea of change...?° Taking a small piece of cow 
dung in his hand, the Blessed One said, “If there were even that 
much ... that were permanent ... not inseparable from the idea of 
change”! ... the living of the Life Divine”? could not be described as 
for the exhaustion of suffering. It is because there is not ... that it is 
so described” (SN 22:96). 

Now that statement can be taken to imply that if time were an 
absolutely independent objective reality, there would be no 
liberation. 

Permanence and impermanence on the one hand, and time on 
the other, are but two modes of the same view. The appearance of 
the three new supramundane faculties signals profound changes in 
the apprehension of permanence and impermanence, that is, of time, 
and consequently in actual experience itself. 

To question the objectivity of time is not new even to Western 
philosophy. While objective reality of time and space still remains 
one of the assumptions made by scientists for which they have no 
proof, Immanuel Kant argued irrefutably for the pure subjectivity 
of both. But almost a millennium and a half before him, Acariya 
Buddhaghosa wrote, “What is called ‘time’ is conceived in terms of 

Sankhara is usually translated as “formations,” or, in the case of the 5 

Aggregates, “mental formations.” (Editor) 

2%. Viparindmadhamma, usually translated as “subject to change.” 
(Editor) 

21 Tbid. 

2. Byahmacariya is usually translated as “Holy Life” or “Life of Purity.” 

(Editor) 

218 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

such and such dhammas ... But that [time] should be understood as 
only a mere conceptual description, since it is non-existent as to 
any individual essence of its own.” (Atthasdlini. Space is 
analogously treated elsewhere). A century or two later it was 
observed that “Nibbana [extinction] is not like other dhammas. In 
fact because of its extreme profundity it cannot be made the object 
of consciousness by one who has not yet reached it. That is why it 
has to be reached by change-of-lineage cognizance [gotrabha], which 
has profundity surpassing the three periods of time” (Milatika). 
When the seen, heard, sensed and cognized (see Ud 1.10), are 
misperceived to be (this that I see ... that think about, is that man, 
so-and-so, that thing of mine, to have temporal endurance and 
reality, it is because the three periods of time, these three modes by 
which we subjectively process our raw world in perceiving it, have 
been projected outwards by ignorance on the raw world and 
misapprehended along with that as objectively real. That is how we 
in our ignorance come to perceive things and persons and action. 

These fragments are merely pointers. The contemplation of 
impermanence, which, when fully and unreservedly developed, 
necessitates the contemplations of suffering (pain) and not-self, 
involves the whole field of insight. (There is no space to deal with it 
here.) However, the inquiry has already led us away from the 
apparent either-or choice between faith in dogma-as-the-goal or 
agnosticism. By establishing a structural interdependence between 
faith and ignorance, it has opened up a new line. In the pursuit of 
that line it has uncovered an unexpected association between faith 
and the temporal mirage of permanence and impermanence. And so 
it has been possible to sketch a practical outline of the way to end 
here and now this whole aggregate mass of suffering. The adventure 
is waiting to be tested. 

“Fruitful as the act of giving is ... yet it is still more fruitful to 
go with confident heart for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, 
and the Sangha, and undertake the five precepts of virtue .... 
Fruitful as that is ... yet it is still more fruitful to maintain loving- 
kindness in being in the heart for only as long as the milking of a 
cow .... Fruitful as that is ... yet it is still more fruitful to maintain 
perception of impermanence in being for only as long as the 
snapping of a finger” (AN 9:20). 

219 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

But does saddha really mean faith? Let the reader judge for 
himself. 

CESSATION OF BECOMING 

(With a Note on Faith) 

Why do normal people normally react with panic and horror to 
the idea of cessation of becoming, or cessation of consciousness? 
There are at least two reasons. There is first the failure to see both 
sides of life, the negative/destructive as well as the positive/ 
constructive, which are (as it were) the obverse and reverse of each 
piece of experience. It is a refusal to face the ambivalence of 
experience, and a putting on of blinkers to shut out, as far as one 
can, what is disturbing. It is by this that life is made to look nice, 
and appears tolerable. The process is largely automatic and 
subconscious, so it is seldom ever enquired into. With the blinkers 
‘on one does not see what is unwelcome and one quickly forgets the 
unwelcome that intrudes. 

And here I want to distinguish two kinds of suffering: (1) 
enjoyable suffering and pain (the arduousness of exhausting sports, 
self mortification, “being ill,” masochism and sadism, etc.), which 
are not properly suffering because they are enjoyed and welcomed; 
and (2) horror or nausea, which is all those things (whatever they 
may be, and they vary with different people) that produce horror, 
nausea, and vertigo, because they are absurd and menace the core 
and pattern of our personal existence. Everyone knows that border 
across which he cannot go, even in thought, and it is that, not the 
former, that people automatically shut out and cannot face. Yet one 
knows at times (in the middle of the night, perhaps, when one is 
sleepless, or on encountering some revolting experience) that this 
horror haunts every form of experience (always and ever), and 
hastily one readjusts the blinkers that had slipped. Put the beautiful 
before you and the horror behind you. Yes, but then I shall not 
dare to turn round. 

The world is a bad place. Is it? But it seems that this haunting, 
this self-delusion by wearing blinkers, is not an attribute of the 

220 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

world. The haunting is in consciousness itself, in its very nature. 
Just as when I set up any object in the sunlight a shadow is cast 
(because it is the nature of sunlight to cast shadows), so anything 
that comes into the light of consciousness casts a shadow of the 
unknown. It is in the unknown that the horror resides in the dark 
of knowledge where the patterns can no longer be traced, where 
chaos resides, and whence utterly hostile systems may emerge, 
devour, and digest us. 

Again this insecurity resides in consciousness because it cheats. 
It lives between the past and the future like a reflection between 
two opposing mirrors. I put my head between the opposing 
mirrors and I see the reflection of the reflection of the reflection ... 
which suggests recession to infinity, But I cannot see that infinity 
because (even if the glasses were clear enough) my head and its 
reflections are in the way. But then if I slightly displace one mirror 
so that my head is no more in the way then the series of reflections 
passes out of the field of the mirrors at some stage of the reflections 
which it must now do (unless the mirrors are made of infinite size). 
So I am forced by this set of experiences to infer an infinity of 
which the very circumstances deny the possibility of my 
experiencing. That is one essential aspect of consciousness: it cheats. 

Another example is the moon. I see as an experience an existent 
crescent, an existent half-moon, or full moon, and there are 
perceptions of existents that are repeated (which are in fact over 
and done with as soon as experienced). Consciousness groups 
together these repeated experiences and forms a concept that 
transcends all these possible existents, and which it presents as “the 
moon.” But “the moon” can never be experienced, and even when 
visualized it is only as one of its aspects. It is a fake. This concept 
“the moon” is then projected upon the objective world where it 
appears to lurk behind existence as Kant’s “Ding an sich,” or, say, 
Eddington’s “reality,” that the physicists are trying to discover 
behind what they investigate. Suppose a man gets lost in a desert 
and he wanders all night. When the sun comes up he may see lots of 
tracks in the sand all pointing the way he is going. He thinks, 
“Marvellous! [ am on the high road. Lots of people have gone this 
way already. I am alright.” So he follows them. They are, in fact, 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

his own tracks made in the night by his walking in circles (which 
people actually do). If he does not stop to consider and goes on 
following them, he will get nowhere. He will die. If he put aside his 
assumption and looked about him, it is possible he might find the 
way of escape. 

This is what I mean by the failure to see both sides of life, to 
see things and ourselves as they and we really are, in their 
relationship. This is what Mara (if we like personification) tries his 
utmost to keep us from seeing, for it is by this that we can slip out 
of his clutches. Mara is Death, but he is also Life, for “all that is 
subject to arising is subject to cessation,” “all that is born and lives 
dies.” Byron said somewhere: 

Sorrow is knowledge: they who know the most 
Must mourn the deepest o’er the fatal Truth. 
The Tree of Knowledge is not that of life. 

But it is Mara that makes us mourn because he makes his living 
by that, just as a rubber estate owner makes his living by the trees 
that he cultivates and bleeds, and cuts down when they are old. 

But there is another, equally fundamental, reason that makes 
people shy away from the notion—their notion—-of cessation. This 
is a very deep-rooted double misconception: (1) there is the idea 
that by “cessation,” by “extinction,” something “good” and 
“valuable” and “lasting” will be “lost forever,” and (2) there is an 
uncritical assumption that consciousness will somehow continue to 
survive—will be “there"—to be aware of this as an “everlasting 
privation.” “Does all this” they say “only end in extinction? But a 
state of nothingness is horrible!” and there the whole double 
misconception lies like a pair of Siamese T'wins in a bed. But there 
is, in the last analysis, no “entirely good” and “lasting” individual 
thing or state discoverable anywhere. Whatever appears good melts 
away in the end. The subconscious cheating of the mind seizes on 
the good, rejects and forgets it, and it melts away. By a “sleight of 
mind” that is one of consciousness’s essential functions, the idea is 
presented that it is possible to skim the good off the world, like 
cream on a bowl of milk, and live in that cream in “eternal bliss.” 
But, alas, like the cream, the bowl of heavenly bliss is not 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

permanent. Such is the “good” that is supposed to be “lost.” And 
then there is the instinctive feeling, the uncritical automatic 
reaction that takes cessation somehow to mean a survival of 
conscious awareness of that loss, in spite of the fact that the 
proposition was in the first place “cessation of consciousness.” This 
is the verbal-mental subconscious cheating that has only to be 
examined fearlessly to see it as a mere self-contradiction. If 
consciousness ceases and with it its objects, there is no question of 
conscious awareness of privation. If there is awareness of loss and 
privation, consciousness has not ceased, and it is not such cessation 
that is being talked about. This misconception (often enough 
believed in due to uncritical acceptance) is often used to deride 
Buddhists without seeing that it hurts only him who uses it. And 
not only Buddhists, for Sankara in his commentary to the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad says: “The Buddhists themselves do not 
deny the existence of gods and heavens [or hells}—they are not 
atheists—but only that the gods are omnipotent or everlasting: they 
change and die, let one down, make one let oneself down, because 
they cannot help it, because consciousness and its objects, with its 
disease of impermanence, are there too.” 

Consciousness without object is impossible, not conceivable, 
and objects without consciousness, when talked about, are only a 
verbal abstraction. One cannot talk or think about objects that 
have no relation to consciousness. The two are inseparable and it is 
only a verbal abstraction to talk about them separately (legitimate 
of course in a limited sphere). 

But it is in the consideration of this cessation as the goal that the 
real comfort and safety are to be found. There is no cheating here, 
and no anxiety to exclude haunting opposites. All else, however 
good it seems, is only temporary, because there is consciousness 
there to know and to change. So there is no permanent safety of 
attack or harm, and there is no permanent safety from one’s being 
led to do harm, even if that harm is merely changing. 

Regarding the matter of faith, it is commonly felt and often 
stated that faith is a weakness, a mere substitute for knowledge, a 
“blind belief in dogma” and “unnecessary.” But the point 
overlooked is that there is an element of faith in every conscious 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

act. It is another of the false aspects inherent in all consciousness: 
the presenting of objects in such that the perception of them 
necessitates inference about what is hidden. This is in fact an aspect 
of faith. Without this faith nothing can be done at all, viz. faith that 
things will repeat themselves and happen as one expects. But the 
case is most clearly seen in the case of death. Death is an obvious 
fact. Described in terms of life, it is meaningless (like a blank 
featureless wall, or a black chasm to vision), but nevertheless by its 
very existence, by its basis in experience, necessitates inference 
about it. The three main inferences are that life of some sort 
continues after death, that it does not, or plain agnosticism. 
Whichever I adopt is a matter of pure faith (1 leave out “evidence” 
for and against other alternatives here). But I cannot avoid adopting 
one of the three. 

On the other hand, faith about, say, “phoenixes rising from 
their own ashes” is simply this same universal attribute of 
consciousness applied to a fantasy, an assumption (the phoenix) 
that has no basis in experience. What is unnecessary here is not the 
faith but the assumption. Now many faiths place faith in baseless 
assumptions. And when people discover this, they not only reject 
the assumption (rightly), but, because they fail to discriminate, they 
deceive themselves into thinking that they can do without the faith 
too. All that has happened to them, though, is that they have 
transferred their faculty of faith to the basis of experience and have 
simultaneously forgotten that they are using it. Now to forget that 
one has a sharp knife in one’s hand is dangerous. 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND BEING 

What follows will have to be stated in terms of ordinary speech, 
though that necessarily involves the word “is” and logical 
constructions, because speech is hardly possible without them. 
Nevertheless they have to be regarded here as a makeshift, and the 

Here the manuscript ends. This undated fragment (which in the 
manuscript, follows immediately after the preceding essay) may have 
stimulated the author to treat the subject more fully in the essay 
“Does Saddha mean Faith?” included in this publication. (Editor) 

224 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

whole of what follows tends to undermine the ultimate value of 
speech, retaining it, however, as a necessity for communication in 
conditions where separateness and individuality predominate. 

The word “consciousness,” it seems to me, can only refer to 
what one might define provisionally as “the knowing that cannot 
know itself without intermediary and that cannot function in 
experience (of which it is an indispensable component) except 
negatively.” 

To the question “What is consciousness,” then, a low level 
provisional answer might be “It is the pure subjective” or “It is the 
bare knowing of what it is not that constitutes (orders) experience 
and allows it being.” It must be added that, when consciousness is, 
it seems to be individualized by what it knows. But on another 
(higher) level the “is” in the question has still to be questioned, and 
so the low-level (and logical) answer is only a conventional 
makeshift, a conventional view, nothing more. And_ this 
qualification applies not only to logically inductive and deductive 
statements necessitating use of the word “is,” but also to descriptive 
statements that appear in “logical” form, using that term, or any 
equivalent. 

When I ask myself, “What does the verbal expression ‘universal 
consciousness’ refer to?,” I confess to be unable to find an answer, 
because, in spite of its “attractive” form, I cannot distinguish it 
from non-consciousness (see below). So I seem to have no 
alternative but to regard the phrase as one of those abstract 
expressions that appear on the surface to mean something, but 
when more closely examined, do not. (This, I know, may seem 
shocking, but Iam more interested here in finding the facts than in 
avoiding shock.) 

The more I examine and observe experience (What else can one 
do? Build castles?), the more I find that I can only say of 
consciousness (and in this I find a notable confirmation in the Pali 
Suttas) that it seems only describable (knowable) “in terms of what 
it arises dependent upon” (i.e. seeing-cum-seen ... mind-knowing- 
cum-mind, known or mind cum-ideas), that is, negatively as to 
itself. And so, instead of being said to appear, it should rather be 
called that negativeness or “decompression of being” which makes 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

the appearance of life, movement, behaviour, etc., and their 
opposites, possible in things and persons. But while life, etc. cannot 
be or not be without the cooperation of the negative presence of 
consciousness, which gives room for them (and itself) to “come to 
be” in this way (gaining its own peculiar form of negative being, 
perhaps from them)—the only possible way of being—they are, by 
ignorance, simultaneously individualized in actual experience. 
Unindividualized experience cannot, I think, be called experience 
at all. Thus there appears the positive illusion also of individual 
consciousness: “illusion” because its individuality is borrowed from 
the individualness of (1) its percepts, and (2) the body seen as its 
perceiving instrument. 

Unindividualized perception cannot, any more, I think, be 
called perception at all. The supposed individuality of 
consciousness (without which it is properly inconceivable) is 
derived from that of its concomitants. This _ illusory 
individualization of consciousness, this mirage, manifests itself in 
the sense both of “my consciousness” and of “consciousness that is 
not mine” (as e.g. in the sensation of being seen when one fancies or 
actually finds one is caught, say, peeping through a keyhole, and 
from which the abstract notion of universal consciousness 
develops). The example shows that the experience of being seen 
does not necessarily mean that another’s consciousness is seeing one, 
as one may have been mistaken in one’s fancy owing to a guilty 
sense (though the experience was just as real at the time), before one 
found no one was there. To repeat: my supposed consciousness 
seems only distinguishable from the supposed consciousness that is 
not mine on the basis of the particular non-consciousness (i.e. 
material body, etc.) through which its negativity is manifested and 
with which it is always and inevitably associated in some way. It is 
impossible, I think, to overemphasize the importance of this fact. 
So of the concept, “universal consciousness,” I at present think that 
the word “universal” misleads. (Perhaps some hidden desire for 
power to “catch all consciousness in the net of one’s 
understanding,” and so escape the horrors of the unknown, seduces 
one to catch at this seemingly attractive term.) 

226 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

Again it may be asked: What knows universal consciousness? 
Would not individual consciousness (if the “universal” is accepted) 
be held inadequate to judge it? And how can it know itself, or what 
are the means by which it can know itself and distinguish itself 
from non-consciousness and individual consciousness? I can find no 
answer to that and so I conclude that, if I ask it, that is simply 
because I must have started out with an unjustified assumption 
about the nature of consciousness (which, platitudinous as it may 
seem, is horribly difficult to understand and handle in view of its 
negativity; when one talks about “consciousness” normally, one 
finds on examination that one has not been talking about it at all 
but about the positive things like pleasure and pain, action, 
perception, etc., that always accompany and screen it). Is the 
question then really necessary? Consciousness, of course, cannot be 
denied as a necessary constituent of experience, but the trouble 
starts when we begin to ask what consciousness (or its nature) is. We 
have assumed the individuality of consciousness, apparently 
unjustifiably, because of the observed individuality of the objective 
part of experience through which we say it is manifested; and the 
assumption of its individuality logically leads to the further 
assumption of some universal form. Why? 

Now, as I said earlier, when I begin to ask what something is 
(is, say, consciousness individual, universal, both, or neither?), we 
have taken being for granted and failed to examine the nature of a 
part of my question. In one sense consciousness seems correctly 
describable as functioning (that is in its true negativity) by putting 
everything in question: What is this? What am I? What is life? What 
is consciousness? What is being? Now here the emphasis must be 
removed from “what” and “this” and placed squarely on “is.” 
Suppose I suggest this: for “is” read “belief-attitude” (as a mode of 
craving combined with ignorance). In other words, it is the nature 
of consciousness to make be (with the aid of desire-for-being and of 
ignorance-of-how-anything-comes-to-be) and the nature of being to 
depend on consciousness. The multiplicity and the 
contradictoriness of the answers normally given to these questions 
ought to be sufficient evidence for something of the sort, or at least 
for the suspicion, that all the methods of answering them in the 

227 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

way normally done are radically wrong in some way. In fact the 
contradictory answers in all their variety, as usually given, each 
bolstered up by logic, betray, it seems to me, just that form of 
ignorance-craving combination which make perception/non- 
perception, change/immortality, time/eternity, life/death, action/ 
inaction, choice/fatality, unity/variety, individuality/universality, 
seem not only possible but real. (It then seems necessary or “right” 
[here we have craving] to determine what among these is [here we 
have ignorance] real and what is not.) And the trouble begins again: I 
begin asserting “I am this, | am not that,” “This is that,” “A is B,” 
“Consciousness is life,” “Truth is beauty,” “Life is good,” “Killing is 
right,” “The end is the justification of the means,” “I am,” “God is,” 
etc., all of which others may deny. Perhaps we get angry and come 
to blows. How many more people in history have been killed for 
the sake of opinions about what is and what is mot than have been 
killed for the sake of facts? View-points, interpretations, and 
opinions about the raw material of experience differ, less or more, 
from individual person to individual person. The more consistent 
and logically strengthened any moral, religious, or philosophical 
system becomes, the more possible it becomes for it to be 
contradicted by an opposing system. And then bare craving has to 
arbitrarily choose and bash the opponent on the head if it can. That 
is why Buddhism (especially Nagarjuna, but also Theravada) 
favours a dialectic that pulls down all such positivistic-negativistic 
systems (the positive is always haunted by the negative, and so there 
is really no true via negativa or via positiva in any absolute sense). It 
pulls them down using their own premises. 

Of whatever I can say that it is, by that very fact I imply that it 
is not: It is this, is not that. It then is in virtue of what it is not, being 
so constituted by the consciousness that determines it thus. But the 
consciousness on which its being depends is negative, whose 
negativity appears in objective things as their temporality and 
change, the change in their being. But while the being of whatever 
is objective to it appears as positive, even though it may change, its 
own being appears as a negation of itself and a denial, flight or 
movement, the temporalizing of the temporalized objective world. 

228 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

Now, perhaps, you will understand why it is really impossible 
for a Buddhist to answer the questions, “Does Buddhism teach the 
extinction of consciousness? Js nibbana the extinction of 
consciousness?” On the basis of what has been said above, could it 
be answered yes or no without examining each term of the 
question? 

There is, of course, another, different approach to the analysis 
of (not the answer to) that question: Why should consciousness 
(however conceived) seem preferable to cessation-of-consciousness 
(however conceived)? Consciousness of deprivation, of an “abyss of 
nothingness,” is not cessation of consciousness. Would not any 
preference (absolute one-sided choice) for one over the other show 
craving in the aim if that were set up as the ultimate aim? The 
desire-to-end-craving, as I see it, is a provisional measure adopted 
while craving is still present in order to use craving to terminate 
itself, while the aim is absence-of-craving and consequently ending 
of suffering. Use of the word is (which implies presence of 
ignorance) in this way is also use of present ignorance to terminate 
itself, while the aim is (to me in this state) liberation from 
ignorance. 

Second, suppose a state of consciousness without suffering. 
Would it not have to be entirely without change since the slightest 
change in the state must imply a degree of suffering intruding. But 
can a state of consciousness absolutely without change be 
distinguished at all from absence of consciousness? I do not see how 
it can. However a mixture of longing for the incompatible (craving) 
and fear of or disinclination to face the facts of the association and 
complexity which are inseparable from conscious experience 
ignorance) can make it seem as possible and realizable as the 
catching of the red in a rainbow with a butterfly net. So out we go 
with our butterfly nets chasing colour ... and get wet instead. 
Craving and ignorance persist in heaven, though suffering may be 
suspended there for a time. 

That is how I see Emerson’s “Take what you will but pay the 
price,” viz. “Pay death as the price of life,” or “Pay suffering as the 
price of consciousness.” May get it on loan, but if one does not pay 
up when the bill comes in, the bailiffs distrain. But that does not 

229 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

mean that I think one should counter with undiminished craving 
and ignorance and use them to denounce life, consciousness, etc. I 
say one should take them as they are and develop understanding of 
them. That, as I see it, and only that, along with the sharing of it, is 
the true source of joy, not joy of life haunted by fear of Joss-of- 
consciousness, and so on, This you know, so I am not saying 
anything new. 

If L ask myself “Is it possible for me to end consciousness?” I 
have to reply to myself that I see no possibility at present. (What 
might happen if I succeeded in ending craving and ignorance, of 
which I see no prospect at present, is, of course, hard to say!) If the 
possibility were available now, I at present see no sound reason 
why I should not avail myself of it. Pure speculation! Yes, but at 
least it prevents me coming down one-sidedly in favour of 
consciousness or in favour of non-consciousness in the crude mode. 
I do regard death (my life’s end, murder, or suicide) as the ending of 
consciousness: to presume that conscious continuity (negativity) 
ends because a particular continuity of its material objective world 
(including its body) ends seems to me a pure assumption whose 
opposite is just as valid, with possibly better logical arguments in 
favour of it if the evidence is observed without bias. However, 
what happens to me at death cannot be known. Consequently I am 
at liberty to assume (since I cannot avoid assuming something 
about it) what seems most reasonable. Death seems above all to be 
forgetting. I do not know. But since I have to believe something 
about it whether I like it or not, I do not believe that consciousness 
ends with death. Memory may well do so. I don’t, however, know 
that this is what I want not to believe. 

It is, I think, rather important to bear in mind one thing in 
regard to what has been said above. With this view there are two 
scales of value (not so much divorced as crossing at right-angles) 
which must be carefully discriminated. The physical world of 
consciousness-being-action in which we live and are, biased by 
ignorance and propelled by craving, is governed by perception of 
being and the practical values based on that. But any positive 
metaphysical system, whether based only logically or emotionally 
on it, which is founded on that, is haunted by the shadows that it 

230 

Pathways of Buddhist Thought 

cannot avoid casting and that it cannot itself see (like the Sun). It 
acts in virtue of cause and effect and its thought is logical by its 
dependence on the word “is.” As far as we live in this world we 
have to live its mode and by its values, or we risk falling into wells 
through star-gazing. But none of its laws are made absolute (without 
divorcing idea from experience). The Void, of which it cannot be 
said that it is or is not, nor that it has consciousness or has none, 
while it denies absoluteness to any experiential value (alike to being 
and to consciousness) cannot be identified. And that is the doctrine 
of not-self (anata) as I see it in one aspect at present. This voidness 
cannot be “is-ed” and so introduced into the worldly scheme, 
except as the denial of absoluteness of all particular values. It has no 
more effect on ordinary life than the theory of relativity. But just as 
that theory completely alters calculation of enormous speeds, so, as 
I see it, this void-element completely alters calculations of 
extraordinary situations, of death (as killing, suicide or the partner 
of old age). 

Written in June 1957 

THE SUKKHAVIPASSAKA 

It is the aim here to ascertain the meaning of these three terms, and 
especially of the last with respect to the minimum of concentration 
(samadhi, samatha) implied by it as indispensable. The material for 
this inquiry is the Pali texts and their commentaries. 

Samathayanika (‘one whose vehicle is quiet’): see, e.g., 
Visuddhimagga Ch XVIII. ‘Quiet’ (samatha) stands here for the four 
jhanas and four aruppas (‘Formless Attainments’). 

Vipassanayanika (‘one whose vehicle is insight’): see, e.g., Vism 
Ch XVIIL. ‘Insight’ here means investigation intended to lead to the 
attainment of the Noble Eightfold path in any one of its 4 stages. 
The suddhavipassanayanika (‘one whose vehicle is pure insight’) in 
Vism Ch XVIII is probably equatable with the next. 

Sukkhavipassaka (‘bare-insight worker’): see quotations in 
Appendix I; since the term is often used to explain the Pitaka term 
panfiavimutta, an examination of the meaning of that term is 
required before attempting to fix a meaning for s#kkhavipassaka. 
As will be seen from the Sutta references summarized in Appendix 
I, the term pafifavimutta is given a number of widely varying 
descriptions. The word descriptions, rather than definitions is used 
purposely here; for numerous differing descriptions can, and 
should, be made of a single thing or person from various angles as, 
say, of a fig-tree [rom above, from the side, etc.), with different 
emphasis, in alternative terms, and so on; but a definition is 
properly only a single strict delimitation, usually of a quality or set 
of qualities. The Buddha makes great use of multiple descriptions as 
well as of definitions. Gee. e.g., App. [ § 8). So, taking these 
descriptions of the pafiidavimutta as complementary and not 
contradictory, they can be used as the basis for ad hoc definitions, if 
required. 

However, pafiiavimutti (‘understanding-deliverance’) emerges 
as the particular distinctive quality (guna) or idea (dhamma), found 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

in all arahantship, of being liberated by the permanent deliverance 
from ignorance (avija) given by understanding. This quality (or 
idea) has in itself no grades (only the four unrepeated stages of the 
Path—the ‘8 stages of insight’ in Vism Ch XX and XXI are not 
relevant here, see § 5). But in the formal statement of the 6th 
(supramundane) abbifid, that is Arahantship as exhaustion of 
taints (see. e.g. M I 35-6 and App. I § 8), both pafitavimutti and 
cetovimutti (‘heart-deliverance’) appear always _ together. 
Cetovimutti, however, alone, is the temporary liberation from need 
(tanha) provided in anyone, Arahant or ordinary man, by the eight 
attainments (4 jhanas and 4 druppas ; see e.g., MN 29, and 
Patisambhidamagga Vimokkhakatha), and at its lowers is the first 
jhana. Cetovimutti thus has grades, is temporary, and is the 
particular field of quiet (samatha), while patiavimutti has no 
grades, is permanent (in each of its four stages in its removal of 
ignorance) and is the particular field of knowledge of the Four 
Truths. In combination with cetovimutti of some grade, 
paffiavimutti gives the Arahant permanent unassailability to his 
deliverance from both ignorance and need. 

Now while paviviavimutti is thus the quality (or idea), the word 
parinavimutta is used of the ‘person’ (i.e., ‘type of person’) 
possessing that quality. Arahants, as ‘persons’ vary, not in 
panhavimutti but in the grade of development of their cetovimutti, 
and on this general basis two kinds of Arahant are contrasted, that 
is, the xbhatobhagavimutta (‘Both-Ways-Liberated’) and 
pannavimutta (‘one liberated by understanding’); see MN 70, 
Puggalapannatti etc.). The former, at maximum, has the highest 
grade of cetovimutti with the five mundane abhifias, while the 
latter, at minimum, has only one or the four jhanas (this will be 
shown later): a possessor of the five mundane abhififias is never, 
then, called a ‘paftfavimutta’ (though he of course has 
panhavimutti), and one with only the jhanas for cetovimutti is 
never called ubhatobhagavimutta (thought he of course has some 
cetovimutti). However, the two terms overlap in the intervening 
grades of cetovimutti (the 8 vimokkhas, 4 druppas, etc.), and the line 
of demarcation varies according to the terms to the terms of 
description and contrast (see App. I). The lower the grade of 

233 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

cetovimutti the more emphasis comes to be laid on pariniavimutti, 
though the former is never and nowhere stated to be quite 
dispensable with. The paitavimutta ‘person’ (puggala)—‘persons’ 
being a convention (vohdra)—is thus not strictly or uniquely 
definable in the way that the quality of pavtiavimutti is. Hence the 
treatment of him by multiple descriptions, 

At this point the question arises: Does the taka allow any 
interpretation of pafavimutta to the effect that, at the very 
minimum, he can reach Arahantship quite without jhana, even asa 
factor of the Eightfold Path? Does the Satipatthana method suggest 
this? 

A careful examination of the Suttas summarized in Appendix I 
and of other relevant Tipitaka passages shows quite clearly that not 
one of them furnishes ay information on the question: the four 
jhanas are not mentioned either collectively or singly in connection 
with pafinidavimutta. In fact nowhere in the Tipitaka is it said that 
Arahantship (or any stage of the Path) can be reached without 
jhana. In the particular case of the Susima Sutta (App. I § 4) the 
specific omission of the jhanas from the list of attainments not 
necessary for the pariviavimutta is, however, particularly striking. If 
the Buddha intended that jhana, too, was not necessary, why did he 
not say so outright, which he never did? But in other Suttas, too, 
such as those at SN 35:70 & 152, no mention is made of jhanas: 
might that not show that the Buddha may have wanted perhaps to 
hint that Satipatthina made jhana unnecessary? Let us see. Those 
two Suttas do relate specifically to the fourth Satipatthana, the 
contemplation of Ideas as Ideas of the Mahasatipatthana sutta (DN 
22), And in that Sutta the Noble Eightfold Path is defined in full 
with samma-samadhi (‘Right Concentration’), its eight factor, 
clearly and unequivocally as jhana, That is the answer. 

The Suttas’ answer to the question is thus perfectly definite: 
there is no dispensing with jhana. And this is also confirmed 
equally decisively by the Abhidhamma, where the 
Dhammasangani’s comprehensive list of 89 types of cognizance 
contains no type of Path-Cognizance without supramundane jhana. 

In view of this, then, if the Commentaries say the contrary if, 
for instance we think that they assert or suggest that a sukkha 

234 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

vipassaka can become an Arahant without any jhana-concentration at 
all—, then, if we are not mistaken, they must be in irreconcilable 
conflict with both the Suttas and the Abhidhamma: there is really 
no escape. If that is right, they disregard the instructions of the 
Mahapadesa Sutta (A Il 167) and their own criterion, which is that 
of a statement in commentaries conflicts with the Tipitaka, it must 
be rejected. Let us see if, in act, they actually do so. 
The commentaries often use their term sukkhavipassaka to explain 
the Pitaka term pafiiavimutta, though they are not at all 
synonymous. That being so, since the Tipitaka, as already shown, 
does not allow the omission of jhana from the indispensable 
qualities of he pafftavimutta or {rom the factors of the Path (and 
consequently Arahantship), this meaning must ne conveyed also by 
the commentaries either explicitly or implicitly, of they are not to 
contradict the Pitakas. Let us take five representative statements— 
the most awkward we can find from the commentaries, which at 
first glance most clearly seem to state the contrary. 
Mayam nijhanika sukkhavipassaka (App. I § 4a). 
So (patniavimutto) sukkhavipassako ca catuhi jhanehi vutthaya 
arahattam patta cattaro ca ti imesam vasena patcavidho hoti 
(App. I § 5a). 
Pafitabalen’eva ... vimutto ti attho (App. I § 7a). 
Jhanabhitinanam abhavena (App. 1 § 8a). 
Anuppaditayhano araddhavipassako (App. 1 § 8a). 

What are we to make of these? 

Do they, especially § 4, not show incontestably that the 
commentator held that jhana was unnecessary altogether? That 
quotations out of context can be misleading is so obviously true 
that it is constantly forgotten and has always to be reiterated. The 
full immediate contexts will be found in Appendix I with English 
translations. But let us take each statement individually and 
examine it closely in the light of its proper context, of the text 
commented on, of possible alternative grammatical solutions, and 
of the teaching as a whole. 

(1) The word nijhanika here (as described in the note to App. I 
§ 4a) does not mean “no jhana,” but on the contrary unmistakably 
alludes to the term dhammanijjhanakhanti; for the appearance of 

235 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

this expression in the sutta (MN 70) where the patiiavimutta is 
described makes this allusion inescapable. The word thus means 
‘ponderers’ indeed there appears to be no usage anywhere of 
nijjhana in any form in a negative sense, the prefix being here 
augmentative, not privative. As to the words that follow in the 
same passage (§ 4a), namely vindsamadhim evam hanuppattim 
dassanattham, these simply state what is, in fact, the essence of the 
Buddha’s teaching: that concentration alone does not provide final 
liberation, which is only attainable by the intervention of insight 
leading to Path-attainment (see § 2 above). The words Vina 
samadhim belong properly to dassanattham not to hapuppattim. 
And this does not imply in any way jhana—concentration 
(cetovimutti) has no part to play at all. 

(2) The addition of the sukkhavipassaka to the four 
distinguished by the jhana they have emerged from (vutthaya) 
might seem to suggest that he does without jhana at all times. If that 
were actually intended, though, it would be odd, given that the 
Susima Sutta here being commented on omits, specially and 
pointedly, any mention of jhina (ee § 2 above) from the 
dispensables, that the commentator should leave such an important 
point not cleared up (and it is not cleared up anywhere else). But 
this oddness here vanishes if we take proper account of the word 
vutthaya; for that means ‘having emerged’ and so applies only to 
the time before reaching the Path, but conveys nothing about the 
composition of the Path reached. The samathayanika first develops 
jhana, on the basis of which, after emerging from it, he develops 
insight, till he reaches the Path whose eighth factor is 
supramundane jhana. The vipassandyanika (including the 
sukkhavipassaka) places jhana second, or works without it at all, till 
the attainment of the path whose eight factor is likewise 
supramundane jhana. This passage therefore gives us information 
about the practice of vipassand, but none at all about the 
composition of the path or the indispensability of shana (see also § 5 
below). 

(3) This simply restates what is said in the later part of App. 1 § 
4a, namely that the attainment of the path, as such and considered 
apart from the necessary accessory concentration, is the peculiar 

236 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

field of understanding (and of it were not, understanding would 
have no part to play.) 

(4) This might seem at first conclusive, explicit and 
incontrovertible evidence in favour of the view that the 
commentaries did reject jhana as indispensable. However, let us 
take a close look at the wording of the sutta commented in (see 
App. 1 § 8, 1st para). The commentary (§ 8a) says jhanabhininanam 
abhavena: but in the sutta passage being commented on we find the 
words sayam abhiriiia sacchikatva (which are actually the basis for 
this formula being called the ‘sixth, supramundane, abbififia’). So 
here in the sutta we have the sixth, supramundane, abhififia alone 
without the other five, mundane, abhifiia. Now while the ‘five’ are 
the exclusive product of the fourth jhana and so belong only to 
samatha (see e.g. Vism Ch XII and XIII), the ‘sixth’ is, considered 
alone, the exclusive product of understanding (as explained under 
(i) above). If we, then, uncritically take the commentary’s 
compound jhanabhitfianam to be what the grammarians call a 
dvandva-compound, resolve it into jhananan-ca abhitiianafi-ca, and 
translate the whole phrase by ‘with the absence of jhanas and 
abhitifids we have made the commentator contradict flatly the very 
passage in the sutta he is commenting on—the sutta assets the 
presence of an abhifita and the commentator has been made to 
deny sweepingly both jhanas and abhifiias—which is plainly 
absurd. The proper and only way here is to take the compound as a 
tappurisa-compound, resolve it into jhanena abhinrianam, and 
translate the whole phrase by ‘with the absence of abhififias du to 
jhana’ (i.e., of the five mundane, which are due to the perfecting of 
the 4th jhana). Further confirmation is provided by the presence, in 
this same sutta passage, of the word cetovimutti: and there is no 
cetovimutti without shana. It is also said in this same sutta passage 
that this Arahant ‘has not... the Eight Liberation’s. Now the first 
three of these are jhana collectively in three aspects, the remaining 
five being the four aruppas and cessation. In this connection the 
commentaries (App. I § 5b and 6a) are at special pains to show that 
‘having the Eight Vimokkhas’ is a collective statement allowed of 
one who has gained any one druppa but not of one who has only 
ghana: having jhana is thus compatible with the eighth ‘having no 

237 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Eight Vimokkhas’. Such an explanation would indeed be futile of 
the commentators held that jhana was dispensable for Arahantship. 

(5) The expression anuppdditajhano araddhavipassako means 
simply ‘one who begins his insight without first arousing jhana’ and 
so is interpretable under (ii) above. 

So here too all the commentarial passages describing the 
pattavimutta and exhibiting their use of sukkhavipassaka tell us 
nothing about jhana not being necessary for the path. 

There is, in fact, nothing here to tell; for that has already been 
told unequivocally in the suttas and Abhidhamma in the 
appropriate place (see § 2). It would also be quite absurd to suppose 
that Acariya Buddhaghosa forgot the Dhammasangani’s definition, 
since he uses its 89-fold classification of all cognizance as one of the 
main pillars of his exegetical system, and equally absurd to suggest 
that he forgot that the Mahdsatipatthana sutta, commented upon by 
him in such detail, contains the sutta definition of Path-samadhi as 
jhana (also repeated elsewhere). But it would be reasonable to 
suppose that he remembered them well—well enough for him not 
to suspect that these passages which he wrote could possibly be 
interpreted to mean that jhana could be dispensed with, for him not 
to refer here to definitions that he must have regarded as too well 
known to need repetition in every instance. For in the 
Visuddhimagga (p. 666-7 / Ch xxi) he wrote the words—repeated in 
the Atthasalini (p. 228-9)—Sukkavipassakassa uppannamaggo ... 
pathamajjhaniko va hoti: “The bare-insight worker's Path ... always 
(only) has the first jhana’. 

Examples of omission for the sake of emphasis of other aspects 
will be found, for instance, in Majjhima sutta 121 (omission of the 4 
jhanas), in majjhima sutta 125 (omission of only the first jhana), 
etc., etc., and these too are not to be taken as ‘hints that what is 
omitted is unnecessary’. 

This inquiry would not be complete without observing that several 
types of concentration (samadhi) are distinguished in the 
commentaries. The Visuddhimagga (p. 85) lists, among other sets, 
two kinds, namely upacara and appand. Elsewhere it is explained 
that by upacdra samadhi (‘access-concentration’) is intented the 
concentration of kdmdavacara (‘sensual sphere’) type that 

238 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

accompanies strong vipassana (‘insight’), which arises when the five 
hindrances (nivarana) have been suppressed but before the jhana- 
factors have arisen (based on the passage at M I 21, lines 31-3: ‘my 
energy was aroused, ... my heart was concentrated and unified’, 
which theme is developed differently at Patisambhida 1 99). Appana- 
samadhi (‘absorption-concentration’) is defined as jhana (with the 
jhana factors arisen), and as ripdvacara (‘from sphere’) or 
ariipavacara (‘formless-sphere’). However, in another context 
(Vism 289) a third type called there khanika-cittekaggata 
(‘momentary unification of cognizance’) is introduced but not 
developed. Of this the Paramatthamanyiisa says khanikacittekaggata 
ti khanamattatthitiko samadhi; so pi hi drammane nirantaram 
ekakarena pavattamano patipakkhena anabhibhito appito viya cittam 
niccalam thapeti: 

“Momentary unification of cognizance” is concentration that is 
steadied for only a moment; yet when that occur in one mode 
uninterruptedly on an object without its being overcome by 
opposition, it steadies cognizance (making it) motionless as through 
it were absorption’ (p.278 Hewavitarane ed.). This, in its context of 
a sub-comment on a comment on the sutta-phrase samadaham 
cittam assasissami ti pajanati (‘he understand ” I shall breathe in 
concentrating cognizance”), might seem to half-open the door to 
some form of substitute for appana (to use the commentarial 
terminology, which is not in the Pitaka) Remembering, however, 
that both suttas and Abhidhamma define Path consciousness 
unequivocally as inseparable from jhana (paraphrased in the 
commentaries by ‘appana’) what is ‘as though it were absorption’ 
can never be the actual supramundane sammadsamadhi of the path 
(see e.g., Atthasdlini p. 214). Though it is doubtless a perfectly 
legitimate way of describing certain aspects of the necessary degree 
of concentration without which no insight can take place at all, this 
passage cannot be taken, and was never intended to be taken, to 
have any bearing on the composition of the Noble Eightfold Path. 
In these contexts it needs also to be remembered that the term 
vipassana, whether in the Pitakas or the Commentaries, whether by 
itself or as a component of the commentarial term sukkhavipassaka, 
is used specifically for that kind of examination of experience 

239 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

which leads up to attainment of the Path, but not for the 
understanding (paffia) contained in the actual path under 
supramundane sammaditthi (‘Right View’). Vipassana is thus only 
that kind of understanding that precedes the Path, its last states 
before the actual Path itself being called vutthanagamini vipassana 
insight leading to emergence’ Vism 661), and the Path itself being 
called vutthanam that is, ‘emergence’ of Right View from wrong 
view (and so with other seven factors: see Patisambhidamagga I 69). 
It would therefore seem that any use of the term Vipassaka 
(whether sukkha or not) as synonymous with maggalabhi (‘path- 
obtainer’) would be incorrect. It that is so, then whatever is said 
about a sukkhavipassaka, as vipassaka, tells us nothing about the 
composition of the path which he may attain, for which we must 
look to the proper definitions in the proper places . 

It is perhaps allowable to infer that, at minimum, a 
sukkhavipassaka need not develop jhana at any time before he 
actually reaches the supramundane jhana of the Noble Eightfold 
Path, but unless his Path contains at least the supramundane first 
jhana it is not, in fact, the Path but only dhammuddhacca 
(overestimation of ideas’) in the form of a vipassanitpakkilesa 
(imperfection of insight’) see App. II; also Vism Ch XX end). 
With the reservations already made about the difficulties of 
defining ‘persons’ (§2 above), the following general definitions can 
perhaps be made. 

(i) Samathayanika (‘one whose vehicle is quiet’); one who in his 
work to reach the path (in each of its four stages) habitually first 
arouses jhana, then emerges {rom it, and practises insight on the 
jhana emerged from. This leads him, if successful to the ‘emergence’ 
of the path with supramundane jhana (at minimum the first as its 
eighth factor.) 

(ii) Vipassanayanika (‘one whose vehicle is insight’): one who 
habitually practices insight before jhana on his way to the Path. If he 
makes no use of, or does not attain jhana before he reaches the path, 
he is called a suddhavipassanayanika (one whose vehicle is pure 
insight’), in which case he can be taken as equivalent to the next. 

“@ii) Sukkhavipassaka (‘bare-insight worker’): one who never 
emerges from jhana (or any attainment of samadhi) before the time 

240 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

he reaches the supramundane sammasamadhi of the Path—in his case 
the supramundane first jhana (Vism 666-7; Atthasalini 228-9). 
Unlike the patitavimutta, which term describes the Obtainer of the 
Fourth Stage of the Path and its fruit, the term sukkhavipassaka (like 
the other two commentarial terms (i) and (ii) above) is only 
applicable to one who is trying for, but has not yet reached, the path 
in any one of its four stages, and so it can be, and is, used for the 
ordinary man who has not yet reached even the Stream-Entry Path 
as well as for those trying for the other stages of the Path. The term 
sukkhavipassaka-khinasava (App. I § 8a) then properly means ‘one 
whose taints are exhausted, who has arrives at the Path by the way 
of the Bare-insight worker’. Since his insight is called ‘bare (dry), 
impoverished’ (App. I § 7b), his way is probably not the easiest. 

(iv) Paiitavimutta (‘liberated by understanding’): since all 
Arahants are, strictly speaking ‘liberated by understanding’, this 
term, when used to distinguish one kind from another has only a 
relative or comparative meaning: in this sense, a parimavimutta is 
contrasted with a Buddha as not having discovered the path he 
follows (App. 1§ 1.), or he is contrasted with an ubhatobhagavimutta 
(‘both ways liberated’) Arahant by his not having fully exploited to 
the full the field of samadhi (samatha: App. I § 2 etc.), while at 
minimum the xbhatobhagavimutta must have one of the four 
aruppas (App. I § 5b, 6a), a patiiavimutta can at minimum have 
only the first jhana. What is the latest point to which his 
attainment of it can be put off is not stated. If called (collectively) 
‘without the Eight Vimokkhas’ (App. I § 6, cf. § 8) he can still have 
jhana (App. 1 § 5b, 6a). Both pa*iiavimutta and cetovimutti (the last 
in some degree) are present in all Arahants (App. I § 8.). 

(v) The Suttas (notably the Mahdsatipatthina sutta) and the 
Abhidhamma (Dhammasangani) state unequivocally that there is 
no Noble Eightfold Path without supramundane jhana. This is 
confirmed in the commentaries (specifically with the words ‘the 
bare-Insight Worker's path ... always (only) has the first jhana (§ 3 
end). Commentarial passages that at first glance seem to state the 
contrary can be found after proper investigation, not to do so. 

(vi) The general spirit of the Buddha’s teaching in relation to 
samatha is expressed by the following sutta: “Bhikkhus, these two 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

ideas partake of true knowledge. What two? Quiet and insight. 
When quiet is maintained in being ... a pure heart is maintained in 
being ... (and) lust is abandoned. When insight is maintained in 
being, ... understanding is maintained in being, .... (and) whatever 
ignorance there is abandoned. No heart defiled by lust is liberated, 
and no understanding defiled by ignorance is maintained in being. 
This heart-deliverance is due to fading of ignorance’ (AN 3:10/I 
61). Other suttas expressing this are far too may to refer to here. 
Consequently, such suttas as the Satipatthana sutta (MN 10), or 
those at, say, Samyutta 35:70 and 152, have to be taken as 
emphasizing the essential part played by insight in developing 
understanding, without, however, implying that the minimum 
ghana of cetovimutti can ne dispensed with. 

* * & 

APPENDIX I 
(For discussion and justification of translations see § 3.) 

§ 1. Paftfiavimutta (at maximum) distinguished from 
sammasambuddha only by the fact that the patiavimutta follows 
the way that a sammadsambuddha discovers (SN 22:58/S III 65-6). 

§ 2. Paitavimutta contrasted with ubhatobhagavimutta in 
terms of the ‘9 attainments’ (4 jhanas, 4 druppas, and cessation): the 
patiiavimutta can have all these, but what distinguished him then 
from the other is that he has not fully exploited them (in their 
aspect of samatha). No pahhavimutta is without one of these 
attainments. (AN 9:44/A IV 452-3). 

§ 3. Patinavimutta contrasted with tevijja, chalabhinnia, and 
ubhatobhagavimutta: he is less than these, but no mention that he 
can dispense with jhana. (SN 7:7/S [ 191). 

§ 4. Susima sutta: the pathavimutta need not have the five 
mundane abhifvias (supernormal powers) or the 4 druppas (formless 
attainments): specific omission of jhana from the attainments that 
can be dispensed with. Compare the wording of attainments here 
with that in, say, MN 6. (SN 12:70/A II 121-7). 

242 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

§ 4a. Commentary to Susima Sutta: mayam nijjhanika 
sukkhavipassaka panniamatten’eva vimutta ti ... “Ajaneyyasi va” to 
adi kasma vuttam? Vind samadhim evam-nanuppattim dassanattham, 
Idan hi vuttam hoti: Susima maggo va phalam va na samadhinissando 
na samadhi-anisamso na samadhissa nipphatti, vipassandya pana so 
nissando vipassandya anisamso vipassanaya nipphatti ... 

Translation: (note: nijjhdnika fr. nijhana (‘pondering’), and 
alludes directly to dhamma — nijhanam —khamati 
dhammanijjhanakhanti (MN 70/M I 480), cf. also nijhatti & 
nijjhapenti (M 1 320); no instance of this term in any form as 
negative of shana, prefix nir- being augmentative, not privative, 
here). “We are liberated by understanding, friend”: we are 
ponderers, bare-insight workers, liberated simply by understanding 
... “Whether you understand or ...” and the rest: why is this said? In 
order to show without (reference to) concentration the arising of 
knowledge thus. What is meant is this: ‘Susima, neither the Path 
nor (its) fruit are the outcome of concentration, or the benefits of 
concentration, or the productions of concentration, rather they are 
the outcome of insight, the benefits of insight, the production of 
insight’. (Note: this simply states the fact that concentration alone 
does not, as susima seems to have supposed, produce true 
liberation, which is the field of understanding; but nothing is said 
here to the effect that jhana can be dispensed with). 

§ 5. Pafiiavimutta contrasted with ubhatobhagavimutta in 
terms of the 4 aruppas only, the difference then being that the 
pathavimutta need not have these. (MN 70/A I 477-8). No 
mention of jhana. 

§ 5a. Commentary to MN 70: Pandya vimutto ti 
panhavimutto, So sukkhavipassako ca jhanehi vutthaya arahattam 
patta cattaro ca ti imesam vasena pattcavidho hoti. Pali pan’ ettha 
attha-vimokkha-patikkhepavasen’eva dgata ... (cites Puggalaparinatti 
14; see § 6 below, and particularly reservations in this respect in 
both § 5b and 6a). 

Translation: (resolution of compound not rendered) ‘He (one 
liberated by understanding) is of five kinds namely the bare-insight 
worker and those (four) who have reached arahantship after 
emerging from the four respective jhanas. Now here (in this 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

particular aspect of the aruppas) the text is also stated in terms of 
rejection of the Eight Liberations’ (as in the Puggalapannatti) but 
see commentary to that, § 6a below). 

§ 5b. Sub-commentary to MN 70 ¢f. § 6a below): 
“Parthavimutto” ti visesato parhdya eva vimutto na tassa 
patthanabbitena atthavimokkhasankhatena satisayena samadhina to 
patfiavimutto—yo ariyo anadhigata-atthavimokkhena** —sabbaso 
asavehi vimutto/ tass’etam adhivacanam // adhigate pi hi 
ripayhanavimokkhenal so satisayasamadhinissito ti na tassa vasena 
ubhatobhagavimutto hoti ti vutto vayam attho/ arupayhanesu pana 
ekasmim pi sati ubhatobhagavimutto yeva nama hoti/ tena hi 
atthavimokkhekadesena tannamadanasamatthena atthavimokkhalabhi 
tveva vuccati samudaye hi pavatto voharo avayave pi dissati yatha 
sattisayo ti// ... Atthavimokkhapatikkhepavasem eva ti avadharanena 
patikkhepavasen’eva agatabhavam dasseti/ ten’aha “kayena phusitva 
viharati” ti. 

Translation: ‘Liberated distinctively by means of only 
understanding; not by means of any concentration with extra 
(development), entitled (collectively) the “Eight Liberations” and 
made the basis for that (understanding), thus ‘liberated by 
understanding” ; this is a synonym for the (type of) Noble One 
(.e., Path-attainer) liberated altogether from taints with respect to a 
Liberation (i.e. form-jhana—see note at the end for the 
‘Liberations’) that has not arrived at (the collective title of) “the 
Eight”. For even when (that title is) arrived at (by his developing a 
formless jhana (as in § 2 above) yet since (the partiavimutta is here 
regarded specifically) with respect to (some) form-jhana Liberation 
(of his), he (thus) has for support (the form-jhana) concentration 
“with extra” (i.e., with extra formless-jhana), and so the meaning is 
that he is not then called ubhatobhagavimutta in virtue of that 
(extra formless-jhana), though when there is even one of the 
formless jhanas he is called an ubhatobhagavimutta too (as in MN 
70, see § 5 above). For he is called an “Obtainer of the Eight 

%. Tris not clear whether we should read locative and negative vimokkhe 
na or instrumental -vimokkhena. Whichever is right—probably the 
latter—both should be the same, probably. Fortunately the sense is 
clear from No. 6a, from which this is expanded. 

244 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

Liberations” in virtue of the ability of a part (i.e., one of the last 
five) of the Eight Liberations to confer that name since the usage is 
found to occur with respect to the whole and to a member, as in 
the case of (the term) sattisayo... “Also stated in terms of rejection 
of the Eight Liberations” points out how it is stated in terms of 
rejection on account of emphasis’. 

§6. Parriavimutta contrasted with ubhatobhagavimutta in 
terms of possession of the Eight Liberations (Collectively: § 5 above 
and § 6a below). The Pafiiavimutta need not have the Eight Libera- 
tions collectively. (N.B. the insistence of the commentary here and 
the Sub-commentary in § 5b above on the collectiveness of the term 
“Obtainer of the Eight Liberations’ and that it can only be gained 
by attaining one of the aruppas, but not by attaining form-jhana 
clearly shows that the commentators were fully aware of the indis- 
pensability of jhana for the attainment of the Noble Path). (Puggal- 
aparnatti 14 & 73). 

§6a. Commentary to Pug: Reproduces § 5a up to ‘Paricavidho 
hoti’, and adds etesu hi eko pi atthavimokkhalabhi na hoti// ten’eva 
“na h’eva kho atthavimokkhe” ti (Pug. text) ddim aha// artipavacara- 
jjhanesu pana ekasmim sati ubhatobhagavimutto yeva nama hoti ti. 

“Translation: For not even one among these [five (see 5a)] is 
(called) an “attainer of the Eight Liberations” (collectively), hence 
“without (having touched with the body) the Eight Liberations” 
and so on is said. But when there is any one of the formless-sphere 
jhanas (i.e., the four aruppas) he (i.e., this ‘ obtainer of the Eight Lib- 
erations’) is also called “ubhatobhagavimutta” (Note: this means 
that an “obtainer of the Eight” can be called an ubhatobhagavimutta 
in contrast to a pafitavimutta who has no druppas and he can also 
be called a pafitavimutta in contrast to an ubhatobhagavimutta who 
has, say the five mundane abbininas (see § 2 above). The Milatika 
adds nothing extra). 

§7. Parinavimutta described in contrast with the ubhatobha- 
gavimutta in terms of ‘seeing with understanding the 7 standing- 
points for consciousness (virtrtanatthiti) and two bases (dyatana), 
namely those of the non-percipient and neither-percipient-nor-non- 
percipient. He lacks the 8 Vimokkbhas (see Nos. 5b and 6a), this tells 
us nothing about jhana (DN 15/D II 70). 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

§7a. Commentary: Pariiavimutto’ ti pafinaya vimutto; 
atthavimokkhe asacchikatva pannabalen’eva namakayassa ca riipaka- 
yassa ca appavattim katva vimutto ti attho. So sukkhavipassako ca 
pathamajjanadisu arihatarasmim thatva arahattam patto ca ti paticav- 
idho (see § 5a) hoti. 

(There follows quotation from Pug. As in § 5a) 

Translation: ‘... without having reached the Eight Libera- 
tions (collectively, see nos. 5b and 6a), he is liberated by causing, 
through the power of understanding alone (see § 4a), the non- 
occurrence of the name-body and the form-body. He (the 
patrtavimutta) is five fold as the bare-insight worker and the four 
who reach arahantship by having already steadied themselves in 
one of the jhanas beginning with the first (before they reach their 
Path)’. (Note: no more is said here than in § 4a and 5a).” 

§7b. Sub-commentary: Pathamajjhanaphassena vind pari 
jananadippakarehi cattari saccani janato pativijhanto. Tesam kic- 
canam matthakappattiya nitthitakiccataya visesana mutto ti vimutto. 
So pannavimutto ... samathabhavanasinehabhavena sukkha likha 
asiniddha va vipassana etassa ti sukkhavipassako. 

Translation: “One knowing, penetrating, the four Truths in 
the (four) modes of diagnosing (suffering), etc., without (having 
already had) the experience of (even) the first hana. He is freed dis- 
tinctively by these four functions being brought to their culmina- 
tion and to their function-completion, thus he is liberated. It is he 
that is “liberated by understanding” ... He has insight that is bare 
(dry), impoverished, owing to the absence of the moisture of main- 
tenance of quiet in being, or is unmoistened, thus he is a “bare- 
(dry)insight worker” (Note: Since this passage deals explicitly with 
insight (vipassana) alone, nothing can be deduced from it about the 
composition of the Path: see § 5). 

§8. The Arahant without the Eight Vimokkhas has both 
patiiavimutti and cetovimutti: Kathah ca bhikkave puggalo 
samanapundariko hoti? Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu asavanam khaya 
andsavam cetovimuttim paihavimuttim ditthe ‘va dhamme sayam 
abhinnia sacchikatva upasampajja viharati, no ca kho attha vimokkhe 
kayena phusitva viharati. (AN 4:87/A II 87) 

246 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

Kathati ca bhikkhave puggalo samanapundariko hoti? Idha 
bhikkhave bhikkhu sammaditthiko hoti ... sammasamadhi hoti sam- 
mafiani hoti sammavimutti hoti, no ca kho atthavimokkhe kayena 
phusitva viharati. (AN 4:89/A II 89) 

Kathat ca bhikkhave puggalo samanapundariko hoti? Idha 
bhikkhave bhikkhu paticas’ upadanakkhandhesu udayabbayanupassi 
viharati: Iti ripam iti ripassa samudayo, iti riipassa atthangamo; ... iti 
vitthanassa atthangamo ti, no ca kho attha vimokkhe kayena phusitva 
viharati. (AN 4:90/II 90) 

Translation: ‘And what, bhikkhus, is a samanapundarika? 
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu by realization through his own direct- 
acquaintance (abhiivia) here and now enters upon and abides in the 
heart-deliverance (cetovimutti) and understanding-deliverance 
(patinavimutti) that are taintless owing to (complete) exhaustion of 
taints; and yet he has not touched with the body the Eight Libera- 
tions (attha vimokkha) and abode in them’. (AN 4:87). 

“And how, bhikkhus, is a person a samanapundarika? Here, 
bhikkhus, a bhikkhu has Right View, ... has Right Concentration 
(sammasamadhi), has Right knowledge, and has Right Deliverance; 
and yet he has not touched with the body the Eight Liberations and 
abode in them’. (AN 4:89) 

“And how, bhikkhus, is a person samanapundarika? Here, 
bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating rise and fall in the five 
categories of consumption thus: Such is form, such its origin, such 
its disappearance; such is (feeling... perception... determinations...) 
consciousness, ... such its disappearance; and yet he has not touched 
the Eight Liberations and abode in them’. (AN 4:90) 

§8a. Commentary: Samanapundariko ti pundarikasadiso 
samano; pundarikam nama tinasatapattam saroruham, imind suk- 
khavipassaka-khinasavam dasseti. So jhanabhinhanam abhavena 
aparipunnagunato samanapundariko nama hoti. Samanapadumo ti... 
jhanabhititanam bhavena paripunnagunatta samana-padumo nama 
hoti. (ad. 87). 

Dasangikamaggavasena va arahattaphalanana-arahattaphala- 
vimuttihi saddhim atthangikamaggavasena va sukkhavipassa- 
kaninasavo kathito. (89). 

A Thinker’s Notebook 

Anuppaditajjhano araddhavipassako appamadavihari sekhapug- 
galo kathito. (90). 

Translation: “Samanapundarika” is a samana like a 
pundarika; a pundarika is a waterlily with less than a hundred pet- 
als. By this he shows a bare-insight worker; and he is called a 
samanapundarika because his qualities are incomplete with the 
absence of (those kinds of) direct acquaintance (abhinyia) due to 
jhana &. “Samanapaduma” ... is so called because his qualities are 
complete with the presence of (those kinds of) direct acquaintance 
due to jhana®*’ (87). 

(Here) the bare-insight worker is expounded by means of the 
ten-factored path or by means of the eight-factored path together 
with arahant-fruition knowledge and arahant-fruition deliverance.’ 
(98). 

(Here) an initiate person (i.e., not an arahant, but who has at 
least reached stream-entry) who abides in diligence as one who ini- 
tiate (his) insight without having aroused jhana (already)’. 

APPENDIX IT 

A sutta in the Anguttara Nikaya Fours (AN 4:170/A II 156-7) gives 
four ways of arriving at Arahantship, apart from which, no 
Arahantship—final knowledge’ (a/ia)—can be arrived at. They are: 

Samathapubbangamam vipassanam bhaveti—he maintains in being 
insight preceded by quiet. 

Vipassanapubbangamam samatham bhaveti—he maintains in being 
quiet preceded by insight. 

Samathavipassanam yuganaddham bhaveti—he maintains in being 
quiet and insight yoked together. 

‘The reason for treating jhanabhititanam as a tappurisa-compound and 
not as a dvandva-compound are given in § 3(iv) and need not be 
restated here, except to repeat that to threat it as a dvandva makes the 
comment contradict the passage commented on which is absurd). 

248 

The Sukkhavipassaka 

Bhikkhuno dhammuddhaccaviggahitam manasam hoti. So ... samayo 
yam tam cittam ajjhattam yeva santitthati sannisidati ekodi 
hoti samadhiyati; tassa maggo sajdyati—a bhikkhu’s mind is 
misled by overestimation of ideas. On that occasion 
cognizance (then) become steadied in himself again, clarified, 
becomes single, and is concentrated. (Then) the path is born 
in him. (AN 4:170/A I 157; Patisambhida Yuganaddhakatha). 

As to the fourth instance, the commentaries explain uddhacca 
here by ‘vikkhepa’ (‘distraction’) and viggahita by virtpagahita and 
virodhagahita (respectively ‘seized by deformation’ and ‘seized by 
opposition’) and paraphrased by tanhamanaditthi (‘need, conceits, 
and wrong views’). Uddhacca as one of the ‘ 5 Hindrances to 
concentration’ is properly ‘agitation’, but here the meaning is more 
literal in the sense of being ‘distracted’ from fact, and is ‘thrown up’ 
(ud+hatatya), i.e., ‘overestimates’ ideas. He thus overestimates 
what he has achieved and mistakes it for the Noble Eightfold Path 
when it is not. 

Now these four ‘ways’ are not four alternatives: the first three 
are alternatives, and need no comment, since they are three 
alternative ways of arriving at the Noble Eightfold Path without 
mistake in the way. The fourth, however, makes a mistake on the 
way, whichever of the three ways he is following, and afterwards 
sets himself right and eventually reaches the Noble Eightfold Path. 
The mistake he makes is to fancy some mere advance in Vipassana 
insight’ in the sense of §5, 9.v.) is the Noble Path. That mistake is 
called in the Patisambhidamagga 

Yuganaddhakatha, a vipassanipakkilesa (‘imperfections of 
insight’) and is divided into ten different kinds, which are also 
treated in detail in the Visuddhimagga, Ch XX. 

The conclusion to be drawn from this sutta, in the light of the 
definitions of the supramundane sammasamadhi of the Path given 
in the Mahasatipatthana sutta and the Dhammasangani, is that if 
someone fancies he has obtained the Noble Eightfold Path but not 
even the first hana as a component of it, he has in fact, simply 
exhibited dhammuddhacca (‘overestimation of ideas’), the remedy 
for which is further practice in elimination of need, conceits, and 
wrong views. 

BERSERKER 

BOOKS