CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

GIFT OF 

Prof. G. L. Burr 

Cornell University Library 
JC 121.M323.E64 

The Defensor pacis of Marsiglio of Padua 

3 1924 005 760 222 

OL1N LIBRARY - CIRCULATION 
DATE DUE 

f^^^^^l**4 

teww- 

ii flijf* ■ 

Men 

irf»l 

KT-^i 

wW 

' x u JUi/5 

» 

*l*«fl#«*«* 

ir 

qtlJ 

trarittfflb 

«#» 

' LUUT 

l 

biH*® 8 ^ 

i 

SrWS , iCE0*i*' 

■ 

CAVLORO 

rniNTCDiNU i.a. 

Cornell University 
Library 

The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 

http://archive.org/details/cu31924005760222 

HARVARD THEOLOGICAL STUDIES 

HARVARD 
THEOLOGICAL STUDIES 

EDITED FOR THE 

FACULTY OF DIVINITY 

IN 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 

BY 

GEORGE F. MOORE, JAMES H. ROPES, 
KIRSOPP LAKE 

CAMBRIDGE 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD 

Oxtord University Press 
I92O 

HARVARD THEOLOGICAL STUDIES 

VIII 

THE 

DEFENSOR PACIS 
OF MARSIGLIO OF PADUA 

A CRITICAL STUDY 

BY 

EPHRAIM EMERTON 

WINN PROFESSOR OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 
IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY EMERITUS 

CAMBRIDGE 
HARVARD UNTVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD 
Oxford University Press 

I920 

L 

tU#1 : '- H l Y 
' I^KjYivYvY, 

-r s\ 

\1\ 

COPYRIGHT, IQ20 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

c^4 

b 1 ' 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 

The most complete examination of the manuscripts of the 
Defensor Pads thus far published is by an American scholar, 
Dr. James Sullivan, now State Historian of New York, " The 
Manuscripts and Date of Marsiglio of ^Padua's Defensor 
Pads," in the English Historical Review, 1905, pp. 293-307. 
Dr. Sullivan personally examined twenty manuscripts in several 
European libraries and drew certain conclusions as to the date 
of composition of the Defensor. It is a matter of regret that 
other occupations have prevented him from carrying on his 
studies to the point of preparing a much needed new edition of 
the original. Meanwhile this work has been taken up by Pro- 
fessor Richard Scholz of Leipzig, and his edition, to appear in 
the Monumenta Germaniae Historica in a Section to be called 
Tractatus de jure imperiali saec. XIII et XIV, may be expected 
shortly. 

A brief summary of the printed editions is given by Dr. 
Sullivan in an article on Marsiglio of Padua and William of 
Ockam in the American Historical Review for April and July, 
1897. I have made use of the very imperfect edition of Goldast 
in his Monarchiae Romani Imperii, etc., 3 vols, fol., Frankfurt, 
1668, vol. II, pp. 154-312, and also of Professor Scholz's much 
abbreviated edition in usum scholarum in Quellensammlung zur 
Deutschen Geschichte, 1914. 

No complete translation from the original has ever been made 
into any modern language, but partial translations have ap- 
peared in French (before 1363), Italian (1363, from the French), 
German (1545), and English. The English translation by 
William Marshall was published in 1535 and is now extremely 
rare. There are three copies in the Bodleian and one in the 
British Museum, but I am not aware of any copy in this 
country. 

Up to the present time the most complete and satisfactory 
analysis of the contents of the Defensor is that given by Sigmund 
Riezler in his illuminating study, Die literarischen Widersacher 

BIBLiu»jritarni^AJL( nuic 

der Ptipste zur Zeit Ludwig des Baiers, 1874. All later writers 
have borrowed freely from this, but its conclusions have been 
modified on many points of detail. The most careful study of 
Marsiglio's life is that of Professor Baldassare Labanca of 
Padua, who writes from the point of view of a liberal Italian 
patriot with a strong tinge of local Paduan pride: Marsiglio da 
Padova, Riformatore politico e religioso del secolo XIV, 1882. 

Shorter discussions of Marsiglio and related authors are to 
be found in : — 

Friedberg, Emil, Die mittelaUertichen Lehren fiber das Verhdltniss von 

Stoat und Kirche, 1869. Zeitschrift fur Kirchenrecht VIII, pp. 

121-138. 
Bezold, Friedr., Die Lehre von der Volkssouverdnetdt wdhrend des 

Mittelalters, 1876. Historische Zeitschrift XXXVI, pp. 343-347. 
Miiller, Carl, Der Kampf Ludwigs des Baiern mit der Romischen 

Curia, 1879-80. 
Scaduto, Fr., State- e Chiesa negli scritti politici 1122-1347. 1882. 
Guggenheim, M., Marsilius von Padua und die Staatslehre des Aris- 

toteles. Historische Vierteljahrschrift XV (7) 1904. 
Dunning, W. A., A History of Political Theories Ancient and Medi- 
aeval, 1905, pp. 238-244. 
Stieglitz, L., Die Staatstheorie des Marsilius von Padua, 1914. Bei- 

trage zur Kulturgeschichte des Mittelalters. 
Lupoid von Bebenburg: de juribus regni et imperii Romani tractatus 

variorum rerum cognitions refertus. Basileae, 1566. 
Meyer, H., Lupoid von Bebenburg; Studien zu seinen Schriften, 1909. 

Studien und Darstellungen aus dem Gebiete der Geschichte VII, 

1-2. 

Valois, Noel, Jean de Jandun et Marsile de Padoue auteurs du De- 
fensor Pads. Histoire Litteraire de la France XXXIII, pp. 528- 
623. 

Baumann, J. J., Die Staatslehre des heUigen Thomas von Aquino, 1873. 

Zeilier, J., L'idee de Velat dans S. Thomas d'Aquin, 1910. 

Wicksteed, Philip H., Dante and Aquinas, 1913. 

Cappa-Legora, A., La politica di Dante e di Marsilio da Padova, 1906. 

THE DEFENSOR PACIS 

OF 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA 

I 

To_understand the importance of the political doctrines of 
Marsiglio of Padua one must bring them into relation with 
those of two of his not remote predecessors, Thomas Aquinas 
and Dante Alighieri. Aquinas died in 1274, three or four years 
after the birth of Marsiglio and Dante died in 1321, two or 
three years before. the appearance of Marsiglio's great work, 
the Defensor Pads. One might be tempted, therefore, to speak 
of these three notable contributors to political theory as repre- 
sentatives bf contemporary thought. To do so, however, 
would be to miss the most essential quality in each. Aquinas, -■■ 
here as elsewhere in his monumental activity, is the spokesman i 
of an epoch in human history that within a short generation 
.after him was gone forever. Dante sounds the note of a transi- * 
tion just beginning to outline itself clearly in the rapid march 
of events. /Marsiglio is the herald of a new world, the prophet 
of a new social order, acutely conscious of his modernness and 
not afraid to confess^it-O His book has often been called the 
most remarkable literary product of the Middle Ages, and I 
am inclined to accept this verdict./ And yet, even the name 
of Marsiglio is unknown to most persons outside the narrow 
circle of students of political theory. Speaking to an audience 
of clergymen educated quite beyond the ordinary level of then- 
class, I found that there was but one in the company who had 
ever heard Marsiglio's name, and that was only because he had 
been a pupil of mine in his university days. 

The explanation of this obscurity is, I think, not far to seek. 
The teaching of Marsiglio entered so subtly but so completely 
into the doctrine of his successors in the work of national de- 
velopment and of church reform that it has been overshadowed 
by their greater fame. From Wycliffe to Luther his influence 

2 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

can be traced with, entire -distinctness. It is seen sometimes 
though rarely, in open acknowledgement of indebtedness 
oftener in unmistakable similarities of argument, and again ir 
the unsparing criticism of orthodox opponents. His name is 
the most hated in the whole category of critics of the mediaeva 
order, and justly, for the defenders of the existing systen 
perceived from the first that Marsiglio, more accurately thar 
any one before him, had put his finger on the sore spot of Euro- 
pean civilization as worked out on the mediaeval theory oi 
society. The limit of that theory, as developed by Thomas 
Aquinas in all his voluminous writing, had been reached 
Sooner or later it must give way before a new spirit of criti- 
cism and a new sense of power in social elements that had 
hitherto been denied their right of expression. How soon thai 
was to be no man in the early fourteenth century could foresee, 
but the travail of the new time was beginning, and Marsiglio's 
teaching was its potent agent. • 

The world of Thonras Aquinas was dominated by a few great 
simple universal ideas, of which the life of man, both individual 
and associated, was the reflex. (• At the heart of things was God. 
revealed in the uniformity and harmony of Nature. The 
center and crown of creation was Man, to whom was given the 
rule over the earth, which again was the center of the material 
universe, served by the obedient sun and accompanied by the 
planetary and the starry host in tributary homage^ Corre- 
sponding to this majestic order of Nature, the associated life 
of man was also an image of ordered unity. It had, to be sure 
its varieties of race and nation and social class, but these varie- 
ties were only the differentiations of an essentially unifiec 
existence. The one and only God had made one sole anc 
sufficient revelation of himself, and this revelation had in- 
cluded a scheme of social order. Divine Providence hac 
chosen for the moment of its revelation a point of time wher 
the world was all united under the one beneficent, peacefu 
sway of the Roman Empire, and had demonstrated its purpos* 
by bringing into one efficient and harmonious whole the twc 
dominant forces of this Empire and the Christian Church, th< 
supreme trustees of its revelation. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 3 

All history since the beginning of Christianity had been the 
further demonstration of this divine purpose. The unity of 
the Church, through the continuing power of the divine will, 
had been embodied in the institution of the Roman Papacy, 
the one single depositary of the leadership of Christ through 
his one chosen agent, Peter, the leader of the Apostles. The 
unity of civil society had been secured by the continuation of 
the Roman imperial power, transferred in due time from the 
rebellious East to the subservient West in the persons of suc- 
sive rulers, whose imperial claim the kings of the earth had 
acknowledged with willing submission. And these two unities 
of Church and of State, were in essence but one; for, as the 
spiritual is higher than the material, as the sun is brighter than 
the moon, so was the spiritual power in the last resort superior 
to the temporal. Each was but an illustration within its own 
peculiar sphere of that divine sovereignty under which by the 
very definition of God all lesser rule belongs. 

It mattered not at all to the defenders of this magnificent 
theory that in fact a great majority of Christians refused to 
submit to the headship it implied. It was of no account that 
no trace of such a headship could be found until ten generations 
of Christians had passed their lives under a totally different 
conception of church order. It was convenient to forget that 
as between the two branches of the divine administration of 
western Christendom there had never existed that harmony 
which the whole theory of papal headship assumed. All these 
apparent limitations were only the accidents jprpjpeF to .ah 
in^itutionTCTU^rusfedtoliumah^ahds. The theory persisted, 
and the thirteenth century — "greatest of Christian centuries" 
in the calm judgment of its admirers — had seemed to put the 
seal, upon its triumph. From Innocent III to Boniface VIII 
the Papacy had been able to celebrate a series of victories over 
its secular opponents, the national governments, the national 
episcopates, and the spokesman for all these temporal interests, 
the mediaeval Empire. 

It is this triumph of the mediaeval theory of society that 
forms the background of the extraordinary activities of Thomas 
Aquinas. By whatever other name he may be known, the 

4 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

most significant word to describe him is the one he himself 
suggests, the "Summarist." Not only in his greatest work, 
the "Summa Theologiae," but throughout his enormous literary 
product, he gives us as in a mirror the reflection of the fixed 
conditions of thought by which the society of his day was 
governed. Contemporaries of his in the field of public and 
private law were putting forth books of law which they called 
"mirrors" (Spiegel). So Thomas mirrored to his generation 
and to all succeeding generations, the philosophic^the religious, 
the social, and the political ideals of his time. ITo him as to 
, the men of the thirteenth century in general^ these ideals 
» seemed to express not so much aims of the future as actually 
accomplished facts. The ideal seemed to have taken shape in 
institutions that must endure forever. 

In his treatment of the state as the most important form of 
>' human association Thomas follows almost completely the lead 
of Aristotle. He approves the monarchy as the best type of 
government, because it offers the best security against disorder. 
He draws, however, a sharp line between the monarch and the 
tyrant. To prevent the single ruler from degenerating into 
tyranny he would have him limited by some constitutional 
restraint on the part of the best elements of the population, 
but he is, perhaps purposely, vague as to the precise nature of 
this restraint. His monarch must be a "good" man, that is 
he must have for his guiding principle the welfare of his sub- 
jects. It is interesting to note that he nowhere discusses the 
nature of the Empire as distinguished from other forms of 
monarchical government. He assumes that there will be 
many different groupings of men around many leaders, and 
what he says as to the duties and obligations of the ruler 
applies to all alike. He makes no criticism of the imperial 
idea as" such, and he doubtless assumes the existence of such a 
coordinating power among the principalities of Christendom. 
Why then should he not have given to this quite unique ele- 
ment in the Christian commonwealth a treatment proportioned 
to its historic as well as to its theoretical importance? 

The answer to this problem may, perhaps, be found in 
Thomas's supreme interest in the Church as the one coordi- 
nating force needed to give balance and harmony to the politi- 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 5 

cal structure of the Christian state. To have elaborated after 
his fashion the r6le of the Empire as the arbiter and guarantor 
of peace among the states might well have seemed to him to 
be raising its function as at once the colleague and the rival 
of the Papacy to the danger point. Aquinas was not likely to 
forget in any theoretical idealism the practical facts of his 
present-day politics. "During the whole period of his literary 
activity the twin powers of the mediaeval scheme had been' 
fighting out their eternal conflict to what may well have I 
seemed to him a final finish. In 1250 Frederic II, the embodi-j 
ment of all that was most hateful to the papal interests, died 
defeated and discredited. His vast plans for the union of 
Germany with southern Italy had been scattered by the death 
of his son Manfred on the field of battle and of his grandson 
Corradino on the scaffold. All this had been accomplished by 
the unwearied diplomacy of the papal administration. So 
that, when Aquinas died in 1274 there was good reason to 
suppose that imperialism had done its work and was ready 
to give up the struggle. The election of Rudolf of Habsburg 
in the previous year had seemed to set the seal upon this 
conclusion; for his election was won at the price of a clear 
understanding that henceforth the things of Caesar were no 
longer to be confounded with the things of God. 

That gives us the key note of Aquinas's thought on the whole 
subject" The cause ^f-4he4ong conflict between the temporal 
and the spiritual as embodied in the Empire and the Papacy, 
had been the confusion of their respective powers. 7 The 
Empire was partly a divine institution; the Papacy, whatever 
disclaimers it might put forth, was at least equally a political 
institution. In the scheme of Aquinas this confusion dis- 
appears. Aside from and above all human law there must be" 
a divine law. The purpose of human laws is to promote the 
earthly welfare of civil society. The object of the divine law 
is to direct men, both individually and socially, toward their 
highest end, the attainment of everlasting fife. The adminis- 
tration of this divine law is in the hands of the Church, and the 
unity necessary for its efficiency is secured by the headship of 
the successor of Peter, t ^ 

This unity is necessary in all matters in which the Church 

6 j MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

as a whole is interested, especially in the uniformity of doctrine, 
without which there could be no real unity of structure. In 
\case of doubt as to doctrine it is the pope alone who has the 
right to declare the truth. Here, almost precisely six hundred 
years before its formal declaration as an article of faith, we 
j have the principle of papal infallibility definitely enunciated. 
No wonder that Aquinas has been proclaimed by the modern 
Papacy as the chief champion of the Roman tradition. But 
this is not the whole of it. While Aquinas tries to limit the 
power of Rome strictly to the declaration of the faith, he does 
not hesitate to draw the inevitable conclusion. The power 
which defines the faith in general is obviously the power which 
also determines in a given case whether an individual has 
departed from the faith. If then a ruler over Christian 
people is convicted by this last tribunal of having departed 
from the faith, what is the effect upon his relation to his 
people? 
The argument here is very close. The Church does not 
unish him for his defect of faith; it only defines it. Its dis- 
ipline extends only to separation from the body of the faithful, 
ut the ruler so separated is placed outside the order of right- 
eousness upon which rests the obligation of his subjects to 
obedience. As soon, therefore, as his excommunication is 
pronounced the subjects are ipso facto released from their 
allegiance. It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the enormous 
range of this simple declaration. It places within the power 
of one fallible man, however supported by the judgment or the 
interests of other fallible men, first to define a crime, then to 
apply this definition in a specific case, and then to overturn the 
order of a civil community by the simple declaration of bis 
j decision. It is basecLupon the ghastly proposition Jihat inde- 
Ipendent judgment in regard to fundamental questions of 
jreligion is a crime fatal to the order of the civil community and 
therefore to be repressed by the civil power. The crime of 
^heresy consists in the exercise of such independent judgment 
in regard to religion, and its definition could be — and was — 
indefinitely extended to cover any form of offence agakist the 
dominant power of the Church expressed through its agent 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 7 

the Vicar of Christ at Rome. The ruler who set himself in 
o^position_to.the_Papacy incurred the imminent risk of being 
declared a heretic and thus of losing his hold upon the allegiance 
of his subjects. 

I The political doctrines of Aquinas work out, therefore, to the 
ultimate supremacy of the papal government over all the civil 
authorities of Christendom. / If they could ever be realised the 
result would be a monstrous theocracy within which every 
independent activity, whether of the individual or of organized 
society must shrivel and perish. That they had not been 
realized up to the time of Aquinas had been largely due to the 
unflagging energy of those representatives of the imperial 
power, men like Otto the Great, Henry IV, Frederic Barbarossa, 
and Frederic II, who had made themselves the champions of 
all national interests in their long struggle for recognition. The 
abandonm ent of this championship by RudoJf_of_ Hjbsbuxg 
threw the responsibility for maintaining the rights of civil gov- 
ernment upon the several national kingdoms. 

In this new phase of the conflict the leadership passes from 
Germany to France. The final, or what appeared to the men 
of Aquinas' generation to be the final, triumph of the papal 
over the imperial policy had been brought about largely through 
the in troduction of Fre nch in fluence into Italy to counteract th e 
pressur e~of Germ any. Within less than a generation after \ 
the death of Aquinas it became clear that in thus calling upon 
France to serve its cause in Italy the Papacy had summoned a 
servant likely at any moment to turn into a master, a master 
so much the more dangerous|as it was free from all the tradi- 
tions of theoretical loyalty that had at times restrained the 
action of the Empire.') Back of every effort on the part of the 1 
French government lay the steadily increasing sense of French ! 
nationality and a constantly growing willingness to make 
sacrifices for it. 

By the close of that first generation after Aquinas the papal 
chair was occupied by a Frenchman and had been removed 
from Rome to Avignon, there to remain continuously occupied 
by Frenchmen and subject to the immediate pressure of French 
political necessity during two generations to come. The process 

8 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

of this transfer does not here concern us. Enough that it was 
based upon the regular working of the papal constitutional 
mechanism whereby the election of popes w as entrusted to a 
limited_bpdy_ot jJecj^^_ap4M±iteji.by_p.opes and producing 
new popes after their own kind so long as the policy of appoint- 
ment of these electors continued the same. The conventional 
phrase "Babylonian Captivity "" represents fairly enough the 
feeling of all those loyal elements of western Christendom 
which saw in this situation the perversion of everything which 
had made the Papacy its efficient and honored head. 

II 

If the thought of Thomas Aquinas on the nature of civil powers 
;,and their relation to the supremacy of the Church was in- 
jfluenced by the apparent defeat of the imperial policy in its 
Hohenstaufen phase and the consequent triumph of the papal 
system, it is equally true that the thought of Dante on the 
same subjects was profoundly stirred by the events accom- 
panying the transfer of the papal seat to France. If we may 
speak of the election of Rudolf of Habsburg in 1273 as marking 
the end of the mediaeval Empire, we may with equal accuracy 
think of the fall of Boniface VIII in 1303 as dating the collapse 
of the mediaeval Papacy. /As the contemporaries of Aquinas 
welcomed the victory of the "Papacy as fixing forever the doc- 
i ltrine of centralization in the administration of the Church, so, 
thin a short generation, men were deploring the corruption, 
f a too strongly centralized Papacy and sighing for a return 
o the good old days of imperial contrpL_\ Aquinas was born 
Neapolitan subject, a citizen of that Italian state which was 
specifically "The Kingdom" (II Regno). Dante was the child 
of Florence, the state of all others in Italy which most fiercely 
defended the principle of democracy. The background of his 
political thinking was that furious partisan struggle of which 
he was himself the most illustrious victim. 

As Dante looked over the field of Italian politics he saw five 
great powers wrestling for the hegemony of the peninsula. 
Milan, Venice, Florence, Rome (la Chiesa), and Naples were 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 9 

already outlined as the leading states around which the lesser 
cities were grouping themselves in ever shifting combinations. 
Among these greater and lesser powers there were continual 
conflicts for economic or political advantage, but these more 
purely local conflicts were all interpenetrated by another great 
historic antagonism, that of the Empire and the Papacy. The 
names of Guelf and Ghibelline had lost none of their actual 
significance with the nominal patching up of a peace between 
the two powers. It is true that this greater issue was often 
obscured in the nearer interests of party warfare within city 
limits; but whenever the larger aspects of Italian relations 
came once more to the front it was always the signal for a re- 
newal of the old alignment. The party groupings of the old 
Hohenstaufen days served again and agam as rallying points 
for an opposition which had its roots deep down in the structure 
of mediaeval society. 

It was, therefore, inevitable that when Dante, citizen of 
Florence, participant and victim alike of her partisan conflicts, 
came to reflect upon the cause of the evils from which she and 
he both suffered, he should .find it in th e absence oij a, Bi.inft.rioE- 
powe r which might moderate at least if not entirely remove 
them. By inheritahce'a ^^HpEh^t'^^TSatraTahdefender of 
the democratic principle anp its conventional alliance with the 
papal" interests," he "found himself' thrown "ByTEe convulsions 
of party struggle into the camp of the "iGrhjbjyjjn^s^ 5 He became 
identified henceforth with that par^rwhich found its support 
mainly in the (feudal ^^aristo«3ratic^l^en|^gf Italian society and 
which looked naturally to the Empire as the guarantor of its 
local claims. 

The removal of the Papacy to Avignon, in other words the 
abandonment of its Italian character, was the last blow to an 
Italian patriot's devotion to the doctrine of papal absolutism. 
It is here that we find our point of departure for a comparison 
of the political theories of Dante and Thomas Aquinas. Funda- 
mentally they had a great deal in common. Both were, or 
professed to be, inspired by the study of Aristotle's political 
ideas. To put this more accurately, both were filled with 
certain ideal conceptions of human society, and when they 

10 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

tried to put these into literary form, both found in Aristotle 
formulas ready to their hand which could be interpreted in 
such ways as would serve their turn. "Originality," as we 
use the word, was not a mediaeval virtue. To have put forth 
ideas as one's own would in that day have been to invite dis- 
aster. The only way to gain a hearing was to pile up authori- 
ties; the only precaution needed was to make sure that one's 
authorities were sound. 

It was, we may be sure, not pride of scholarship, or at least 
not this alone, that led men of the intellectual quality of 
Aquinas and Dante to fill their pages so largely with Aristotelian 
reference and method of demonstration. It was that they 
desired to give to what were really their own opinions the 
required sanction of acknowledged authority. It was in every 
respect parallel to their use of Scripture for the same purpose. 
Probably, in the case of Dante, the same may be said of his use 
of "science." The obscure and bewildering applications of 
mathematical and astronomical processes to the movement of 
human affairs had doubtless its effect in commending the value 
of the ideas thus hopelessly muddled up with irrelevant or 
misleading conceptions. 

<*, Dante shares with Aquinas the general notion of the State 
as a necessary organism designed primarily tgrnaiufcaw among 
men that conditiojijof ofder^Lp^ace without which the legiti- 
mate objects of human desire cannot be secured. He too 
thinks of human society as the reflex of a divine order. He 
sees the need of a 'dSylae^ejrei^taiEi^* oireartB to secure the 
consecration of this society to the highest ends of man's exist- 
ence both in this world and in the life to come. He parts 
company with Aquinas at the point of considering the means 
by which this highest control shall be administered. Thomas, 
as we have seen, has a very lofty conception of the function of 
bhe state, but in the last analysis the earthly ruler is subject to 
the constant revision of his acts by the superior power of the 
Uhurch, and this right of supervision is centered in the one 
lupreme jurisdiction of the Roman primate. Dante, on the 
)ther hand, believed that the primacy of Rome was only one 
>art of the divine representation in the government of the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 11 

Christian commonwealth. Co-ordinate with it goes, in his 
doctrine of sovereignty, the function of the Empire, and this, 
not in virtue of any right conferred upon it by any earthly 
sanction, but independently, by its very nature. 

This doctrine of imperial supremacy is set forth in a separate 
pamphlet with an argumentative defence probably convincing, 
at least to the Ghibelline intelligence of Dante's day, and having 
the merit, rather rare in a mediaeval document, of entire 
clearness in its main position. The treatise De Monorchia 
deals, not as is often supposed, with the question of monarchi- 
cal government as compared with other forms of administering 
political states, but with the problem of a s ingle administ ration 
for all stat es togeth er,.., In other words it is a glorification of 
the idea underlying the Empire of the Middle Ages as the 
continuation of the imperial system of ancient Rome. The 
date of its composition is uncertain, but it is altogether prob- 
able that it is to be set somewhere near the year 1310, the date 
of the brilliant attempt of the Luxemburg emperor, Henry VII, 
to revive the glorious days of the Hohenstaufen and to wipe 
out the disgrace, if such it were, of the Habsburg compromise 
of a generation previous. As to Dante's feeling about the 
importance of such an imperial revival there can be no doubt 
whatever. He had appealed to the Habsburger Albert with 
all the fervor of a poet and a patriot to come down and rescue 
Italy from the chaos of party strife. He had written to the 
Italian cardinals to use all their influence to bring back the 
Papacy to its rightful place and its bounden duty toward 
the common fatherland. It is quite possible that he was one 
of the band of Italians who went to meet their "Savior" as 
he descended from the Alps and began his first triumphal pro- 
gress through the Lombard plain. 

/The De Monorchia in its three books develops in logical 
order and according to the scholastic syllogistic method the* 
principle of a single universal sovereignty for the world. The 
rule of one is better than the rule of many because it conforms 
to the law of Nature and because it is best suited to the ends 
for which human society exists. These ends are mainly peace 
and justice. Peace is possible only under the control of a 

12 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

supreme prince. | This does not mean that all other lordships 
are to be abolished. Diversi ties of rule are a necessity; but, 
since they are bound to produce diversities of desire, they must 
be regulated by so me superior tribunal. But justice among 
confficting~elements is possible only to a power which has no 
interest in the questions at issue. The emperor is such a power, 
because~being' the supreme ruler he has nothing to gain. He 
represents in the things of this world the loftiest principle of 
Christian charity, whereby he is able to maintain peace and to 
distribute justice. So far Dante's argument for single rule 
follows that of Thomas and in general that of Aristotle. He 
concludes this first part with a characteristically naif Christian 
turn: — Christ chose for the time of his appearing on earth 
the first moment since Adam when the whole world acknowl- 
edged the sovereignty of one imperial power. 

But this monarchy belongs by right to Rome, and the second 
book goes on to demonstrate this proposition. Here Dante is 
deserted by his Aristotle and becomes dependent upon his 
own ingenuity. Rome has a right to supreme rule because the 
Romans were the noblest of peoples, as shown by the genealogy 
of Aeneas, who derived his origin from all the noblest sources 
of the ancient world. Rome gained her power by miraculous 
means, proving the special care of God for her preservation 
and expansion. Her wars were undertaken for the good of the 
peoples; her ends were therefore right, and, the ends being 
right, it follows that the means she employed were right also. 
The Romans were created fit to rule, hence were fulfilling their 
destiny and therefore were right. Supremacy acquired by 
single combat is justly acquired, because in single combat 
there is no enmity between the combatants, but only a desire 
to seek the judgment of God. Now Rome did thus acquire 
power, and therefore had a right to it. Finally again, Christ 
by being born and accepting death under the rule of Rome 
proved her right to rule. 

Whatever one may think of the value of this logic, the point 
is clear enough, and the third book clinches the "argument." 
Its thesis is that the imperial power is independent of all 
human' control. FfomTjfod~aIone it derives its right to regu- 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACK 13 

late the affairs of Christendom. The Empire existed before 
the Church. The Donation of Constantine to the See of 
Peter, which Dante of course in common with the mediaeval 
world in general believed to be a genuine document, rested 
upon this imperial right, otherwise Constantine would have 
been granting what he had no power to bestow. The alleged 
transfer of power by the Church from the eastern to the west- 
ern ruler in the person of Charles the Great was impossible 
because there was no possible source from which such right 
of transfer could have been derived. Hence the necessity of 
a two-fold leadership of the Christian commonwealth, a spir- 
itual and a temporal. . . . The imperial Electors were not 
electors in the strict sense, but rather heralds whose function 
it, was to proclaim the decision of divine Providence. 

•'While thus repudiating in the most emphatic manner the 
subjection of the Empire to the Papacy, Dante does not pro- 
pose any remedy in case of conflict, but only presents his ideal 
of the headship of the world. The emperor is bound to show \ 
a filial regard for the person of the pope in order that he may 1 
the more perfectly fulfil his own function of temporal leader-' 
ship. It is here that we see the advan ce^of Dante beyond the 
ideals of Thomas Aquinas. His government of human society ; 
is not a theocracy. Temporal and spiritual administration 
are to be harmonized through the realrzation~by~the temporal 
ruler of his divine origin and commission. The unfortunate 
fact that this harmony, on which the whole structure of medi- 
aeval society was theoretically based, had never in practice 
been realized had nothing- to do with the case. The failure 
was due, not to the theory but to the frailty of human nature. 
The remedy was now to go back to the pure standards of peace 
and justice contained in Scripture and in the instruction of 
the wise among the philosophers of the classic world. 

7 

ni 

The complete collapse of Henry the Seventh's Great Ad- 
venture in Italy in the year 1313 was the demonstration, if 
one had been needed, of the futility of Dante's dream of im- 

14 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

perial restoration on the mediaeval basis. It leads us natur- 
ally to a brief survey of the political background of Marsiglio 
of Padua. The death of Henry was followed by, a„divided 
election in Germany? ~S Habsburg candidate, Frederic of 
Austria, and an anti-Habsburg candidate, Ludwig of Bavaria, 
divided the electoral vote between them. Neither would give 
way, and the decision was left to the ancient arbitrament of 
war. A struggle of eight years ended in 1322 in the defeat of 
Frederic and the acknowledgment of Ludwig by the German 
princes. Conflicts of this sort had always afforded to ambi- 
tious popes the most welcome opportunities for asserting their 
claims as arbiters of the political fortunes of the Empire, and 
Pope John XXII was not the man to let the chance escape him. 
Frenchman as he was, and accepting in its full extent the ac- 
complished fact of the papal residence in France, he threw 
himself from the first wi^h hearty support on the side of Austria. 

The ancient weapons that had served in the days of Hilde- 
brand and Innocent III and Frederic Barbarossa were fur- 
bished up again for this new encounter. On the papal side 
every effort was made to show that the imperial power was 
valid only as it was confirmed by the papal sanction. The 
imperial champions not only denied this and asserted the prin- 
ciple of imperial independence, but went far beyond it and 
claimed in their turn rights of control over the papal office. 
If this had been all, history might well have cried: "a plague o' 
/both your houses!" and let it go at that. But what lends an 
[entirely new interest to this new phase of the old conflict is the 
[volume of discussion it called forth and in this discussion the 
/new emphasis placed upon the fundamental questions as to 
I the essential nature of the two parties in opposition,, the State 
/ and the Church. 

The Papacy of John XXII found itself confronted by a very 
peculiar alliance. Opposition from the imperial interests was 
to be expected, but a still more dangerous antagonist was de- 
veloped in the house of its friends. It was just a hundred 
years since the papal institution had taken on a new lease of 
life through the support of a tremendous popular religious 
enthusiasm expressing itself in the new Mendicant Orders and 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 15 

especially in the Order of St. Francis. In the course of that 
century these orders had run through the usual stages of 
enthusiasm, of practical organization, and of adjustment to the 
standards of the world they had tried to reform. Naturally, 
however, this worldlifyingpof the Orders had called out a re-\ 
action toward the nobler' aspirations of the founders, and this \ 
idealism had found expression in that wing of the Minorites ! 
known as the "Fraticelli," or "Spiritual Franciscans." Once 
again the old battle cry of "evangelical poverty" had been 
raised as the standard to which all grades of the clerical hier- 
archy ought to conform. Especially was this standard of \ 
unworldliness to be applied to the Papacy itself, and this at a ,• 
moment when in its safe retreat at Avignon it was feeding a 
hungry horde of its own creatures on the proceeds of a novel 
and extremely promising system of taxation on benefices 
throughout the western worldly Natural enough, that a John 
XXII should reply to such an audacious suggestion by a decree 
of heresy against the Fraticelli, and that they shouldretort by 
a like charge against him. Not that this bandying back and 
forth of heresy charges was in itself of any great importance. 
It was useful only as calling out the defences on either side, in 
which the real issues of the combat are revealed. 
Between these t wo enemies of the Avignon Papacy, the 
sire and the "radicals 1 ,*} if one may so call them, of the 
iFranciscan order ,(ffier5~was thus prepared the basis of an alli- 
aSce~featwas to be of decisive importance in the immediate 
future. Each turned to the other for the kind of support which 
it specially/needed and which the other was specially capable 
of giving, f Ludwig, in his fight for supremacy over the papal 
power, needed every possible weapon on the legal and philo- 
sophical side of his contention. The Fraticelli, strong only 
on this ideal side, needed every possible security against actual 
physical persecution by the papal arm. ) Whatever could be 
done to show the extravagant worldling s® of the Papacyjn the 

strongest light was in so far a co"ntHDution toward the general 
clearing up of the mind of Europe on the whole broad question 
of the relation of the clerical to the civil powers. 
It is through this peculiar alliance that the services of 

16 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

Marsiglio of Padua were brougfit into play. ^ It seems well 
established that he was not a member of the Franciscan or of 
any other religious order, but it is equally clear that in his 
studies and in his executive function at the university of Paris 
he had been brought into close relations with Franciscan activ- 
ities. Especially indicated, though not positively proven, is 
his connection with the man who, more than any other, was 
coming to be the spokesman of that new philo sophy of Nom i- 
na lism wh ich was destined to transform the thinking processes 
of^Ejurope in transition, the English Franciscan, William 
OckhamJ) Precisely what were the relations between the two 
has been the subject of much study and speculation. 1 There 
is no doubt that, as the bearing of the nominalistic teaching 
upon the papal claims became more apparent, the work of 
Marsiglio came to be thought of as the natural product of so 
perverted a condition of the intellectual process. He must, 
it was felt, have been a pupil of Ockham: from no other source 
could such pestilent doctrines have been derived. In the con- 
demnations of his work dating from 1327 on he is often expressly 
described as a follower of Ockham's teaching. |On the other 
hand there is but slight evidence of actual collaboration be- 
tween the two, and perhaps the safest conclusion is that each 
influenced the other in the way best suited to his peculiar 
genius and tale nt. Ockham was primarily a philosopher 
interested, as a philosopher is bound to be, in discovering 
general principles of thought applicable to all intellectual 
problems. FMarsigho was primarily a political theorist em- 
ployed in defending the <: righis_oj_cjjdLanthj3rity against what 
he represented as encroachments upon these rights by a power 
outside the range of civil control, A In this defence the principle 
of the new philosophy was a rnosx valuable ally, and he fol- 
lowed it, not avowedly as a disciple, but practically, as one 
whose own mental process was naturally akin to that of the 
acknowledged leader of the school. 

Precisely how the emperor Ludwig came to know these two 
champions of causes closely allied to his own is obscure but may 

1 Sullivan, James; Marsiglio of Padua and William of Ockam. American 
Historical Review, April and July, 1897. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 17 

easily be guessed. O ckham had identified himself early with 
the "spjrit ual" wing_ of"the Franciscans. He was a notable 
member of the order, iater~becoming its General. It could 
hardly fail that in the appeals of the order to the protection of 
the Empire, his name should have been prominent as the most 
vigorous exponent of its cause. The case of Marsiglio is a 
little more difficult. ) Up to the time of his entrance into the 
great conflict he had been known only as a scholar and univer- 
sity man, not identified with "causes" and not associated with 
ruling powers anywhere. It is altogether possible that, having 
something to sell, he took his wares to the market where they 
would best be appreciated. It is to the credit of the hard 
pressed Ludwig that he recognised promptly the value of the 
contribution thus offered to him and became the patron under 
whom Marsiglio was to serve during the brief period of his 
public activity J The anecdote told of Ockham's first personal 
dealings with the emperor applies equally well to Marsiglio: 
"If you will protect me with your sword" the philosopher is^) 
reported to have said, "I will defend you with my pen." / 

Many attempts have been made to show that the Defensor 
Pads was the joint product of Marsiglio and a TjVfwh colleague 
of his at the university of Paris, ! John,.of-Jandu»? The most 
recent of these is by M. Ncel Valois in the Histoire litteraire de 
la France, t. xxxiii, pp. 528-623 (1906). His article is entitled: 
Jean de Jandun et Marsile de Padoue auteurs du Defensor Pads. 
The author gives a detailed account of the philosophical 
treatises which form the bulk of Jandun's literary product. 
These are all of a highly speculative, metaphysical character 
and are not concerned with political or ecclesiastical problems. 
Their tendency is to a mild scepticism on the vexed question 
of the "reality" of general concepts. Indeed it is not on any 
marked similarity of views that M. Valois bases his opinion as 
to the collaboration of Jandun with Marsiglio. 

This, he declares is a "fait av&rL" Contemporaries, "who 
doubtless knew better than we what the truth of the matter 
was," always couple the two together. Of this he gives four 
examples: 

1. A contemporary Latin "poem," De Bavari apostasia, 

18 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACK 

edited by O. Cartellieri in Neues Archiv der Gesellschaft fur 
dltere deutsche Geschichtskunde, Bd. xxv, pp. 712-715 (1899). 
The author does indeed join the names of Jandun and Marsiglio 
in a common indictment as serpentini gemini. He says that 
they wrote codicillos, cartulas, et libelhs, and that they made 
false commentaries upon texts they did not understand. He 
had heard them both lecture upon naturalia, but even then 
their imagination had opened the way to contention (dis- 
crimeri). There is no mention of the Defensor Pads and no 
reference to collaboration in this or any other work. 

2. The French continuator of the Chronicle of Guillaume 
de Nangis (ed. Geraud, ii, p. 74) describes the reception of 
Marsiglio and Jandun at the court of Ludwig, but he also 
makes no reference to the Defensor Pads or to collaboration 
in any one book. He quotes as theirs certain opinions hostile 
to the papal supremacy and says that Ludwig protected them 
reluctantly without endorsing their views. 

3. The judicial examination at Paris of a certain Francesco 
of Venice, an alleged famulus of Marsiglio, given in Baluze, 
Miscellanea, ii, p. 280 (1761). The young man says that 
Marsiglio and Jandun, and they alone, composed "a certain 
book," which, so far as he knew, contained no errors such as 
were charged upon them. If it had, he would not have failed 
to report them to the bishop of Paris. The obvious purpose 
of this deposition was to clear the youth himself and everyone 
else except the two persons directly charged. In any case it 
is extremely slight evidence as to actual collaboration. 

4. The bulls of John XXII directed against the emperor 
Ludwig and against Marsiglio and Jandun make repeated 
reference to "a certain book" which they presented to the 
emperor and which furnished him support in his conflict with 
the papal power. There can be no reasonable doubt that the 
book thus referred to was the Defensor Pads, or that the papal 
writer believed it was the expression of opinions held jointly 
by the two Parisian masters. As proof of joint composition 
such an estimate cannot go very far. 

That is the most that can be said for a participation of John 
of Jandun in the writing of the Defensor Pads. On the other 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 19 

side is the internal evidence, borne by every line, of unity in 
plan, in purpose, and in style. If any one worked with Marsig- 
lio it must have been in a very subordinate capacity. A man 
of Jandun's undoubted quality could hardly have taken an 
important part in the work without leaving far more distinct 
traces of his activity than M. Valois has been able to show. 
In his brief analysis of the Defensor he simply assumes 
the double authorship without attempting to discriminate 
in any way between the contributions of the two alleged 
authors. 

IV 

The facts of Marsiglio's life are meagre and uncertain. He 
was born in Padua probably about the year 1270, of good, but 
not specially notable family. He left Padua as a young man 
and migrated to Paris, the natural goal of all intellectually 
ambitious youths of his day. He may have broken his journey 
by a visit to Orleans, and may there have studied the elements 
of the Roman Law, though only slight traces of a knowledge 
of that law are visible in his writings. At Paris he was cer- 
tainly the Rector of the famous University in the year 1312, 
but our only information of his activity is in one or two docu- 
ments bearing his name. He left Paris, perhaps in the year 
1324, and reached Nuremberg in 1326. He was there received 
with enthusiasm by the emperor, Ludwig the Bavarian, in 
whose service he remains as long as we are able to trace his 
career at all. In the following year he went with Ludwig to 
Italy as his most trusted counsellor. He stood by the emperor 
through the exciting experiences of the ensuing months, supply- 
ing him with ammunition in his combat with the absentee 
Papacy at Avignon and witnessing the outward triumph of 
the ideas which he had embodied in the great treatise we shall 
soon have to examine. He shared with Ludwig the inevitable 
overturn in Roman-papal politics and set out with him on his 
return to Germany in 1328. There he disappears from our 
sight. The Florentine historian Giovanni Villani states cas- 
ually (Book x, c. 100) that he died in Italy just a month after 

20 MARSIGLIO OP PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

leaving Rome. 1 Much later local historians of Padua report 
that he was reconciled to the politic pope John XXII and made 
Archbishop of Milan. There is some reason to believe that 
the emperor, in his negotiations with the pope eight years 
later, promised to discipline Marsiglio; but that is all. 

This man, whose influence was felt throughout the whole 
period of two hundred years between the appearance of the 
Defensor Pads and the advent of Martin Luther, vanishes from 
contemporary notice as completely as if he had never put pen 
to paper. His identity as a man is lost in the one great work 
by which he has lived. * The Defensor Pads interests the mod- 
ern student in virtue both of its contents and its methods. 
What distinguishes it from its immediate predecessors and 
also from much of the product of the century and more follow- 
ing is its note of modernity. ■ It is the obvious expression of 
opinion of an individual, fortified it is trup, by abundant if 
not superabundant reference to authorities, but at every point 
revealing independence of all authority. Frankly the work 
of an advocate, expressly intended to support the cause of one 
of the great parties in a world struggle, it seeks to bring this 
advocacy of a party into relation with great general principles. 
Marsiglio has no hesitation in using the first person. "I will 
now prove," "I think," "I have demonstrated," are frequent 
phrases. Everywhere one feels the personality of a thinking 
man. 

The first clear impression derived from the continuous read- 
ing of the Defensor Pads is that it is all of one piece. It begins 
with definitions, moves on to the application of these defini- 
tions to specific instances, and concludes by bringing these 
specific cases again into their proper subordination to defini- 
tion. Continually there is reference both backward and 
\forward, showing that before the work left the author's 
hands it was thoroughly reviewed and cast into one completed 
whole. Its Latinity would make the ghost of Cicero weep, 

1 M. Noel Valois, in the article referred to above, makes the ingenious sugges- 
tion that the person whose death is reported by Villani is not Marsiglio, but John 
of Jandun, who disappears at this time and to whom the abusive epithets of the 
Florentine chronicler apply equally well. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 21 

but it has the primary merit of expressing quite precisely the 
author's thought. There are very few passages the meaning 
of which does not become clear when one reads them in the 
light of all the rest. /The badness of the Latin comes from its 
nearness to the thinking process of the writer, in other words 
from his modernness, and this only brings him so much the 
nearer to our own ways of putting things. 1 Such Latin as this 
any one of us might write if he were well grounded in vocabu- 
lary and proportionally indifferent to syntax. 
• Especially notable is his departure from the favorite mediae- 
val syllogistic method. Occasionally he drops into it with a 
casual reference to a major or a minor premise, but in gen- 
eral his reliance is not upon the formal soundness of logical 
propositions, but upon the inherent truth or the self-evident i 
common sense of his ideas. His process is fore-shadowed 
by the division of his work into three "dictiones," i. e. state- 
ments. He does not offer subjects for argument; he makes 
statements, and then proceeds to demonstrate them by ex- 
planation and elaboration. He is anxious, not so much to 
prove his point by contentious discussion as to present it in a 
variety of lights and then leave it to the fair judgment of the 
reader's good sense and right intention. It is this method 
which has brought upon Marsiglio the reproach of vain repeti- 
tion, and it is true that he does repeat a good deal. A reader 
concerned only with the main argument would find this an- 
noying, but examined carefully it does not appear quite vain. 
Each repetition occurs in connection with some new way of 
presenting the given thought, and the long result is not to_ 
confuse but to clarify. i>jSpJ0thS Vf 

It would be of interest to know whether the Defensor Pads 
was written on the express commission of the emperor Ludwig 
the Bavarian or was the outcome of Marsiglio's independent 
thought and was then offered to the emperor as the patron 
most likely to find it of service and to reward it most hand-i 
somely. The fact that it is formally addressed to Ludwig I 
gives no indication on this point; for if accepted by him it 
would certainly under any circumstances have been fitted with 
an appropriate dedication. On the other hand, in the dedica- 

22 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

\ tion as it stands there is no hint of a commission, and I incline 
to think that Marsiglio's profession is an honest one that he 
is moved "to commit these opinions to writing" as a loyal 
"son of the city of Antenor (Padua), by love of truth-telling, 
by zealous devotion to his fatherland and his fellow-citizens, 
by pity for the oppressed and a desire to save them and to 
recall oppressors from the error of their ways, and to rouse 
those who permit such things when they ought and can prevent 
them, especially the emperor as the servant of God. . .after 
long, close, and diligent examination, in the hope thereby to 
be of assistance to you (the emperor) in your efforts to suppress 
these evils and in other ways to serve the public good." 

He proposes, with God's help, to set forth only the one 
peculiar cause of the present conflict: "For to reiterate the 
nature and number of those causes which Aristotle enumerates 
would be superfluous; but from this cause, which Aristotle 
could not know and which no one since his time has tried to 
set forth, we hope so to lift the veil that it may henceforth 
readily be banished from all civil communities, and when this 
is accomplished that rulers and people of good will may live 
in peace, the supreme desire of all men in this world and the 
loftiest goal of human action." (This one peculiar cause of 
'. strife is the existence of the corrupt Church under the papal 

J_ administrationT^! 

Marsiglio hasbeen further accused of inconsistency and 
contradiction. I cannot find this charge substantiated by 
facts. If his definitions are understood and accepted, his 
statements hold together with a quite remarkable consistency. 
From beginning to end there is no variation on essential points. 
The third book, which he calls "Conclusions," sums up the 
results of the first and second with continuous references to 
specific passages binding the whole together. The most strik- 
ing case of apparent contradiction, the defence of democracy 
and at the same time the advocacy of the imperial rights, dis- 

/^appears when one follows carefully Marsiglio's analysis of the 

\ imperial office as the representation of the ultimate right of 
the people. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 23 

With these preliminary remarks we are prepared to follow 
the course of Marsiglio's thought as nearly as possible in the 
order in which it is presented in the work itself./ The first 
book is devoted to a discussion of the principle of the State, 
the second to _an exai nmaUon oflhe ortgin~and development 
of the Church, its appropriation by the~Roman papal system, 
and its relation to the civil powers. The third is the brief 
summary of conclusions already mentioned. Marsiglio's first 
care is so to define his terms that there shall be no doubt in 
what sense he is using them./JLike his predecessors he bor- 

i rows the Aristotelian formulas as far as they suit his purpose. 

/ The State is a living^ organism, designed to seniirgjjp men thos e* 
guarantee s of proVr a.nH t.hfi frpp rIpvplnpTnpnt, of capacity whichT 
s h all lea d to_theis Jvcnfflff gogjli Rulers there must be, but ' 
they are subordinate to th e con tort jot jaw ,/ The definitions" of? 

' I ll I J w^^— i«^^^— ^TjBWHi M ii < r»nT-~- ' ^. .T j n im i I ■ I ' l fr — i i t I 

law give us an excellent illustration of MarsigUo's analytical 
process. *Caw]^in its first meaning is a natural inchnation 
tgward a certain action or feelin g, as for instance, when Paul 
says (Rom. 7, 23), "I see a different law in my members 
warring against the law of my mind." Secondly, law means a 
f orm or model in the mind for som ething to be made, as in 
Ezekiel (43,'12f.), "Behold, this" is the law of the house; and 
these are the measures of the altar." Thirdly, law is a rule for 
such human actions as have reference to reward or punishment 
i n. the life to come . In this sense the Mosaic law is called 
"law" in some of its parts, and the Gospel law is so called in 
its entirety. In this sense also all "sects," as for instance that 
of Mahomet or the Persians, have "laws," though o nly the 
Mosaic and the Christian contain the truth. Fourthly, and 
more widely accepted, is the meaning of law as the whole 
body of opinion as to what is right and expedient in civ il affairs 
and what is opposed to this opinio n. Under this head may 
be distinguished a t heoretical and a p ractical d ivision, and the 
latter is to be taken as the definition - of law in the strictest 

sense, because it implies behind the" theoretical principle a 

24 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

praeceptum coactivum, \a coercive s anctio"5V which alone can 
give effect to the principle. 

fin this definition of law as a p^"™]^ "fjjgftJI: supported .by 
^ tfie force naf>f; ssflry to put, it into execution we have the key- 
note of Marsigho's whole argument./ It it* only_JJie-p« wer 
w hich has this coer cive jurisdiction t h at can p roperly b e en- 
trus ted with the applicatio n of law, a nd the whole thesis of 
the Defensor Pads turns upon the distinction between the 
secular and the spiritual powers in this respect. His grievan ce 
t la the invasion of the right ? nf gpnnW n.nt.hnrit.v hv-pewers 
whi ch are essentially spiritual and ought, therefore, J o_be 
re stricted to the exercise of spiritual function s] The remedy 
is to be found in drawing as sharply as possible the lines of 
division between the two types of authority which have be- 
come obscured partly through the persistent aggression of the 
clerical and partly through the ignorance or indifference of the 
lay elements of the Christian society. 

But now, whence comes this law which is to hold the balan ce 
.a mid the conf^Emg passionFof a human community? In the 
answer to this question we~fin6T"the most striking feature of 
Marsigheis— jrork. /"Without hesitation he declares that the 
s cwce of law j& to be found, not in any divine right of rulers, 
n ot in anv superior wisdo m of any class of society, but in the 
^tiole body of citizens/^ 
~ — -TVe declare that according to the Truth x and to the opin- 
ion of Aristotle, the Lawgiver, that is. th e primary, essential 
and e fjEJcientRniir npi nTTa!wj_JsthR People^ that is the whole 
body of ntizsm,pi^^SSa^y^dnSsn^acung of their own free 
choice openly declared in a general assembly of the citizens and 
prescribing something to be done or not done in regard to civil 
affairs under penalty of temporal punishment. I say a 
majority, taking account of the whole number of persons in 
the community over which the law is to be exercised. [It 
1 1 ma kes no differen ce] whether the w hole body of citiz ens, or its 
\\ maj ority acts^T itself im me diately o r whether l^ntrusts.the 
wlmattePto^bne or more persons to act for it. "Suchpersbn or 

1 I understand the word Veritas to be used here and in many other passages 
as synonymous with Gospel. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 25 

persons are not and cannot be the Lawgiver in the strict sense, 
but only loFaTspecific purpose and at a given time and oiTthe 
a uthority of the primary lawgiver." Marsiglio seemirto be" 
guarding himself thus early in his inquiry against the charge 
afterward made against him that in emphasizing the rights of 
the people he was in so far minimizing the right of the emperor 
whose cause he was nevertheless defending. His point is that, 
wi thin the sco ne_o l the powers given him by the people^ jhe 
mlftfnannnt, lawfully h e interfered wit.iTKy apy other autEoritv 
w hatsoeve r. 

wThe phrase here translated by the word "majority^' (pars 
valentior) has been the subject of much discussion. Some 
writers have insisted that Marsiglio meant by it, not a numer- 
ical majority, but the more competent part of the body of 
citizens. I am convinced, however, by examining a great-v 
niirriVioT- f>f fqaofl, *Vt hfflvnq in truth a champion of the mod=. A 
ern ^dea of majority ru le Jts . on the whoIeTthe best expression 
of the will 01 tne wnole community. In connection with the 
words pars valentior he frequently adds some further explana- 
tory phrase which seems to ind i cate a numerical us e, and the 
same idea is confirmed by the spirit of many of his references j 
to the political sense of the lower orders of the people. 

For example, speaking of the lawmaking process, he says: 
"The truth of a proposition is more accurately judged and its 
usefulness to the community more carefully taken into account 
when the whol e body of citizens apply their int elligence and 
t heir feeling' to i£ For the greater number (major pluralitas) 
candet ect a fault inlTprqposed law better than any part o f 
them, as every corporate whole is greater in mass and in value 
(male atque virtute) than any one of. its separate parts." Mar- 
siglio seldom mentions the universitas civium without adding, 
"or its pars valentior" Sometimes he uses valentinor multi- 
tude) or pluralitas. He enlarges at great length on the impor- 
tance of giving to all citizens some share in the government; 
he dwells upon the capacity of the humblest to do his part; 
bu t he nogheie_dj ^ ribes any, higher group , as, J^ayJngJBfi ciaL 
quj^ lirica tionj^Qr j^zggfJUP ^ Tf K y T""" " nlo,nf « nr **~~*tiA 
meant "themore competent" or "the more highly placed" 

26 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

or "the more responsible," in other words any kind of an 
aristocracy, it is hardly conceivable that he should not have 
followed his invariable practice and given a precise definition 
of his meaning. If 

Speaking of the right to_call a council (ii. 21) he says that 
this belongs t o the Lawgiver^ ', e. to thebody of the fait hful, 
because it or ifo pa.™ mlmiwr canno ^so-jea&ily-be--seduced-.by. 
. selfis h motive s_jts_ca n the j j-oman bishop or the Co llege of 
^ C ardin als. Among the dutieTof the to-be-reformed pope" is 
that of s itting as judge in strictly ec clesia sticalj ^tses with the 
■jvarte valentiori sive majori of the c ollege assigned to him jiy-the 
lawgiver. Here the meaning "majority" seems perfectly 
clear. , Referring to the election of the emperor Marsiglio says 
that its validity depends upon the valentiore parte of those 
qualified to vote, a positive allusion to the principle of the 
majority as fixed in the Electoral College. In view of all these 
, illustrations I feel no hesitation in regarding Marsiglio as a 
theoretical advocate of majority government. . 
' /What does Marsiglio mean by " citizens"? IHe answers 
this question with the Aristotelian definition:^"! call a citizen 
i one who has a sha re in the government of the civil community 
jeither in.m,gxj^uja£e„^ a judi ciaLcapacity, according to his 
legreeJ^. This excludes boys, slaves, foreigners and women, 
though in different ways;/ for boys are to become citizens in 
the near future. It is to the whole body of citizens thus de- 
fined that Marsiglio would commit the making of laws. The 
objection will be made that there are few wise and thoughtful 
persons, while the multitude of the simple (stulti) is infinite. 
But the g reater part of the citizens are neither wick ed nor 
la cking iniu%fmwira¥rig 'ards thegreat er_r jart of the^ ueiiiohs" 
t hat concern them and for the greater pa rt>of-fee-iiimei (One 
is reminded of President Lincoln's immortal version of the 
same truth.) For all, or the greater part, are of sound mind 
and r eason and of good will toward the state. " Even though 
anybody and everybody does not originate laws, yet anyone 
is capable of a judgment in regard to matters originated by 
othersand submitted to him, as to whether they ought to be 
added to or diminished or amended. The danger of legisla- 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 27 

tion Jat-A-teaLia _that they are likely to be moved by. .s e lfish 
i^ljpT p.Rt,Rjathgr than b^thewelfare oTtKe*community _ , "as*Eas 
be^n abundantly shown in the delifetaT legislation ofthe clergy." 
rocess of lawmaking, therefore, should be as follows: i 
1 expert in the law, should be fiVio,^ in the gpripjal 
assembly of the citizens and entrusted-gnth tha-frn.n img of bills 
(regulae). "When these bills have been duly drawn_up and 
carefully revved by these experts, they are to be subm itted 
to the citizens in convention for amendment nr rejection. 
Then, after everyone nas been neard who lias anything reason- 
able to say about them, again men are to be chose n or the 
fo rmer experts are to be confirmed , w ho as representatives of 
t he authority of the body of citizens shall a pprove or reje ct the 
p roposed bills in whole or in par t ; or this may be done, if they 
so choose, by the body of citizens themselves or the majority 
of them. After this amgoxaL the so-called Jbills bec p ma 
' lawai (leges) and are to be so designated, but not before. 
These alone, after being duly proclaimed , can bind those who 
violate them by civil penalties." 

T he ruler (principans) must govern accjQrdjng m tp_JJtl&Jajgs X | 
but he must be of such quality that he ra n snp nlp.mp.nt. t hem 
by what Marsiglio says he understands is called by jurists 
"equity," that is "th e beneficent interpjeja^ion^or migration 
of^the-law i n a specific case wfririh is i ncl uded in a ri giH intpr^ 
pretation but migk* haw jgfji^ggptgd jf \t could have b een 
foreseen.'! To enforce the law the ruler should have a ; 

CMj nt armed force, but this sho ukL.no.L_be alle wffj k'™ -»atil i 
"3W "is . election. One feels here a reference to the repeated 
action of the German electors in choosing a not too powerful 
prince to be their principans. /The ruler should have a.laj^ge 
l iberty of executive, actio n, but should never jhe a""wei.„ fp 
forget that whatever he does is done by him asJihe a^ eiit-ql 
th ^*jipVege_gn"'~pe ople. /Marsiglio quotes with approval the 
Ai&toteTlaiHnaxIm ' tha!t all parts of the state should grow, like 
the parts of the human body, i n due proportion , without the 
overgrowth of any one part, as, for example, of the multitude 
in a democracy, or, he adds, "of the priesthood under the 
Christian law." 

28 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

Perhaps in consequence of his medical training, Marsiglio 
is especially fond of these analogies between the physical life 
and the life of the state. He never forgets that the state is a 
living organism with its directing force and its executive 
members. In the chapter on the origin of government (i. 15) 
he says: ....J 

"Like the action of nature in forming a perfect animal is 
that of the human mind in establishing a state and the pa rts 
thereof. . . . There is in nature a certain Generative pri nciple) 
by which the body of the animal is formed and a certain dis- 
tinctive quality (virtutem) given to each of its parts. The 
part first formed is the heart or a something comparable 
(proportionalis) to it. . . . This part first formed is nobler an d 
more jeomplet e (perfecta) than the other parts of the animal. 
For generative nature has fixed in it a force and an instru- 
mentality by which the other parts are formed out of appro- 
priate material, are separated and distinguished one from the 
other, set in due relations, preserved in their characteristics, 
and protected against natural injuries. But if, through sick- 
ness or other check they fall away from the normal they are 
restored by the vigor (virtus) of this part. 

" In the same way we should view the process of creating a 
properly constituted state. By the whole body of citizens as 
the soul (anima) there is or should be created a part comparabl e 
tothe_heart. In this is to be fixed a certain power or mode l 
vrma) with an active force or authori ty for establis hing the 
ot her parts of the st ate. Now this part is the government 
(principatus), which in its causal aspect represents the uni- 
versal law. Its active function is to a dminis ter justice, to 
issue c ommands , and to carry out just and expedient civil 
\ administration. 

" This part in the state should be nobler and more perfect in 
its qualities, i. ^jn - rjrudenceaud3JrJaa%4han the other parts. 
. . . For the ^reatiye principle nfthe st.at.dj namely th e com- 
munity-soul, has fixedftn this first par j^a certain universal 
causal force, which4s ( Ehej awyand also the executive power. 
Just as the natural warmth of the heart through which it 
performs all its activities is directed and regulated in its action 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 29 

by the structure and potency of the heart itself and could 
fulfil its purpose in no other way; furthermore, just as the 
heat called spiritus is regulated throug hout the body by that 
same potency ... so also the^oerciy e power ot gov ernment J 
entrusted to any man as an instrumen t, is analogous to~EEe 
heat called ffiiritu j?) and shoved he reppiln.tp.ri. hy thp law in 
dealing justice, in issuing orders, and in carrying out measures 
of civic expediency; for otherwise the ruler could not fulfil his 
purpose, which is th e preservation of the state. " 

It might have been expected that Marsiglio^ with his doc- 
trine of the sovereignty of the people, would have been an 
advocate of a purely democratic form of government. Such, 
however, is not the case. He analyses the various kinds of 
rule, distinguishing carefully between democracy which he 
describes as the corruption of politia, that is a republic, in 
favor of the proletariat, the egenorum multitudo. Monarchy 
is the rulg^oijmejijeES.Qn. fgr the good o LaU) in distinction from 
a tyranny, which is the rule of one for his own advantage. 
The mnnfipny hp frflfl in Tnjnri is a, li mited one ( temyeratus 
principatus), and rests u pon the consent of the peop le, wh ile a 
tyranny is independent of ihe'popuiar war. lVlarsiglio does 
not declare himself abstractly in favor of any one type of 
government. He realizes that not all peoples, nor the same 
people at all times are fitted for the abstractly best of govern- 
TnAntg (npti^irm. principatuum) , and that therefore only the 
practically best )under all the circumstances is to be expected; 
but it is this limited monarchy which is assumed in all his 
later treatment of the subject. 

Whether this monar chy shou ld be an heredjj0xy--or .an 
elective one was oSviousTy a matter '™oT grealHmportance in 
^MarsTglio's scheme, and he gives to the discussion of this point 
a proportionally ample space. He first states the case of the 
opposition to election in twelve propositions and then proceeds 
to refute these one by one. /The whole argument is summed 
up in the one principle, that inheritance_^ives shnilarity ,c£_ 
body, but cannot be depended upon"togive that_cjanti nuity of ^ 
spirit which is"tj»e-gceatest safeguard to the jasjtiiai&ons of the_ 
state. The eK&ted ruKfry islhore'TJKely Jio,corres.pondJio>-fefe^. 

30 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

"conformi ty of perfec tion" wi th his predecessors- and with 
the principle of perfection in the whole universe of things than 
is the hereditary ruler./ 

This discussion leads'naturally to the further inquiry whethe r 
there ought to be one shj file^gflYe rnment for jbha. whole civilized--- 
, world „(ai>iZifer viventium) . It is almost impossible not to 
connect Marsiglio's treatment of this question with the De 

tnarc hia of Dante, which may have appeared within a 
en years bef ore the Defensor Pads, Marsiglio says that 
"subject is open" to discussionTTnit is not pertinent to the 
sent treatise. He does, however, go so far as to deny that 
the unit y of the world is th e model for the constitution of civil 
society ^J"The Empire is a unit only in the sense that tKe 
sev eral units of which it is composed submit themselves volun- 
tarily to its supremacy, whereas the unity of the world depends 
up^on some essential relation of each of its parts to a principle 
, of unity at the cen ter, t The analogy, therefore, on which 
Dante bases his chief argument is expressly denied by Marsig- _ 
lio. Naturejhe thinks, seems to point rather toward multi- 
p licity than towards unit y, and he sees a possible purpose in 
ffis in orde71h^E7^K?ougTwars and diseases of men and other s 
animals, the population may be kept within^gjimits of suffi- 
cient support. HereTsTa touch of four^elShcentury~lS^ItTur- 
sianism, but it is evident that Marsiglio feels himself here a 
little beyond his depth, and he turns the subject back to his 
own immediate field of discussion. Obviously too it would 
not do for him to go too far in diminishing the authority of the 
^Empire he is defending. 

The concluding chapter of the first book is a comprehensive 
statement of the purpose of the work as a whole. /The object 
o f government is to secure peace . Peace is the orderly work- 
in gjrf all par ts of the stataaejiprding to ^EKe nature ahdjHSpQse 
of each. It consists in the free interchange o f th? artiiyjtiip? 
o f the citizen s, t heir mutual aid as against any hindrance fro m^ 
outs ide, and in the participation of all in the advantages o f " 
the ir confmon life, each in hi s own degre e./ TTte nppnsSfj^nt 
all this is discord. Thus much was known to Aristotle, but 
now comeajnthe Church as the disturbing element and with 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

(&/ 

thisjtlie_necfissity of a new adjustment of powers. It is this 
cause which, by hindering the activities of itsTruTer, has de- 
prived and still deprives "the Italian kingdom" of peace and 
its blessings and fills it with every sort of misery and injustice. 
The immediate source of this evil of clerical supremacy 
Marsiglio finds in a change of theory as to thejgiginand 
d evelo pment of the papal power?" He"Ye*hearses briefly the 
establishment ot a' priestly" order through the ordination of 
the Apostles, all of them equally, as the successors of Christ 
in the work of human redemption. That was enough down 
to the time of Constantine, but after that a claim "seems to 
have been derived from a <wf,p.in granf, yvhioh poms say waj-j 
m ade by Constantine to Sylvester. But then, either because^ 
tms grant does not precisely iormulate this claim or because it 
has lapsed through the progress of events, or was invalid as 
regards the other principalities of the world (or even as to the 
rule of the Romans in some of the provinces included in the 
grant) — for these reasons more recent bishops of Rome ha vei 
based their co ercive jurisdiction over t he whole worl d._HDQr 
OTVF3.W tit.lft narnp.lv. nnon .the plenitude of unvfe.v (nfanit.udj I 

ptftestatis) which they claim wag. granted by Christ, to St. j£e 
and his successors igTthe Rx^nSee asVicajsjiLghrist. 

In other words the R oman claim ha s been transferred fro/ 
an historical basis to a th eoretical one. The course of history 
brings changes; but a" theory, if it can be maintained as a 
divine ordinance, does not change. In this was the obvious 
advantage of the Roman position and the most difficult point 
for its opponents to overcome. It is interesting to note that 
Marsiglio, more than a century before the complete exposure 
of the fraudulent Donation of Constantine by Lorenzo Valla 
casts a certain shade of doubt upon that universally accepted 
document. "Some say" that such a grant was made. Its 
contents are not specific as to Roman supremacy; its terms 
had become antiquated. One feels that if only the historic 
sense had awakened in the fourteenth as it did in the fifteenth 
century, the honor of that great exposure would surely have 
fallen to this fearless investigator. 

"The title 'Vicar of Christ,' means, therefore, according to 

32 MARSIGLIO OP PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

the Roman bishops, thaj^ aa Christ had plenitude of power and 
judgment over all kings, princes, co mmuniti es, association s 
ami individuals, so those who call, themselves vicars o f Christ. 
ancTol St. J J eterJhajta.jVr it "^ p " f ""wnjyp jyri«dipt,inn not 
Bruited by any human l aw. . . . Popes are oppressing Italy on 
account 6't her divisions and her sufferings, but they overlook 
worse things in princes whom they fear. They gradually 
worm themselves (serpunt) into others' rights, especially those 
of the Empire during vacancies, until now they clajmtemporal 
coercive jurisdiction over all subjects qfthe Empire in JferS&iy 
^as welljisjn^Haly/' 

"""This is the^v^j£^b&^^3SK^m.i- w ^ cii prevents the 
emperor from**exercising his power to keep the peace, and 
hence, all wise_a nd pow erful men^hould unite to check these 
usurpations. Marsigho himself will use his learning to this 
end and is prepared to take the consequences. 

VI 

With the way thus prepared, Marsigho enters upon the 
second and more important stage of his exposition. He antici- 
pates three kinds of opposition: fi rst persecution by the Roman 
bishops and their "accomplices." They will oppose him 
because he is attacking their ambition for temporal riches and 
power. It will be idle to attempt to curb them by judicial 
argument: "May a merciful God restrain their fury and pro- 
tect the faithful, princes and people, whose peace is menaced 
by them." Here is the note of Luther's appeal to the German 
princes as the only possible defenders of the people's cause. 
The second k ind of opp osition will come from the false teach- 
ing of won Id-he leaders Tthe confusion of things temporal and 
things spi rltuaI7""the threatenings of eternal punishment to. 
si mple m in ded believers . Words simple in their original 
meanings "have been perverted by gradual usage into false 
implications. So it will happen that many who read or hear 
these pages, especially those untrained in philosophy or in the 
Scriptures, will be checked at the outset. And then th ere will 
be the obstacle of malicious enw. Even men who know that 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS (W) 

what is here said is the truth will "rend it with the tooth of 
secret detraction or attack it with the noisy yelpings of pre- 
sumptuous envy, simply because it is said by some one other 
than themselves." But Marsiglio will not be turned from his 
purpose by fear of any of these enemies. 

Here again he begins with a series of very carefully guarded 
definitions, first of all with a definition of the Church. Ac- 
cording to Aristotle ecclesia signifies the assembly of all the 
people belonging under one government. Among the Lathis 
the word means, first and in the most popular sense, a building 
in which God is worshipped in common by the faithful, and 
then the officials, presbyters or (seu) 1 bishops, deacons and 
the rest who serve in such a building. In recent times (apud 
modernos) the Church means chiefly (maxime) those ministers, 
presbyters or (seu) bishops and deacons, who serve or preside 
in the metropolitan or chief of all churches, a position gained 
rather recently (dudum) by the church of the city of Rome, 
whose servants and presiding officers are the Roman pope and 
his cardinals. These now by a certain usage have gained the 
point, that they are called "the Church," and that the Church 
does or receives whatever they do or receive or ordain in any 
way whatsoever. 

But in another sense, and this the most true and most ap- 
propriate of all according to the earliest usage and the intention 
of those who first employed it, the Church is the whole body 
of believers who call upon the name of Christ, and includes all 
parts of this body in whatever community they may be, even 
the community of the home (etiam domestica). Such was the 
primary use of the term among the apostles and in the primi- 
tive Church, and therefore all faithful followers of Christ, 
priests or not priests, are and of right ought to be called viri 
ecclesiastici "churchmen." To put it in other language: 
The Church consists of all those who belong to it, and here 
one sees the working in Marsiglio's mind of that philosophical 

1 Almost invariably when Marsiglio speaks of bishops and presbyters together 
he connects them by the word seu, hardly ever by et or atque. This seems to 
be . one way of expressing his opinion on the essential equality of all ordained 
clergymen. 

34 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

process of which his co-worker William Ockham was the most 
eminent spokesman. The unit of Christian fellowship was 
the individual Christian. It was not the order, the class, the 
official college, which determined the status of the individual; 
it was the body of individuals that gave sanction to every one 
of its organs. As the philosopher would have said: The thing 
was the reality, and the general concept was only a convenient 
name by which to express the complex of things — "universalia 
post rem," in distinction from the formula which had dominated 
the thought of the Middle Ages, "universalia ante rem." It 
is this e mph asis upon t he ri ght of the individual Christian 
man that runs Mke a scarlet thread throughout every stage of 
Marsiglio's further demonstration. 

He goes on to distinguish between the words "temporal" 
and "spiritual." Temporal is readily defined as whatever 
pertains to the use and advantage of man in this world. The 
difficulty is in fixing the limits of the spiritual. Marsiglio 
enumerates no less than seven different senses in which the 
word is frequently employed. In general it may be used of all 
incorporeal things and their activities. More specifically it 
applies to the divine law, its teachings and its discipline, and 
so to the sacraments of the Church and their effects, the divine 
grace, all theological virtues and gifts of the Holy Spirit pre- 
paring us for the eternal life. Further, it may include all those 
voluntary human actions or experiences (passiones) which 
tend toward merit in the life to come, as, for example, divine 
contemplation, affection toward God and our neighbor, chari- 
ties, fastings, prayers, pilgrimages, contempt of the world and 
escape from it. Less important is its application to the church 
building and all the apparatus connected with divine service. 

But now, in the most recent times, certain persons extend 
this word "spiritual" most unsuitably and inappropriately to 
those actions of the clergy which are to the advantage or dis- 
advantage of another person with reference to the present life. 
Still more improperly they include under "spiritual" the 
temporal possessions of the clergy, both real and personal, and 
also certain incomes from them which they call "tithes," so 
that under cover of this usage they may be exempted from the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 35 

ordinary rules of the civil law. Surely this is an open abuse, 
and is contrary to the intention and practice of the apostles 
and saints, who called such things not " spiritualia," but 
1 ' carnalia seu temporalia ." " For not all their acts are spiritual 
or ought to be so called. Many of them are civil acts subject 
to contention, carnal, and temporal. For priests can borrow, 
make trusts, buy, sell, strike, kill, rob, fornicate, rape, betray, 
bear false witness, slander, fall into heresy, or commit other 
crimes, just as they are committed by laymen. Wherefore 
we may properly ask them whether any one of sound mind can 
call such actions when committed by them spiritualia." 

The words judex and judicium offer another fine distinction. 
We use the word "judge" of an expert in some technical art, 
as, for example, of a physician, a geometer, or a carpenter, and 
his opinion within his field is a "judgment." Specifically, a 
judge is one having special knowledge of public or private law, 
commonly called an advocate, though in many regions, espe- 
cially in Italy, he is called judex. Again, this word is used 
of the ruler, and his opinions are called judicia and have coer- 
cive power. Again and again in later chapters Marsiglio refers 
back to these fundamental distinctions in the use of terms in 
order to make perfectly clear in what sense he is using them at 
the moment and to guard himself against objections arising 
from their corruption or perversion. Especially in denning 
the powers of the priesthood he will insist upon the sharpest 
distinction between their character as experts and their claim 
to coercive jurisdiction. 

! The arguments for the coercive power s of the- Papacy are 
gummed u p under the one principle that, as the spiritual""is 

igher tp«" the tem poral, g» that pow er which is primarily 
concerned with spiritual things has rights of control over all 
pnw pra whifih havp +» An nnly with temporal things . Espe- 
~"cially"is this claim advanced as against the Empire, because 
the Papacy preten ds t,n the right to confer the imperial power 
and tn transfer it from one prince to another, as in the case of 
the famou s tr ansfer from the ru) Q r if the oqg t +* t.h P Vin^ nf 
the F ranks! This pretension has recently been renewed in the 
strongest terms in the conflict between Ludwig the Bavarian 

36 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

and his rival Frederic of Austria. JMarsiglio proposes to show 
"by the witness of Scripture in both its literal and its mystical' 
sense, according to the interpretation of holy men and other 
approved doctors, that nei ther the Roman bishop called 'popel 
no r any other bishop^jaresbyter, or deacon lias a right to any 
sov§reiglfty"^^ (judicium) or 

coercive" jurisdiction over any priest, ruler, community, asso- 
ciation, or individual" of whatsdeveT'cohdition (undersiajldiag 
by 'coercive judgment ' What we have already described as 
contained in the third meaning of judex and judicium) .'} 

This sentencTmay be saidfo*contain the thesis of the whole 
J work. It is a sweeping proposition, and Marsiglio seems to 
feel the necessity of safeguarding himself by a disclaimer. 
Here, he says, is no question as to what power or authority 
Christ, true God and true man, had and still has in this world, 
nor how much of such authority he had power to confer upon 
St. Peter, or upon the other apostles and their successors the 
bishops or. presbyters; for on this point no true believer has 
any doubts. WhatJie_wishes_io .investigate is the question, 
" ffihat e xflfi 11 ^"^ pnwp.r a nd authority in th is wp^rl nViriat 
willed to confer upon them and de facto did confer upon them f 
and from what he excluded and prohibited them both by his 
advice andlns commands^ , Christ came into the world, not to 
rule over men, not to judge them with judgments (according 
to the third meaning), not to be a temporal sovereign, but 
rather to subject himself to the conditions of the world as it 
was; nay, he purposely wilier! to exclude and did exclude 
himself and the apostles and disciples and c onsequently their 
successors, bish grjs_ or presbyte rs, from aJU tem p nml . „rn^ » r 
sovereignty (thaHs^_of a coercive c haracter), and he did thi s 
rjyTsiireTHmpIe, his teaching, his coun sel an d his commands. 
We are "noTgHaftylioncer^ long~array of texts of 

Scripture and quotations from the Fathers from Augustine to 
Bernhard of Clairvaux. This is notoriously a kind of argu- 
ment that can be used with equal success on either side of any 
question. /Th e fact was, that the Church, in the narrower 
sense, had fortified itself with a tr enif.mlunw At ii m Ui gp ^f i o ga ^ 
precedent and defiant assumption against which nothing sWt. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 37 

of determined revolt could accomplish any permanent res ult. 
The cunclusion is the inevitable one, tnat smce no clerical 
person has the right to coercive rule, all clergymen must be 
subject to the civil lawgiver, and may exercise jurisdiction 
over laymen or other clergymen only in so far as this is per- 
mitted to them by that lawgiver, in whose power, moreover, 
it lies to deprive them of it for reasonable cause. And it must 
not be forgotten that this "lawgiver" is, according to the 
definition, the People, acting either directly in assembly or 
through a ruler chosen by their own free action. 

This leads naturally to an examination of the famous "power 
of the keys." Christ said to Peter (Matt, xvi, 19), "I will give 
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and_ whatsoever 
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and what- 
soever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 
Similar sayings were addressed also to the whole body of the 
apostles (Matt, xviii; 18 and. John M,£3) . • '' What do they mean? ' 
Marsiglio answers in such a way as to show that he accepts 
the practice of th e Church in committing to the priesthood the 
function oi periorm ing the sacraments and prono uncing the 
r emission 1 Of sins upon due confession and repentance; but 
he shows also that the real pr ocess of absolution depends, not 

TTpfinTTTt v aetJb g Sf ti hp pnPBT, , hrjtupnn t.hp f rra.fP nf dnri frpply 

given to the individual repent ant soul. Confession is properly 
Yequired, but li it is not practicable, then absolution takes 
place without it, provided, however, that the penitent hajveVtbe' 
honest intention of confessing at the first practicable*'bppor- 
tunity. It is a modified protest, but the spirit of it is evident. 
The real thing is the individual will; the ceremony is accessory. 
Marsiglio's authorities here are Peter Lombard and Richard 
of St. Victor, and he sums up his conclusion from their opinions : 
"From which it is evident that as regards the merit of the 
penitent, the Roman bishop has no more power than any other 
priest to absolve from guilt or from penalty. God alone ab- 
solves the truly penitent sinner without any action of the 
priest either preceding or accompanying." As to excom- 
munication, altibough ther^is need of a priest to declare the 
decision, still the coercive function does not belong to any 

38 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

single priest or to any collegium of them. It is the right of the 
whole body of the faithful in the community where the ac- 
cused person belongs, or of his ruler (superior) or of a General 
Council to appoint a judge, whose duty it shall be to summon 
the accused, to examine him, to pass judgment, and to acquit 
him or condemn him to public disgrace and separation from 
the society of believers. Nevertheless in the inquiry as to 
whether a person ought to be excommunicated or not, a judge 
of this sort should associate with himself a body of clergymen 
as experts in the law and the customary practice. / "If it were 
lawful for any one priest, either alone or with his collegium of 
clergymen, to excommunicate anyone he please without the 
consent of the whole body of the faithful, it follows that a 
priest or a collegium of them might take away all kingdoms 
and principalities from the kings or princes who hold them. 
For if any prince be excommunicated, all his subjects will be 
excommunicated also if they continue to obey him, so that the 
power of every prince will be destroyed." 

By numerous analogies Marsiglio tries to make still clearer 
the distinction between the professional and the extra-pro- 
fessional action of the priesthood. It is the function of the 
priest to examine the accused as to whether according to 
the Gospel law he ought to be cut off from the communion of 
the faithful lest he infect others; just as a physician or a council 
of them has to decide about a physical disease, e. g. whether a 
leper ought to be separated from human society. B ut ? as_t he 
physjgianjias-iio-coorcivo jurisdioti on -^wfaJd^w^uMjenaJble him 
to e nforce such a H ppisinn , «p t,he priest has no p ower_to enforce 
hTs expert jud gment. In the same way, the tmnS^XcTavig er) 
oi a priSOiUias!^Ldja±y_cdJapening .and closing the doors, but 
has no power to say wheth er the door shall or shall not b e 
opened to ajyvejijuisimejLayLg^^ He has to proclaim 

tfiaTth'e prisoner is freed or not freed, but it is n&t his procla- 
mation but the decree of the judge which really releases him. 
If he proclaim a man to be free or bound, contrary to the 
decree of the judge, the man is not therefore free or bound. / So 
the pjjp gf ha <* th p f""oiinT< nf fWi q| Tin g thfi "inner absolved or 
conde^ jipr 1 ; hnt, ^ as "" rinprmypright m the matter.! 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS (j®S 

We now begin to see the practical applications of the dis- 
tinctions thus carefully worked out. The first of these is the 
right of civil jurisdiction over the civ^U or temporal offences of 
clergymeny The fact already set forth that clergymen can 
ancTHb commit crimes brings them of itself within the scope of 
the civil law;vbut_MajsigliQ _goes a step further . The clergy- 
man, as an expert in morals, sins more gravely and less excus- 
ably than the layman, and ought therefore to bq J b he more 
severely punished . "Let no one^objecVthat injuries by word 
"Of mouth or to property or to the person or of any other kind 
forbidden by secular law become "spiritual acts" when com- 
mitted by a priest and that therefore their punishment does 
not belong to the secular ruler ... for these are, as already 
shown, carnalia and temporalia. If the Roman bishop or any 
other priest were to be thus exempted from the coercive juris- 
diction of rulers, and were himself to be a judge of this sort, 
freed from the authority of the human Lawgiver, and might 
separate all spiritual servants (commonly called "clergy") 
from the jurisdiction of rulers and subject them to himself 
(as the Roman pontiffs are doing in these days), it follows of 
necessity that the secular jurisdiction of rulers would be almost 
totally destroyed. That, I think, would be a serious evil and 
of great moment to all rulers and all communities." 

In pursuance of their doctrine of clerical exemption, Roman 
bishops have recently been trying to include as many kinds of 
persons as possible under the term "clergy." For example, all 
such orders as Templars, Hospitallers, lay brethren known as 
Beghini or Fratres Gaudentes or the Order of Altopascio * and 

1 el eos qui de alto passu. This puzzling description doubtless refers to the 
lay mendicant Order of Altopascio, the seat of which was in Tuscany on the border 
between Florence and Lucca. The Rule of this Order is printed in the collection 
called Curiositd Letterarie, vol. liv, Bologna, 1864. The Italian manuscript, 
supposed by the editor to be a translation from a Latin original made about 
1300, gives the name as Altopasso. This plainly suggests the derivation, alius 
passus. It is, therefore, quite intelligible that a branch of the Order established 
in Paris by King Philip IV (1285-1314) should have been called du Haul Pas. 
The use of this name seems to have caused the original Altopascio entirely to 
disappear. It does not occur in the description of the Hospital of the Order in 
Paris given in Du Breul, Thidtre des An/iquitez de Paris, 1612, nor in Helyot, 
Histoire des Ordres Religieux et MilUaires, ii, 282, 2d ed. 1792. In both cases the 

40 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

so on pro libito. If all persons of this sort are to be exempted 
from the jurisdiction of civil rulers, with immunity also from 
public burdens, it seems a very obvious danger that the greater 
part of mankind may slip into these orders. If this should 
happen the coercive jurisdiction of rulers would be left without 
effect, a grave evil and corruption of the republic. "For who- 
ever enjoys the honors and advantages of a civil community, 
as, for example, the peace and protection of the human Law- 
giver, should not be exempted from its burdens and its juris- 
diction without the action of the Lawgiver itself. "To avoid 
this we must admit, in accordance with the Truth, that the 
ruler has jurisdiction over all bishops or presbyters and clergy- 
men by authority of the Lawgiver, in order that the republic 
may not go to pieces through undue multiplicity of powers. 
The ruler ought further to assign a certain number of clergymen 
to each district subject to him, as also of every other class of 
citizens, lest through their undue increase they come to resist 
the coercive power of the ruler or otherwise to disturb the 
peace of the realm and impede the community or the kingdom 
in carrying out its necessary activities." 

In the effective sense of the word "judge," there is but one 
who can give final judgment as to transgressions of the divine 
law, that is Christ and no other. In this world there is no 
judge who can exercise coercive jurisdiction for such offences. 
The priest is, so far as this world is concerned, only a "doctor," 
or expert. His business is to teach, to exhort, to convince by 
argument, to terrify transgressors by fear of future condemna- 
tion at the judgment seat of Christ, but not to compel by force. 
Such enforced conformity is of no use whatever, since it profits 
nothing to the man so far as his eternal salvation is concerned. 
So that, "in accordance with the Truth and the obvious inten- 

origin of the Order is said to have been at Lucca. It was only the unfailing 
linguistic instinct of my colleague, Professor George Foot Moore, working down- 
ward from Marsiglio's qui de alto passu to the French Haul Pas, that enabled 
me to work upward again from this to Altopascio and to discover the missing 
link in Altopasso. A considerable account of the Order with many documentary 
proofs is given in Giovanni Lami, Delidae Erudvtorum, Florence, 1769, vol. 
xviii, pp. 50-184. All three of these rare books are in the library of Harvard 
College. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS ( 41 

tion of the Apostle and of those holy men who were the molt" 
famous doctors of the Church, no one is to be compelled in this 
world to obey the Gospel law by any form of punishment or 
penalty, whether he be a believer or an unbeliever. Conse- 
quently, no minister of this law, bishop or presbyter, can judge 
any one in this world (in the third sense of the word 'judg- 
ment'), nor compel any one to observe the divine law, especi- 
ally without the authority of the human Lawgiver." 

We are thus led naturally to Marsiglio's views as to the 
punishment of heretics. He does not question that the heretic 
.deserves some kind of correction, and admits that at first 
thought such correction seems to be the function of the priest 
as the expert in the divine law. But here comes in his funda- 
mental distinction again. It is Christ alone who can judge the 
heretic for his offence against the divine law, and this judgment 
is reserved for the world to come. If, however, he be forbidden 
to remain in the region where his heresy was proven, then, as a 
transgressor of human law he may be coerced by the custodian 
of that law, as authorized by the human Lawgiver./ But if the 
human law allows him to stay in the community of the faith- 
ful, then "I say that no one has the right to coerce the heretic 
or other infidel by any penalty or punishment, real or personal, 
so far as his status in this life is concerned. The reason for this 
is a general one : that no one, however he may sin in matters of 
opinion, is to be punished or coerced in this world for the 
opinion itself, but only in so far as he offends against a com- 
mand of the human law."/ 

Marsiglio next devotes several chapters to the critical ques- 
tion of apostolic poverty and its modern application in the form 
of sacerdotal poverty. \ Nowhere else does he let himself go in 
bitter accusation of the folly and wickedness of the clergy as 
he does here. \ As usual he begins with definitions, analysing 
with the utmost care the various forms and degrees of property 
rights in a civil society. Especially interesting in view of the 
later exposition by Wycliffe and his followers is Marsiglio's 
definition of dominium or lordship. "Strictly, dominium 
means supreme control over a thing justly acquired and so held 
that no one else has a right to this thing without the express 

42 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

/consent of the person in control." In common usage this 
definition applies, not only to a thing itself, but to the use or 
usufruct of the thing, a distinction which underlies the most 
important of Wycliffe's contentions on this subject. Marsiglio, 
however, does not here enlarge upon this point, but includes 
both kinds of dominium in his later applications. The term 
applies to ownership by corporations as well as individuals, 
and this gives the opportunity for references to the property of 
religious orders. "We must not forget" says our author, 
"that there are some, of the voluntary poor who have aban- 
doned earthly things from honorable motives and in suitable 
ways. But there are others who seem to have given up these 
things not with any such purpose but for vain glory or some 
other wordly deceit (fallaciam). We must bear in mind also 
that of earthly goods (which they call riches) there are some 
which according to ordinary human needs are to be consumed 
at once, as food, drink, medicine and the like; others of a 
permanent kind which by their very nature serve many uses, 
as land, houses, tools, clothing, horses and slaves." 

As a conclusion from this distinction Marsiglio lays down 
what seem to him sound principles of sacerdotal economy. 
GlerfiaaBea-shoul d be content with their daily bread and t he 
necessary clothing if they desire to attain a condition of per fec- 
tion or poverty. in the ingh^t^senssL-lAummam paupertatem). 
But an4he_o1^r_h^n31t_is the ! bjmndfinjiuty of those to whom 
they minister-^o-aup ply . these -Ji fl cOKr.i tio n iiLthe yareflTtlpi t,r> Hn 
so,_ andLjjbia^lCTgyman has the right to dem a nd such suppo rt, 
though not by coer.civ e - - nrQ C Pss_in Jbhis present life . He can 
have recourse only to the "divine law." There is no warrant 
in Scripture for requiring tithes or any other part of the 
property of the faithful. If the community is so poor that it 
cannot support the clergy, then they must seek some other 
honorable and suitable way of increasing their income. 

"Now someone will ask, to whom belongs the dominium or 
right of suit before a civil court over such temporalities and 
especially over real property, since, as we have shown, such 
dominium does not' belong to gospel ministers in their state of 
perfection, hi say, that the ownership of property set apart 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 43 

for the maintenance of ministers of the Gospel belongs to the 
Lawgiver or to its deputies for this special purpose appointed 
either by the Lawgiver or by the donors of such property. 
Persons thus appointed for the defense and recovery of ecclesi- 
astical property are usually called "patrons" of churches. . . . 
It is not fitting, therefore, that Christ's perfect ones, the 
successors of the apostles, should reserve to themselves fields, 
towns, or fortresses. £Never was there given in the acts or the 
example of Christ a formula to the Church for holding lordship 
over real property or of reserving it to themselves for the future, 
but examples of the opposite we do indeed find in Scripture. 
A formula for holding personal property for the purpose above 
specified we do find, but nowhere for holding real property." 
jit is at this point that Marsiglio strikes hands with the 
Spiritual Franciscans in their crusade for the evangelical 
poverty of the clergy and especially in their fight against Pope 
John XXII. In thus making common cause with a class of 
persons as little likely as any to be accused of unorthodoxy his 
case was greatly strengthened. 

VII 

Marsiglio is now prepared to move on to the most telling 
argument in his w hole attack, and to grapple with th e vital 
question o ^""papaT suprema cy By way of introduction he 
ISuinifiarizes oriranruOre what he has already laid down as to the 
nature of the sacerdotal office. His main distinction here is 
between the ess ential quality or "character" of the priest an d 
h%TJtri eT more distinctly functional quality. T he form er in - 
cludes the power to celebrate the sacrament of theHEuchansl 
and"tD"'absbT ve the la itnlul irom tneir sins. This power is 
granted by God through Christ unmediately, though with a 
certain preparatory human ceremony, as the laying on of 
hands and the utterance of certain words. These human act s, 
however, have n o effect in so far as the con ferring nf + ** p PSS, ' TI - 
tiat"groarrlrn5fl character is concerned, although "thev precede 
in pursuan ce of a certain divine covenant or ordinance.' 
f ^mtB^mnther thing is th at human institution by which one_ 

U -'/ MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

priest is set above others, or by which priests are assigned to 
%ertain terrrto rieT"fOr the instruction of the jgeop^CiBrthe 
divine law, for ad ministering sacraments~an d dispe nsing th ose 
tempor aTrlgh ts which we call "chinch benence^ LJ^As-feg^as 
ffieTnrmg r, ihp. pi ^ R pnt ia l prfeflt l y fhar a rtT, " n pripqt.q are f i aii al 
a^lTt^fi Apnstlpis wRrp eq ual. No one of the Apostles h ad 
a uthority ov er any o ther or n vsr t.TiA whole body of them , either 
as to thehj^jssenjtial-and-^srimary-^^raetei^^ 
ary^stitutions. \ 

"In this way Marsiglio leads up to the vital question of the 
Petrine supremacy. if We recall that he said rather early that 
the claim of the Roman bishop to supremacy over other ele- 
ments of the Church had in recent times been shifted from the 
historical basis of the Constantinian Donation to the dogmatic 
or speculative basis of the Petrine succession.) This has, 
therefore, become the very crux of the whole papal position 
and is in consequence selected by Marsiglio as the most critical 
point in his attack. Taking up the argument as to the equality 
of the priestly character he applies it at once directly to Peter. 
Peter had, there fore, no p,Qwer a;nd j^U ^s_ aiiy^ercive 
jurisdiction directly from God oyerj^jal^^jipostles^neither 
the^power q£ inducting them into the sacerdotal office^orTS 
getting thetn. apart, nor of sending them out" on theJL work of 
preaching, excepting that we may fairly admit a certainjgre- 
cedence over the others on account of age or service (officio) o r 
perhaps from circumstances (seranafora lemjms) or the choice 
of the apostles, who properly revered him — although no one 
can prove such a choice from Scripture/" The proof that what 
we are saying is true is, that we find in Scripture that St. Peter 
assumed no peculiar authority for himself over the other 
apostles, but, on the contrary maintained an equality with 
them. s> Forjthe whole body (congregatio) of the Apostles was 
of higher authority than that of Peter alone or of any other 
Apostle. Why, then, do certain sacrilegious flatterers take 
upon themselves to say that any one bishop has from Christ 
plenitude of power over clergymen, not to say over laymen, 
when neither Peter nor any other Apostle ever presumed to 
ascribe such power to himself either by word or deed?". . . . 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 45 

"Furthermore, since it is written that Peter was elected bishop 
at Antioch by the multitude of the faithful, not needing t6e 
confirmation of the other Apostles, and that the rest of the 
Apostles presided over other regions without the knowledge of 
Peter or any institution or confirmation by him (since they were 
sufficiently consecrated by Christ), we ought in the same way 
to hold that the successors of these Apostles needed no con- 
firmation from the successors of Peter. Nay, more, that many 
successors of other Apostles were duly elected and installed as 
bishops and governed their provinces as holy men without any 
further institution or confirmation by the successors of Peter." 
As to the supremacy of the bishop of Rome as the successor 
of Peter, it is marvellous, says Marsiglio, that people will over- 
look the fact that the Roman bishops are the successors rather 
of Paul than of Peter, and it is "supermarvellous" when we 
consider that it is not the See of Rome but the See of Antioch 
which ought justly to claim this succession. It was Paul who 
was sent out to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, as Peter 
was sen* to the Jews. "It can be proved by Scripture that 
Paul was two years at Rome, preached there and converted all 
Gentiles who were willing to be converted, and therefore it is 
evident that he was in a special sense bishop of Rome and 
exercised there the pastoral office, having his authority from 
Christ, commanded thereto by revelation and elected by the 
consent of the other Apostles." "But, as to Peter, I say that 
it cannot be proved by Scripture that he was bishop of Rome 
or, what is more, that he was ever at Rome. For it seems most 
amazing if, according to some popular saint's legend, St. Peter 
came to Rome before St. Paul, preached there the word of God 
and was then taken prisoner, if then St. Paul after his arrival 
in Rome acting together with St. Peter had so many conflicts 
with Simon Magus and in defence of the faith fought against 
emperors and their agents, and if finally > according to the same 
story, both were beheaded at the same time for their confession 
of Christ, there fell asleep in the Lord, and thus consecrated 
the Roman Church of Christ — most amazing, I say, that St. 
Luke, who wrote the Acts of the Apostles and Paul himself 
make not the slightest mention of St. Peter/' , 

46 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

When Paul came to Rome the Jews there declared that they 
knew nothing about this "new sect" except that it was every- 
where badly spoken of (Acts xxviii, 22). Now, asks Marsiglio, 
can any one who is seeking the truth and not merely looking 
for an argument believe that Peter had come to Rome in ad- 
vance of Paul and had not said a word about Christ? Or that 
Paul, if he had known that Peter had been preaching there 
would not have referred to him as a witness? " Can any one 
think that Paul was for,two years with Peter at Rome and had 
no intimate relations with him, /or, if he had, that the author 
of the Acts would not have mentioned it? For in other and 
less important places where Paul met Peter he mentions him, 
as at Corinth and at Antioch and many other places, and if he 
had met him at Rome, the most important city in the world, 
where, according to the above story St. Peter was in charge 
as bishop, how could he have failed to mention him? So that 
these things are practically (quasi) incredible, and that story 
or legend cannot with any probability be accepted as to this 
part of it, but must be reckoned among the apocryphal writ- 
ings. But according to Scripture it ought to be held without 
a doubt that Paul was bishop of Rome, and if some one else 
was with him at Rome, nevertheless Paul should for the above 
reasons be regarded as the sole and chief Roman bishop, while 
Peter should be considered as bishop of Antioch, as is evident 
in the second chapter of the letter to the Galatians. II do not 
deny that Peter was bishop of Rome, but I hold it to be very 
probable that in this he did not precede but rather followed 
Paul." 

Therretrine legend is thus, so far as the essence of it is con- 
cerned, thoroughly demolished. Marsiglio, like any fair 
minded Protestant controversialist, is willing to admit the 
great probability of Peter's presence in Rome and even that he * 
may have had some such leadership in the Christian commun- 
ity there that he may fairly be described as its "bishop^'A 
What he will not admit for a moment is that he was in any 
special sense designated in any way as the divinely ordained 
head of the Roman Christians. £ Still less will he admit that, 
whatever leadership Peter may have had at Rome, this was of 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACI8 ; 47 

such a nature as to give to his successors there any shadow of a 
right over the successors of the other Apostles in their several 
districts. [in so far as the papal supremacy rests upon the, 
Petrine argument, the author of the Defensor Pads rejects it ! . 
absolutely. Never, in the hottest controversies of the Reforma- j 
tion period was this line of attack followed more completely 
or more convincingly. \ Never, with all the resources of modern 
scholarship has anything essential been added to the chain of 
evidence which has shown the weakness of the Petrine claim as 
the basis of papal supremacy. Marsigho is the pioneer m the 
use of a strictly historical method in examining the foundations 
.oiJheJinpxising. structure of the mediaeval church. We have 
here no metaphysical speculation and no appeal to formal logic. 
The Papacy claimed to rest on a series of historical facts; 
Marsiglio's contribution was to show the instability of these 
alleged facts. Other and far more valid grounds for the Roman 
supremacy there were indeed, but at this point Marsiglio is not 
concerned with them. For the moment it is the Petrine ques- 
tion and that alone which holds his attention, and to this he 
clings with extraordinary consistency until he has disposed of it 
in all its details. 

Quite distinct, as we have already seen, from the essential 
quality of the priest as the dispenser of divine law to the faith- 
ful is the function of assigning specific clergymen to special 
territories and of determining their relation to the means of 
support. JVTRTRiglin nnw gjjjjresses himself to the task of de- 
fining more accurately this latter process, in other words of 
"describing the actual and the ideal conditions of the system of 
benefices that formed the basis of so enormous a part of the 
curial activities of his day. From what source did this control 
jai the clerical forces of Christendom originate? True to 
his guiding principle Marsiglio declares that in the beginning, 
especially before the conversion of the nations, the active cause* 
(causa factiva) of this secondary determination of place and 
condition of living was either the whole body of the Apostles 
or some one of them, as circumstances might dictate. Then, 
after the time of the Apostles and the early Fathers, by a 
certain order of succession and especially in communities that 

V 

,48 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACK 

were already completely developed {jam perfectis) the immedi- 
ate active source has been and ought to be either the whole 
body of the faithful in the given community acting through its 
own voluntary election, or else the individual or individuals to 
whom the community has committed authority to carry out 
such arrangements. Such trustee of the community's interests 
may be compelled by it to take action or may at its discretion, 
be removed from office. /In well organized communities it is 
the human Lawgiver alone who has the duty of selecting, 
prescribing, and presenting the persons who are to be raised to 
ecclesiastical orders. No priest or bishop alone and no college 
of priests may assist any one to obtain ecclesiastical rank with- 
out permission of the human Lawgiver or of the prince who 
rules by its authority.] 

As to the temporaha (usually called benefices), Marsiglio 
reminds us again that these are established either by the 
community for the support of ministers of the Gospel ".and 
other persons deserving compassion (miserabiles) ," or else by 
some individual or corporation. In the former case the Law- 
giver alone has the right to appoint and remove officials who 
shall present to the clerical office. In the latter, this right 
belongs to the donor or donors, always, however, subject to 
correction by the Lawgiver in any doubtful case. The climax 
of this chapter is reached in Marsiglio's doctrine of ecclesiasti- 
cal taxation. "And again, from what has been said it must be 
clear that t he h uman Lawgiver or the prince ruling by its 
authority, in casetheTC it> a surplus above the needs of the 
ministers of the Gospel, arising from ecclesiastical property, 
especially from real estate, m ay lawfully colle ct tfl.\f f p n/nrj 
revenues therefrom according-to both human q r H Hiving iW 
foFttardetence of the country or the redemption of captives as "a* 
servicTe-to~rdjg^^ 

reasonable purposes according to the judgment jaLthe-Ghristian 
Lawjjrven—Por "the grantor of "such temporalities to an indi- 
viduaror a corporation for pious uses may not grant them with 
any greater immunity than they had while they were in his 
possession. They were not exempt from public burdens then, 
and cannot be so after their transfer by a donor or founder into 
the possession of another." 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 49 

Having thus disposed of the Petrine claim of the Roman 
bishopric to supremacy over others and so over the Church as a 
whole, Marsiglio proceeds to examine those other claims which 
may be summed up in the one word "historical." He cites 
his authorities, including here especially the collection of 
canon laws known by the name of Isidore. In his estimate 
of the authenticity of these authorities he stands on the level of 
his own time, neither higher nor lower. He accepts, not only 
the Donation of Constantine with certain reservations, but also 
the Forged Decretals, now universally admitted to be a fabri- 
cation of the ninth century, but then received as undoubted 
evidence of a certain right of dictation by Rome to the other 
churches in the period before Constantine. Marsiglio sums 
up his results as follows : — During the whole of that period no 
bishop exercised any coercive jurisdicSon^over3§t E e r~blgS 5ps. 
What~hap^ened was, that many bishops in other provinces, 
when- they were in doubt regarding Holy Scripture jot the 
correct" practice of the Church, since they _cM not jyenture to 
come together openly, consulted the bishop and the church at 

Rome. They did this because of the greater number and the 

grgater"6xperience (peritia) of the Roman Christians, since 
the pursuit of all kinds of learning flourished greatly at that 
time in Rome, and in consequence its bishops and priests were 
better schooled than those in other places. Furthermore, they 
were held in greater reverence on account of Peter, the senior 
of the Apostles, who was said to have been bishop there, and 
of Paul, of whom the same is even more probable. The same 
kind of respect was paid to the City of Rome as the capital and 
most famous city of the world. . , 

These are all practical reasons, historically justified. Marsig- 
lio's implication is plain : if it had been possible for the provin- 
cial bishops to come together they would have fallen back 
upon the fundamental right of the community to determine 
its rules of practice for itself. In the absence of this possibility, 
they turned to the most obvious source, the center toward 
which the provincial looked for direction in all matters of legal 
or political import. / They applied to Rome for suitable direc- 
tors of their spiritual interests, because such persons abounded 
at Rome. Their applications were met by the Roman Chris- 

50 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

tians in a spirit of fraternal affection (charitative atque fraterne) 
and bishops were sent out ("though men could scarcely be 
found who were willing to accept this office")- So also the 
Roman orders were communicated to the provincial churches, 
and dissensions among them were heard and disposed of in 
Christian love. /"But now, from this priority of custom and 
the voluntary acquiescence of the other churches the bishops 
of Rome went on successively to assume a more ample author- 
ity and to issue decretals or ordinances for the whole Church 
in matters pertaining to church practice and to the conduct 
of the clergy, down to the time of Constantine. That emperor 
seems to have exempted the clergy from the coercive jurisdic- 
tion of the civil authorities. He seems also to have given to 
the church of Rome and to its bishop rights and powers over 
all other bishops and churches, which they now, however, as 
we have already shown, claim to be derived from another 
/source" (namely, the Petrine succession). 
/ Marsiglio has thus clearly indicated that in so far as the 
/ Roman bishopric represents an ancient and honorable tradi- 
f tion of sound doctrine and correct practice, he is ready to admit 
its claim to the reverence, and, within limits, even to the 
obedience of Christendom. What he will not admit is any 
such basis of divine appointment as entitles Rome to unques- 
tioning obedience and, least of all, to any coercive jurisdiction 
over other bishoprics or over civil powers. In developing this 
opposition he asks first : — to what writings must the Christian 
man give absolute acceptance as a condition of salvation? 
His answer is, that in the first place Holy Scripture is to be 
assumed as true and accepted with steadfast faith (firma 
credulitas). The same kind of faith is to be given also to such 
interpretations of Scripture as are declared by a General Coun- 
cil to be valid, because the decision of such a council is inspired 
by the Holy Spirit and therefore cannot err. On the other 
hand, no such implicit faith is to be given to any writing in 
which there is a possibility of human error. This is the weak 
point (hoc patiuntur) of writings emanating from an individual 
or a restricted corporation (collegii partialis). Such writings 
as experience shows, may be lacking in truth, which is not the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 51 

case with the canonical Scriptures. Marsiglio quotes Augus- 
tine in confirmation and closes his inquiry thus : " St. Augustine, 
therefore, understood by canonical writings only those which 
are contained in the Bible and not the decretals or decrees of 
the Roman pontiff or of the college of his priests whom they 
call "cardinals," nor any other human ordinances whatsoever 
concerning human actions or contentions and devised by 
human ingenuity. For "canon" means rule or standard, a 
standard because it is something certain, something that is 
peculiar to Holy Scripture alone as compared with other 
writings." 

VIII 

Where, then, are we to look for such authoritative interpre- 
tation of Christian faith and practice as shall secure the Church 
against those errors and schisms which Marsiglio recognizes 
as fatal to the essential unity of Christendom? His answer 
may fairly be described as the first proclamation in the century 
long campaign which was to result in the great series of General 
Councils, whereby the whole structure of the Church was to 
be essentially modified. £li' one seeks a point where Pre-Re- 
formation history may be said to begin, one finds it as distinctly 
marked here as anywhere.^ For it is from this point on that 
the demand for a council which should be radically different 
from any of those partial assemblies which in the mediaeval 
period had claimed universal authority grows more and more 
insistent. As Marsiglio's doctrine of the People as the source t 
of law penetrated more deeply and more widely into the con- l 
sciousness of thinking men, the feeling that this same principle ( 
must be extended to the Church as well grew more, intense, J, 
until it culminated in an irresistible demonstration. __H 

, "" The twentieth chapter of the_seconjiJlQQk of the Defensor 
Pads "contains Marsiglio's program for a working General— 
Council. Its monumental importance justifies a more ample 
treatment than we have given to any other portion of his 
argument. < The problem of the Council, he says, is the settle- 
ment of doubtful and sometimes contradictory opinions of 
learned men in regard to the divine law. "I propose to show 

52 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

that the principal authority for such a settlement, be it mediate 
or immediate, is that of a General Council of Christian men 
or of the majority of them or of those to whom such authority 
is deputed by the whole body of believers./ The method is 
this: Let all the more important provinces and communities 
of the world, according to the determination of their human 
lawgivers, whether their government be unified or manifold, 
and in proportion to the number and quality of the inhabitants, 
select pious men, first priests and then laymen, suitable persons 
of blameless life and skilled in the divine law. These are to 
act as judges (in the first meaning of that word), i. e., as experts 
representing the whole company of believers. They are to 
assemble in virtue of the authority committed to them by 
their several communities (universitates) , in a place selected 
by the majority of them or of their lawgivers, and there are to 
settle matters pertaining to the divine law which may appear 
doubtful, determining what things are useful, what are expe- 
dient and what are necessary. They have further to decide 
with regard to other matters concerning the church ritual or 
divine worship as shall best conduce to the peace and order 
of the faithful." 

Attendance at the Council is to be obligatory, enforced if 
necessary by the civil authority./ Priests are bound to this 
duty by the nature of their office; but laymen also, if selected 
to serve, are equally under obligation to be present and to 
assist in the discussion of matters affecting the common welfare. 
Such a council is vested with final authority in the matters 
presented to it, and this excludes the final authority of "any 
one single person or college." A proof of the need of lay 
co-operation at councils is found in the historical fact, that in 
those of the early Church Christian emperors and empresses 
with their court officials were present and aided in the settle- 
ment of doubtful points. If this was proper then, how much 
more so now, when the throng of priests and bishops ignorant 
of the divine law is so much greater. When priests differ 
among themselves as to what must be believed in order to 
attain eternal life, the decision must rest with the majority of 
the faithful. \ 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 53 

"If the Pope of Rome or any other single bishop had author- 
ity of this sort, or if the letters and decrees of the Roman 
pontiff were of equal authority with the decisions of a General 
Council, then all the governments of the world, all kingdoms 
and provinces and all persons of whatsoever dignity or pre- 
eminence or condition, would be subject to the coercive 
jurisdiction of the Roman bishop. For this is what Boniface 
the Eighth declared in his letter or decree beginning " Unam 
sanctam catholicam ecclesiam" and ending: "We proclaim, 
declare and establish, that henceforth it is a necessary article of 
faith that every human creature is subject to the Roman 
pontiff." . . . Now, however, it is clear that this is false from 
the beginning, the most injurious of all imaginable falsehoods 
to the welfare of all civilized peoples." Its falsity and its folly 
are shown by the decree "Meruit" of Clement V, which 
expressly exempts the king and people of France from its 
operation. 

In early times matters of doubt could be settled by assemblies 
of the clergy alone. "Now, however, on account of the cor- 
ruption of the church administration, the greater part of the 
priests and bishops are but little versed in sacred Scripture, so 
that the temporalities of benefices, are gained by greedy and 
litigious office seekers through servility or importunity or 
bribery or physical violence. And, before God and the com- 
pany of the faithful, I have known numbers of priests, abbots, 
and other church dignitaries of such low quality that they could 
not even speak grammatically. And what is worse, I have 
known and seen a man less than twenty years of age and almost 
completely ignorant of the divine law entrusted with the office 
of bishop in a great and important city when he not only lacked 
priestly ordination, but had not passed through the diaconate 
or subdiaconate." 

The General Council thus defined is to be called together by 
the human Lawgiver and is to act under the special protection 
and supervision of the ruler who represents the Lawgiver. It 
is clear, says Marsiglio, that this cannot be the function of the 
Roman bishop or of the College of Cardinals, because, if he 
alone or with them were to be accused of crimes requiring the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

elgment of a council it is highly probable that he would delay 
calling it, or would put it off entirely to the grave injury of the 
body of the faithful. Thjs_jtemptajiah does not e^stjar the 
faithful Lawgiver or the^pmaaxinifey- of believers, smcethey 
or the irrajorityTSf "fKem are^pJ^asiJ^^be corrupted. I'urther- 
more the "enforcement of the conciliar decrees against all 
offenders, clerical as well as lay, belongs to the human Lawgiver 
or to his representative, the temporal ruler. This right extends 
even to making statutes regulating the government of the Holy 
See and the election of the Roman pontiff. It includes a mul- 
titude of details such as fasts, restrictions of marriage within 
certain degrees of relationship, charters to new religious orders, 
imposition of penalties in person or property. "For it were a 
scandal to the peace and order of the community of the faithful 
if an ignorant or malicious priest or bishop or any college of 
them should excommunicate a prince or lay an interdict upon 
a province." 

The Council is to be the supreme and final judge in regard to 
assignments to benefices, the issuing of licenses to teach, notarial 
commissions and similar grants. If the principle of the " Unam 
Scmctam" were to be enforced, it would mean the gravest 
danger or even complete ruin to all civil governments. "In 
his edicts against the noble Ludwig, Duke of Bavaria, accepted 
as King of the Romans, a certain person called Roman Pope, 
professes to be dealing only with the Roman kingdom or empire, 
but in reality he includes all governments, ascribing to himself 
plenitude of power and thus covering all other kings as well as 
the prince of the Romans. This bishop, I say, is seeking juris- 
diction over all the princes of the earth in order to control the 
granting of benefices and tithes, and is thus stirring up sedition 
especially throughout the whole Roman Empire." Hence 
follows the duty of the human Lawgiver (i. e. the People) and 
of the prince representing it to watch this whole business of the 
church temporalities and to see to it that if there is any surplus 
beyond the needs of the clergy it be devoted to the necessities 
of the public defence or other service to the community. 

The most impressive feature of this conciliar schem e 4s its 
representative character. It proceeds from the base of the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

social structure upward to its higher levels, not from afcove 
downward. The unit of representation is the local community 
acting on the initiative of its own civil authorities. The dele- 
gates, clerical as well as lay, are toact jn virtue of t bft authority 
derived fron^ Jbe^omc^unity, not in virtue of any essential 
quality of their own. The clerical members, to be sure, have 
an especial qualification as experts in faith and morals, but 
only as such. Their opinions are to command respect only 
upon their individual merits. Even the selection of the place 
of meeting, always a consideration of great importance, is to be 
in the hands of the delegates themselves or of their constituent 
communities, an obvious precaution against "packing" by 
any centralized authority. The choice of delegates is to rest 
partly upon a numerical basis, partly upon that established 
distinction of social classes which no rational scheme of reform 
in the fourteenth century could wholly ignore. 

It is in this matter of the General Council that the intel- 
lectual kinship of Marsiglio and William Ockham is most 
clearly manifest. In Ockham's most famous treatise, the 
Dialogue * between an inquiring Scholar and a somewhat ap- 
pallingly learned but affectedly reluctant Magister written about 
1340 we have an elaborate discussion of the nature and powers 
of the Council analogous at almost every point with that of 
Marsiglio. As the latter bases his argument upon the funda- 
mental right of the whole body of citizens to act immediately 
and directly in matters of interest to all, so Ockham, the 
professional champion of the new philosophy of Nominalism, 
starts with the conception of a state or of a church as an aggre- 
gate of individuals, bound together indeed by common inter- 
ests, but not thereby divested of their essential individual 
quality. . 

An illustration of this principle and at the. same time of 
Ockham's logical method is found in his^discussion of the ques- 
tion whether a General Council can fall into error in a matter 
of faith. (Dial., Part I, Book iii, ch. 25). "Individuals, 
liable to error when they were, in divers places, continue to be 

1 Dialogus Magistri Guillermi de Ockam dodoris famosissimi, in Goldaat, 
Monarchiae S. Romani Imperii etc. Frankfurt, 1668. II, pp. 392-957. 

56 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

so liable when they come together in one place. Their coming 
together does not prevent some of them from being perverted 
in their faith (inobliquabiles) . For, as the place does not 
sanctify the man, so the place can confirm no man in his faith. 
... If a hundred or two hundred bishops were (formerly) 
liable to fall into heresy through their own wills, they could 
do the same after coming together." 

Ockham plays with this argument, twisting it back and 
forth with every possible device of logic through page after 
page until he finally forces it to its logical outcome. The 
General Council may err; the pope and the cardinals may err; 
is it possible that the whole body of Christians should fall into 
error? The Scholar asks the question, and the Magister re- 
plies: "Well, Jews, Saracens, and Pagans firmly believe that 
the Christian faith is erroneous." "But I wasn't asking for 
their opinion," replies the Scholar, "I meant to ask whether 
any Christians believe this, and among Christians I include 
also heretics." 

Mag. "I never heard of a Christian who believed this." 
Sch. "And yet, perhaps you could think up some reasons for 

such an opinion." 
Mag. "A false question can be answered only by sophistical 

reasoning." 
Sch. "True; but oftentimes false propositions can be sup- 
ported by reasons that are plausible and hard to controvert. 
So, will you kindly try to invent some of these?" 
The Magister then goes on to say, that one reason why all 
Christians might fall into error is, that belief, whether of the 
individual or of the group, is not self-evident but is a matter 
of will, and the human will is always liable to error. Another 
reason is as follows: "No one can deny that all Christians ex- 
cepting two bishops might become heretics. Now, these two 
bishops might fall into heresy, because God can have no greater 
care for them than he had for our first parents, and he per- 
mitted them to lapse from the faith. Finally, it is clear that 
any aggregate (ilia multitudo) of Christians might err, provided 
only that Christ's promise that his faith should abide forever 
be preserved inviolate. Now, if all living Christian men and 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 57 

women should become heretics, still this promise would be 
preserved through the aggregate of baptized children." 

Sophistical reasoning indeed! And yet, however fantastic 
this game of logic-chopping may appear to us, it certainly ex- 
presses the very essence of that new mental attitude of which 
William Ockham was the chief exponent. In the last resort 
it was no single official or college or assembly or class or sex 
or age that could give a final verdict in a matter of faith. All 
these might fail; but even so, somewhere within the body of 
Christians must be found that mystical witness to the truth 
which should ensure its permanence. 

In spite of Ockham's metaphysical conclusion that no specific 
portion of the faithful is exempt from, error, he recognizes the 
General Council as practically the efficient representative of 
the Church as a whole. There was a time, says the Magister, 
when the Church was so small that its members could all come 
together. Now that this is impossible the next best thing is 
to secure a true representation. "Therefore, if the several 
parts of the Church universal elect certain delegates to come 
together to take action in regard to the Church of God, these 
delegates in their assembly, — even though there be no lawful 
pope — may be called a General Council." The method of 
convening such a Council may be as follows: "Let each parish 
or other community which can conveniently hold a meeting 
send one or more persons to a synod of the diocese or to the 
court (parlamentum) of the king or prince or other civil govern- 
ment, and these shall choose delegates to the General Council. 
Those who are thus chosen by the diocesan or "parliamentary " 
councils, coming together, may be called a General Council." 

Ockham admits that, as a rule (regulariter) a true council 
cannot be called without the authority of a pope; but, if the 
pope be heretical, or the cardinals fail to choose a new one, then 
the primitive right of the Church to act re-asserts itself. 
"Papal authority is never to be interpreted to the prejudice of 
the Christian faith, for that is superior to any pope, even to a 
catholic one." As to membership in the Council, Ockham like 
Marsiglio insists upon the participation of laymen, but goes 
beyond him in at least apparently advocating the admission of 

58 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

women. He touches the point briefly and with a shade more 
than his usual caution (c. 85) : "The participation of women is 
defended on the ground of the identity of the faith in men and 
women, which includes all and in which is neither male nor 
female. Therefore, where the wisdom, the gentleness (bonitas), 
and the strength of women are necessary to a consideration of 
the faith, women are not to be excluded from a General 
Council." 

IX 

In what sense then, if in any, would Marsiglio accept the 
headship of any one church or any one bishop over others? 
He answers this question in detail in the twenty-second chapter 
of his second book. Unity is essential to the well-being of the 
Church. This unity can best be secured through a unified 
administration. _A- single headship is, therefore, advisable; 
but of what sort and under what limitations? Marsiglio gives 
four possible interpretations of the principle of headship. 
First, in such sense that all utterances of the accepted head 
must be received by all believers as necessary to salvation. 
Second, that all clergymen or colleges of them are subject to 
the coercive jurisdiction of the supreme pontiff. Third, that 
he or his special college has the sole right of assigning benefices 
and distributing their emoluments. All three of these con- 
ceptions of supreme pontifical right Marsiglio has already 
discussed and rejected in toto. 

There remains a fo urth, th e details of which are laid down at 
considerable length. / According to this view, the basis of any 
single headship of the Church is to be found jn thejysproyal of a 
General Council or of the human Lawgiver. The functions 
of the Head, who~ii always to~actln"accord" with a college of 
priests assigned to him for this purpose by the Lawgiver or by a 
General Council, are as follows :^ First, to notify the Lawgiver 
whenever a case is brought before him of such importance that 
it seems to require the action of a council, in order that the 
summons to the council may be duly issued by the Lawgiver as 
set forth above^. Second, to "hold the chief place at the 
council." (Whether this implies a presidency in the modern 

kARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 59 

sense, may perhaps be questioned.) He is to propose topics for 
discussion, to direct the drawing up and certifying of the record 
of proceedings, to communicate the result to any churches 
which may so request, and to make himself master of the 
decisions so that he can give instructions in regard to them. 
He is to punish their violation with spiritual penalties, but 
always under direction of the council and withouk-4?ecaurs.e.to 
any coercive action against persons or property. He, together 
with a majority of the college assigned to him by the council, 
may sit in judgment upon bishops or churches in strictly 
spiritual matters, but always with a right of appeal to the 
human Lawgiver or to the General Council. 

In this sense, and in this alone, Marsiglio thinks, the head- 
ship of a single bishop and church over others is expedient for 
the Church as a whole. But what church and which bishop 
shall it be? Speaking according to the strictest truth, it ought 
to be thattrishop who excels others in purity of life and in sacred 
learning, and it ought to be that church which most abounds in 
men of the highest character and most brilliant accomplish- 
ment in sacred things. But, other things being equal or not 
greatly different, it is the church of Rome which comes nearest 
this ideal standard. /Again "Marslglfo" reviews the actual or 
historical claims of Rome to leadership among the churches and 
finds them valid. As before he yields not an inch to the idea of 
apostolic succession. It is not the Petrine claim, but the rever- 
ence for the nT grpnry "f Peter a,nd Paul, the greatness of Rome" 
theXJJyTher p urity of doctrm e_MliLixer_.CiirJRtian charity 
toward other and weaker comm uni ties, that make the solid, 
foundations "6T"Eef" acknowledged headship. To these was 
added the legalisation of Constahtine's gift to make the struc- 
ture complete. \ I n. that gift lay also implicit, t.hp. ri^hf, pf the. 
civil power to con trol the actio n of We _p .RRl«Ria«tjnal headship 
it had thus sanctioned. As the basis ot civil power is found in 
EEe "sovereign peopIe>epresented by its rulers, so the final con- 
trol over the action of the ecclesiastical head is vested in the 
General Council, whose protector and representative is the 
civil executive. It is clear, therefore, that the human Law- 
giver has the final authority to discipline the head of the 

60 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

vQhurch and ultimately to depose him if he abuse his power. 

With somewhat wearisome iteration Marsiglio recapitulates 
his version of the expansion of the Roman claims from a simple 
headship of honor to the plenitudo potestatis of the "Unam 
Sanctam": "This doctrine has been expressed by Boniface 
the Eighth among other Roman bishops in language as insolent 
as it is harmful and contrary to the meaning of Scripture, and 
based upon metaphysical demonstrations. He has gone so far 
as to decree that the acceptance and confession of this power is 
necessary to salvation. And this opinion has been followed by 
his successors, Clement V, and the immediate successor of this 
Clement, a person called John, although they seem to apply 
it only to the empire of the Romans. But if they rest, as they 
say they do, upon the gift of this plenitude of power by Christ, 
then it is evident that it applies to all the kingdoms of the earth 
just as much as the power of Christ himself does." 

What then is this plentitudo potestatis on which the modern 
Papacy bases its control of all ecclesiastical life in the widest 
extension of that term? In answering this question Marsiglio 
indulges once again his passion for accurate definition. He pro- 
poses eight possible meanings rising from a simple jurisdiction 
in spiritual matters to that absolute authority which belongs to 
the words of Christ alone. All these meanings he rejects as 
sufficiently covered by what he has already said as to the real 
nature of papal sovereignty. Only in the sense of a priority 
or leadership (principalitas) over other priests will he admit the 
use of the phrase at all. What really interests him here as 
elsewhere is what ought specially to interest us, namely the 
historical process by which the claim to plenitude of power has 
actually established itself. 

He is ready to accept from the beginning what he calls a cura 
animarum generalis, a general oversight of the spiritual life of 
Christendom. Thereupon followed — perhaps for gain — a 
claim to the power of absolution, then the practice of issuing 
decrees as to ritual observances. Then the imposition of fasts 
and other restrictions upon the laity as a means to avert calami- 
ties, and with this the proclamation of punishments for viola- 
tion of such restrictions — and all this under the guise of pious 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 61 1 

ceremonial. ' ' But then the appetite for wider domination grew 
with its own increase. Devoted believers began to be terrified 
by language 'of this sort on account of their low condition and' 
their ignorance of the divine law. They imagined that they 
were bound by whatever their priests might tell them, and so, 
through fear of damnation, bishops of Rome together with their 
coterie (coetu) of clergymen ventured to issue certain despotic 
edicts touching upon civil affairs. In these they declared 
themselves and the clerical order, including some mere laymen, 
exempt from public burdens. They advanced to the clerical 
office even married laymen, who were easily allured by the 
prospect of enjoying immunity from their obligations to the 
State." 

Hereupon followed the practice of visiting with excommuni- 
cation all who attacked in any way the persons of clergymen, 
and of calling upon the civil authorities to enforce these spiritual 
penalties by the secular arm. And the worst part of this prac- 
tice was that this process of excommunication was extended to 
cover all cases of failure to pay moneys due at a certain date, 
thus shutting out from the holy sacraments "those whom Christ 
and the blessed Apostles had brought into the Church with pain 
and labor and the shedding of their precious blood." 

"And, not content with this, reaching out after the utmost 
limit of secular power, they have broken out (proruperunt) into 
legislation quite apart from that of the civil community, 
declaring the whole clergy exempt from civil jurisdiction and 
thus bringing about political divisions and an impossible multi- 
plication of supreme rule. The realm of Italy is the root and j 
origin of this pestilent condition. There the whole scandal had i 
its germ and its development and as long as this continues there I 
will be no end of civil disorders. For this power, which he j 
gradually and with sly deception crept into, the Roman bishop, 
of late through custom, or rather through abuse, has seized 
upon and, fearing that he will be deprived of it by the Prince 
[i. e. the emperor] as he well deserves to be, on account of the 
excesses he has committed, he prevents the election and inaugu- 
ration of the Prince of the Romans with every kind of malicious 
interference. A certain one of- them has gone so far in his 

62 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

insolence as to proclaim formally that the Prince of the Romans 
is bound to him by a feudal obligation and subject to his 
coercive jurisdiction . . . Such despotic ordinances the bishops 
of Rome and their cardinals dared not call 'laws/ but gave 
them the name 'decretals,' although they intended them to 
have binding coercive force in this world just as human law- 
makers do. They were afraid to use the word 'laws' at first, 
dreading the resistance and correction of the lawmaking power 
and the charge of treason against rulers and legislators. From 
the beginning they called these 'canonical rights' (jura 
canonica) in order to impress the faithful with their validity and 
to secure their acceptance, their reverence and their obedience." 
Such is the nature of that plenitude of power upon which the 
extraordinary hold of the Roman See upon the church life of 
the western world was based. It remains to notice some of 
the consequences as Marsiglio saw them in the political and 
social conditions of his day. Here, as always, he reverts to his 
fundamental principle, the right of the whole people to share 
in the administration of all affairs which concern their welfare. 
rThe effect of the plenitudo potestatis is, he says, utterly to 
\ destroy this principle in the whole field of appointment to cleri- 
cal offices. / The only safe method of securing suitable officials 
of any sort is by election; but now election has been practically 
abolished withmthe 'Church. It has been restricted by placing 
it solely in the hands of clergymen. It has been corrupted by 
leaving episcopal elections to the so-called "canons," a narrow 
group of young men ignorant of the divine law, to the exclusion 
of the other clergy of the diocese. It has been crushed out by 
the system of papal reservations extending even to the lowest 
offices of the Church. /"Through these reservations elections 
of suitable persons made according to law are quashed, and in 
their place are thrust ignorant, inexperienced and untrained 
men, often of corrupt morals or notorious criminals, men who 
do not even speak the language of those over whom they are 

placed If you count them up you will not find one in ten of 

the provincial archbishops, bishops, patriarchs and the clergy 
of lower degree who is a doctor of theology or adequately 
trained in that science." The only kind of persons who can 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 63 

secure appointments are the causidici, men skilled in legal 
quibbling, because they are "useful" in gaining and holding on 
to the temporalities, whereas the doctors of theology are 
"useless," simple souls who would allow "the Church" to fall 
into ruin. 

As to the papal elections, these, says Marsiglio, are seldom 
made from among doctors of theology but rather from the 
"college of advocates" in shameless disregard of Holy Scrip- 
ture. The College of Cardinals admits licentious youths 
unacquainted with sacred learning. This corruption at the 
center infects the whole body of the Church everywhere. It 
leads to the appointment of the same kind of persons to the 
provincial churches. It involves the clergy in political compli- 
cations, and this brings about the appropriation of church 
revenues to the maintenance of armies and the continual pro- 
motion of quarrels among Christian men. 

When Marsiglio speaks of the power exercised over clergy- 
men or laymen by any one single cleric he generally adds "or 
any collegium or coetus of them. ' ' Such references are obviously 
to the College of Cardinals. He includes these in his criticisms 
of the papal maladministration, and evidently thought that 
some radical measures should be taken to reform them. As to 
precisely what such reforms should be we get only one construc- 
tive suggestion. The root of the evils connected with the 
cardinalate was the vicious system of appointment. No other 
electoral system in the whole history of elective governments 
contained precisely the same element at once of strength and 
weakness as this. Nowhere else do we find the electoral body 
appointed by the executive whose successor it was their chief 
duty to select. We speak loosely of political "rings," but 
never was there so complete a ring in the literal sense of the 
word as here. The electoral college of the Empire was a group 
of territorial lords fixed by the imperial constitution and thus 
independent of all political influence from the reigning prince. 
The electors of the Doge in Venice were evolved from a com- 
plicated series of more or less freely elected councils always 
jealous of the ruling executive and his family and ready to 
supplant them whenever the opportunity should offer. It was 

64 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

only in the papal system that the ring of electors and potential 
popes was absolutely closed. The only restraint upon appoint- 
ment of electors was the individual sense of propriety of the 
existing pope and the pressure of party politics within and 
without the limits of the Curia itself. 

With Marsiglio may be said to begin the long series of 
propositions for the reform of this electoral system which con- 
tinue all through the conciliar period and find their final 
expression in the Council of Trtent. The essence of all these 
propositions is the widening of the electorate, the effort to make 
it more truly representative of the Church as a whole. Especi- 
ally was ever increasing emphasis laid upon the necessity of 
recognizing the growing principle of nationality as the basis of 
such representation. In view of the radical suggestions made, 
for example, at the Council of Constance, going as far even as 
the abolition of the College of Cardinals, Marsiglio's proposals 
sound almost conservative. He aims to break the vicious circle 
of appointment and election as it was working in his day. He 
•• admits the importance of an advisory council to act with the 
pope in all official ways, but he would make this board inde- 
pendent of the pope's personal influence. He would have it 
appointed by the General Council as the organ of the Church 
universal. Whether it should be a permanent board or chosen 
for specific objects is not quite clear. In one passage referring 
to the duty of the pope to notify the Legislator of the need of 
a council Marsiglio says that he shall do this together with his 
college of priests whom the Lawgiver or the General Council 
shall have seen fit to associate with him ad hoc, as if this were a 
special assignment of councillors for a specific case. Numer- 
ous other references, however, suggest rather a permanent 
board to be selected either by the emperor or by the General 
Council as the executive organs of that universitas fidelium 
which is the last resort in all matters of church administration. 
Although this suggestion was never adopted, and the ancient 
method of appointment of cardinals by the pope has continued 
to the present day, still the spirit of it has been more and more 
recognized in actual practice. The personnel of the cardinalate 
has in fact been greatly improved and made to correspond 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACK 65 

more accurately to the world-wide membership of the Roman 
communion. If one is willing to overlook the obvious fact of a 
dominant Italian majority in the present college, one may fairly 
describe it as a reasonably representative body of catholic 
Christendom. 

The source of all this evil is that the Head undertakes to 
control the operation of all the members: 

"Who would not regard the body of an animal whose limbs 
were joined directly to its head as a monstrosity useless for its 
own proper functions? If the hand were fixed directly upon 
the head it would lack suitable space and would be deprived of 
strength, of motion, and of effectual action. But this is not so 
when the fingers are joined to the hand, the hand to the arm, 
the arm to the shoulder, the shoulder to the neck, and the neck 
to the head, all by suitable joints, so that the head can give to 
each member its own proper activity. Thus the whole body 
receives its appropriate form and is able to perform its normal 
functions. So is it with the body of the Church and of civil 
society as well. The universal pastor or the universal prince 
cannot directly inspect and control the individual actions of 
every one throughout all the provinces, but if this is to be done 
decently and adequately he must have the assistance of special 
representatives and agents. In this way the body of the 
Church will be well ordered and will grow as it should. But, 
if we once admit the phnitudo potestatis of the Roman pontiff, 
this whole beautiful order is destroyed; for he absolves the 
lower prelates and orders from the power, the oversight and 
the correction of their superiors." 

This is Marsiglio's contribution to the continual conflict 
between the papal and the episcopal powers. It was no new 
issue. His criticism of papal aggression was the common 
protest of all right thinking men of his day against the abnormal 
development of the centralized papal administration as com- 
pared with the constantly growing restrictions upon the local 
authorities of the Church. It was on this point more than any 
other that the common interests of civil governments and these 
local church powers became evident. The alignment of parties 
generally threw the episcopal order on the side of the govern- 

1 

'66 J MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

ment and against papal aggression. This had been wonder- 
fully demonstrated in the great fight between the government 
of France under Philip IV and the Papacy under Boniface 
VIII. Whatever may be thought as to the political methods 
/of that far from scrupulous king, it is clear that on the whole he 
carried the French clergy with him in his struggle for French 
independence of papal dictation. It could almost be said that 
the Papacy was, for the time, converted into a French institu- 
tion. All this Marsiglio had seen at close quarters from his 
academic residence in Paris. It was unquestionably this ex- 
perience, combined with his own personal traditions of Italian 
democracy, that gave such vivid color to his presentation of the 
situation for the benefit of the German Ludwig. The papal 
§• plenitude pojestatis was the common enemy of every local right. 
Marsiglio did not overstate the case in saying, that if this were 
once conceded there was no limit to the aggression that must 
ensue toward every form of government in both Church and 
State. 

His passionate indictment of the Roman Curia as a sink of 
bargain-driving scoundrels is not a whit more venomous than 
many utterances of Dante and Petrarch on the same theme. 

"What do you find there but a swarm of simoniacs from every 
quarter? What but the clamor of pettifoggers, the insults of 
calumny, the abuse of honorable men? There justice to the 
innocent falls to the ground or is so long delayed — unless they 
can buy it for a price — that finally, worn out with endless 
struggle, they are compelled to give up even just and deserving 
claims. For there man-made laws are loudly proclaimed; the 
laws of God are silent or are rarely heard. There are hatched 
conspiracies and plots for invading the territories of Christian 
peoples and snatching them from their lawful guardians. But 
for the winning of souls there is neithei care nor counsel." 

Marsiglio's attacks upon the morals of the Curia are of quite 
secondary importance; for the answer to such criticism is 
always ready. Evils are to be expected in all institutions 
administered by human beings. The remedy is to bring the 
administration into better hands. This is always the watch- 
word of "reform within the party"; improve the adminis- 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 67 

tration and the evils will take care of themselves. What 
Marsiglio's criticism meant was, that the real evil was not 
found in the irregularities he enumerates, but in the system 
itself. Only by a thoroughgoing reform of the system at the 
root of which was the doctrine of plenitudo potestatis, could 
Christian societies be safeguarded against unlimited abuse of 
power. Marsiglio insists over and over again that the cause 
of the emperor in his controversy with Pope John XXII is the 
cause of all civil governments; but he is, of course, especially 
concerned with showing the far-reaching consequences of the 
papal claims in the sphere of imperial rights. 

Here again he brings the issue down to the essential test, to 
the question of the basis of the emperor's claim upon the 
allegiance of his subjects. The Empire was the most note-, 
worthy illustration of his fundamental theory of the origin of 
all civil jurisdiction. It was an elective institution, perpetu- 
ated by the direct action of a limited electorate, but in its theory 
that electorate represented the people as a whole. In the 
formal statements of the electoral process, beginning with the 
Sachsenspiegel in 1230 (?) and closing with the Golden Bull of 
1356, after the enumeration of all the individual electors there 
follows an express declaration that all the leading men (die 
vorsten alle) are to express their approval of the choice made by 
the college of seven. These leading men come as near to being 
the "People" of Marsiglio's theory as mediaeval conditions 
could permit. Furthermore, if we assume the year 1324 as the 
date of the Defensor Pads it was only two years since the 
emperor Ludwig, after eight years of fighting, had maintained 
the verdict of the electoral college against the "claims" of the 
Habsburg candidate supported by the unwearied activity of 
John XXII. We can, therefore, quite understand the vehe- 
mence with which Marsiglio makes the application of his argu- 
ment against the plenitudo potestatis to the question of the 
imperial electoral right. 

"For if the authority of the king elect were dependent solely, 
upon the will of the Roman bishop the function of the electors 
would be absolutely an empty one, since the man whom they! 
might choose would neither be nor be called "king" until he' 

68 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

should be confirmed by the papal will or the authority of the 
so-called Apostolic See, nor could he exercise any royal author- 
ity. He could not even draw from the revenues of the king- 
dom enough for his daily subsistence without the approval of 
that bishop, a thing intolerable and unheard of. What then 
would be the force of an election by the princes beyond that of 
a nomination, the final determination of which would depend 
upon the will of one other single individual? Why! Seven 
barbers or seven blind men could convey as much of a sanction 
to the King of the Romans as this! I say this in derision, not 
of the electors, but of him who would deprive them of their 
due authority. For he does not understand the force and the 
theory of an election, nor why it is that its validity rests upon 
the majority (valentiore parte) of those to whom the right of 
election belongs. Nor does he realize that the effect of the 
election ought not and cannot be dependent upon the will of 
any one person, if it is conducted according to rule, but upon 
the Lawgiver alone over whom the (elected) ruler is to be 
placed, or upon those alone to whom the Lawgiver shall have 
entrusted this commission. The Roman bishop, therefore, 
plainly desires to destroy the office of the electors, no matter 
how much he may try to blind them and defraud them." 

The supreme test of this claim to control over the Empire is 
seen at times of vacancy in the imperial office. 

"Since the afore-mentioned bishop claims the right to take 
the place of the emperor during a vacancy, it follows of neces- 
sity that he claims also the right to compel all princes and 
feudatories of the Empire to take oaths of allegiance to him. 
Furthermore he demands the privilege of collecting all tributes 
and other forms of taxation regularly due to the emperor and, 
besides these, other exceptional taxes imposed according to the 
will of that bishop in virtue of his self-constituted plenitudo 
potestatis. . . . The very worst and most dangerous thing of all 
is, that thus during an imperial vacancy, which, at the will of 
Roman bishops may become perpetual, all princes, associa- 
tions, communities and individuals under the Empire, in case 
of civil suits among themselves are compelled to bring their 
suits, real as well as personal, by appeal or by delation to the 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 69 

court of the Roman bishop and subject themselves to his civil 
jurisdiction." 

The absurd claim that this control over the imperial power is 
necessary in order to prevent the election of an heretical em- 
peror is disproved by the obvious fact that the electoral college 
contains three important archbishops who "have received from 
Christ a sacerdotal and episcopal sanction equal to that of the 
Roman pontiff." The chance of a bad selection is less among 
seven electors than if the choice were in the hands of the Roman 
bishop alone. The intention of these people, says Marsiglio, 
is none other than to cut the very root of all civil allegiance. 
"For, in my opinion, the root and bond of this allegiance con- 
sists in the mutual and sworn faith of princes and peoples. 
This faith is, as Cicero says, the foundation of all justice. He 
who tries to break this bond between rulers and subjects is 
aiming at nothing less than to overturn the power of all govern- 
ments and subject them to his arbitrary will." 

What then is the remedy In the answer to this question 
we have Marsiglio's Constructive teaching. /All his theoretical 
argumen^lafeTEere Brought to a focus in a series of practical 
suggestions: "For these reasons it is advisable that a General 
Council should be summoned by all princes and peoples after 
the manner I have recommended. This council should abso- 
lutely forbid the use of this term plenitudo potestatis by the 
Roman bishop or any other person whomsoever, that the people 
may not be led astray through long continued hearing of false 
things. The Roman bishop should be deprived of all power of 
conferring ecclesiastical, office and of distributing the temporali- 
ties or benefices; for that bishop now abuses these powers to 
the injury of the bodies and the damnation of the souls of the 
faithful. The duty of .calling a council is an obligation resting 
upor^,all_rjuJbjs r jespecially'upon kings according to the law of 
GodT To this end they were instituted: to do justice and give 
judgment, and failing in this they are without excuse because 
they well know what scandals will follow upon their neglect." 

Here Marsiglio draws a moving picture of the ills that have 
already befallen his beloved Italy in consequence of the false 
conditions he has described and closes with this eloquent 

70 .3 ; . k l, MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

appeal: "Who, then, would be so brutish a son of this father 
and mother land, once so beautiful, now so torn and defiled, 
as to be silent and withold his spirit from crying to the Lord 
when he sees and knows these things and is able to act against 
those who rend and betray her? Verily, as the Apostle says, 
"he hath denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever." 

/The last three chapters of the second 'Dictio' are devoted to 
a refutation of the specific arguments in defence of the doctrine 
of ' plenitudo potestatis.' They do not contain any noteworthy 
addition to the arguments already put forward by Marsiglio 
on the other side of the controversy. Most significant is the 
renewed .insistence upon a sound method in the use of authori- 
ties. Supreme above all others is the authority of Scripture, 
and this is to be interpreted according to the principle of com- 
mon sense. Where no mystical meaning is involved the literal 
sense of language is to be accepted. Where a mystical inter- 
pretation is required, "I will accept the more probable opinion 
of holy men. If, however, they advance opinions of their own, 
I will accept those which are in harmony with the canon of 
Scripture. Those which are discordant with Scripture I will 
reverently reject, but never without the support of Scripture 
upon which I shall always rely." 

/ Here is the proclamation of those principles of biblical 

/authority and interpretation which underlie the activities of all 

I the great leaders of the Reformation from Wycliffe to Calvin. 

In this doctrine of Scripture is to be found, contrary as it seems 

\ to all the implications of present day thought, the very essence 

\of modern religious liberty. It does not imply, as is so often 

charged upon it, the "slavery to a book" which must lead men 

into a bondage worse even than that of an infallible church. 

For after all, every Scripture must be interpreted, and it is in 

this process of interpretation that modern liberty has worked 

itself out in the field of religion as everywhere else. The 

struggle was to be a long and bitter one, but the key-note had 

been sounded, and it was never again to lapse into silence. 

Marsiglio of Padua is the prophet of that new world of 
thought and action, to which, in default of a better word, we 
give the name of ' ' modern." It is the world in which the right 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 71 

of a man to think as he must and to associate himself with 
others who think, on the whole, as he does is the dominating 
principle of social organization. 

The third and final Dictio of the Defensor Pads consists of a 
brief summary of the argument of the whole work in short 
paragraphs and with continuous reference to specific passages 
in the previous books. It furnishes the natural basis for a 
review of what we may now fairly call Marsiglio's program for 
Church Reform. It bears much the same relation to the 
activities of the conciliar period as that of Luther's Ninety-five 
Theses to the work of the Protestant Reformation. It begins 
where the main body of the book ended, with the doctrine of the 
supreme authority of Scripture interpreted by the common 
action of the whole community of tine faithful. In cases of 
doubt as to what articles of faith are necessary to salvation, the 
sole power of decision rests with the General Council or a 
majority of its members (valentior multitudo). No partial 
collegium, and no individual of whatsoever condition has this 
power of decision. Dispensation from things prescribed or 
prohibited or permitted by the law of the New Covenant 
belongs solely to the General Council or to the human Lawgiver. 
This Lawgiver is defined as the whole body of citizens or the 
majority of them. Decretals or decrees of Roman or any other 
bishops whomsoever issued individually or collectively without 
permission from the human Lawgiver cannot bind anyone by 
temporal penalties. Only the Lawgiver or its agent can dis- 
pense from human laws. 

No elective official who derives his authority from election 
alone requires any further confirmation or approval. No 
bishop or priest has, in virtue of his priestly character, coercive 
jurisdiction over any clergyman or layman. All bishops are of 
equal authority through Christ, nor can it be proved by the 
law of God that, either in matters spiritual or in things tempo- 
ral, one bishop is higher or lower than another. In accordance 
with divine authority and with the consent of the human 

72 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

Lawgiver, other bishops acting separately or together, may as 
properly excommunicate the Roman bishop as he may excom- 
municate them. It is the right of the civil ruler in accordance 
with the laws of the Christian community to fix the number of 
churches and of the clergy who are to officiate therein. 

The right to summon a council, general or special, belongs 
solely to the Lawgiver or to one who governs a Christian com- 
munity in virtue of its authority; and a council summoned in 
any other way cannot bind any one to observe its decrees. 
Those who are bound to the perfection of evangelical poverty 
may have no dominium over any property whatsoever, real 
or personal. Bishops and other ministers of the Gospel have a 
right to receive from individuals or from the community what 
is necessary for food and shelter, but they have no right to 
tithes or any other form of revenue beyond these necessities. 
The bishop of Rome, as well as every other spiritual minister, 
ought to be appointed to his office solely by the Christian Law- 
giver or the prince ruling by its authority or by a General 
Council" of the faithful on removable tenure, and should be 
suspended or deposed from his office by the same in case of 
malfeasance. 

Many other conclusions, says Marsiglio, might be drawn from 
what he has set forth, but he is content to leave the matter 
here, believing that these will supply a sufficient line of 
approach (ingressum) for the removal of this plague and the 
cause of it as well. He thus justifies our use of the word 
"program" for the summary of his opinions here presented. 
It is not merely a theoretical, or, as we say now-a-days, an 
"academic" presentation of an argument. It is a call to 
action. Although written primarily to meet the immediate 
problems of the emperor Ludwig's stormy administration, the 
Defensor Pads has a universal application to all civil govern- 
ments included under the general term "The Christian Com- 
monwealth." Marsiglio's view does not extend beyond this. 
His whole scheme rests upon the basic idea of the sovereignty 
of the People, but the people is the universitas fidelium, the 
community of believers. This people is the ultimate Lawgiver. 
It is represented by the ruler, and this ruler is the prince ps or 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 73 

the principalis fidelis, the Christian prince. The personnel of 
the civil and the ecclesiastical communities is the same. There 
is no such thing as a church within the community; the church 
is the community in its religious aspect. 

This dual community, however, must have its organs of 
expression, and these are to be most carefully distinguished 
one from the other. Here was Marsiglio's most delicate prob- 
lem. He solved it by his careful analysis of the difference 
between "character" in the technical sense familiar to every 
student of church institutions and "function" in the obvious 
meaning of administrative action. The priestly "character," 
of divine ordination and conferred through certain sacred rites, 
gave the power to grant absolution and to perform the eucha- 
ristic sacrifice and nothing else. [All beyond this, especially all 
that had reference to the temporaTactivities of the clergy, was 
functional, was instituted by human agencies and was, there- 
fore, to be regulated by human laws^\ The distinction is as sharp 
as that between the organic ancTThe functional in the living 
physical body. Just as any finn fl;fft r hpt.wppn the two in a, living 
organis m brings disaster to the whole, so in the community of 

SOCial b f' TlgR ft"Y »™ f r ainn " f tV> ° +•""-■ irlnrr in nimn tn rpg^lt in 

an impaired condition of the whole social organis m. 
~ That/we recall, was Marsiglio's starting-point. The curse 
of society in his day was, as he conceived, the corruption of the 
Church arising from precisely this kind of confusion. The 
functional activities of the priestly order had steadily en- 
croached upon the strictly sacerdotal, until there was danger 
that they would entirely absorb them. What was only func- 
tional had come to call itself sacred and to claim the privileges 
of sacrosanctity. The lay elements of the faithful community 
had not understood the meaning of this tendency. They had 
let things drift, but now, in the face of the unparalleled audaci- 
ties of Boniface VIII and John XXII, they were aroused to the 
fighting point. The rulers of the earth, one after the other, were 
coming into conflict with the one power in which these perver- 
sions of the true Christian order seemed to be concentrated, the 
power of the Roman bishop and the collegium which he domi- 
nated. 

I MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

Marsiglio's mission, as he understood it, was to point out by 
;he method of historical.illustration..an(LAQun d technical defi- 
ntion, the real nature^ofjthis conflict. His historical material 
vas by "no means of the best, but his method in using it was 
sjound, and his conclusions from it have borne the test of time. 
Essentially they have not been changed by the discovery of 
better materials and the wider experience of modern historical 
science. Marsiglio is properly scandalized by the atmosphere 
of moral indifference to which, in common with all good 
observers of his time, he calls attention. But the gravamen of 
his attack does not lie in the all too easy field of moral criticism. 
Atrocities as such play little part in his indictment. The one 
thing that really interests him is the application to the existing 
conditions in Church and State of the fundamental principle 
from which he started, the principle of popular sovereignty. 

As that principle guided him in his critical study and in his 
assault upon the prevailing evil of his time, so it furnished the 
leading idea in his constructive suggestions. The remedy was 
to be found in an honest and thorough reorganization of the 
church aclministration from the bottom upward. The begin- 
ning must be made by the civil authorities because they were 
the only element of the Christian society fitted to take the 
initiative. But they must proceed, to use the language of 
present day reform, by going over the heads of the existing 
church powers and appealing directly to the People. The 
instrument of this appeal must be the General Council, and 
this must be, no longer an assembly of clergymen called at the 
good pleasure of the centralized papacy, but a truly represen- 
tative body, built up on lines of territorial and class representa- 
tion, including laymen and directed through the whole process 
of its assembling and its deliberations by the highest civil 
authority. Its decrees must be certified and validated by its 
own sanctions, and, so far as they were concerned with affairs 
of this world, must be enforced by the civil power. 

In this great popular assembly was vested the true unity of 
Christendom. For practical purposes, however, a central 
organ of administration was desirable. To this end the ancient 
and honorable See of Rome was especially indicated. Marsig- 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 75 

lio is ready to go all lengths in his admiration for the splendid 
traditions of pure doctrine and noble service that made the real 
claim of Rome to the respect of Christians. Her leadership, 
founded upon actual historical grounds, might be compatible 
with his doctrine of popular right. What he could not admit 
was that this leadership rested upon any ground whatsoever 
which could make it independent of that final control. Rome 
must be brought down from its theoretical primacy to its origi- 
nal level as the servant, not the master of the Christian com- 
munity. According to this conception the bishop of Rome 
was to be the executive agent of the supreme Council. His 
very election was to be dependent upon its action; for the 
electoral body was to be appointed by it and no longer selected 
by his own free choice. 

Now, it is obvious that however admirable such a constitu- 
tion of the Church might be, however well adapted to meet the 
crying needs of the social order, it was not the papal constitu- 
tion. Its Head, however dignified and useful, was not a pope. 
The specifically Roman character of the whole 1 institution was 
gone. The Petrine tradition which gave and gives still the 
quality of a divine commission to the authority of the Roman 
bishop, was shattered. In place of all this was to be a rather 
vague universalism lacking in all the heroic, the dramatic, and 
the emotional elements that worked so powerfully in the Roman 
appeal. 

It remains to notice very briefly the fate of the Defensor Pacts 
and its influence upon the development of political theory and 
practice. Almost immediately after its presentation to the 
emperor it seems to have become rather widely known to both 
friends and enemies. Papal condemnations followed in rapid 
succession, while on the other hand the imperial lawyers were 
employing arguments apparently borrowed from the Defensor. 
Ludwig's whole activity during the fatal years 1327-1328 was 
little more than the carrying out into practice of Marsiglio's 
doctrines of a universal elective monarchy resting upon the 
will of the people. The fantastic performance of an imperial 
coronation at Rome at the hands of officials representing the 
populus romanus, which in turn represented the universitas 

76 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

avium of the Christian commonwealth, was the dramatic but 
momentary realization of the Paduan's dream. Its almost 
immediate collapse was the proof, if proof were needed, how 
far ahead of his time was this prophet of a new era freed from 
the cramping limitations of the age just drawing to a close. 

In the course of Ludwig's tortuous policy of alternate defi- 
ance and submission he makes every sort of formal promises to 
repudiate his evil counsellors, but without ever taking any 
practical steps to this effect. If Marsiglio survived the Roman 
fiasco of 1328, there is no reason to believe that he suffered any 
actual inconvenience from his repeated condemnations by the 
Papacy or from the feeble protestations of his imperial patron„ 

It is, however, quite intelligible that other and later writers 
on the same or related -topics should have been cautious about 
using the name of a thrice condemned heretic to support their 
own opinions, and this may well explain the absence of specific 
references to Marsiglio in writers who otherwise give every 
indication of knowing his work and of being influenced by it. 
A notable early indication of this is found in the chief work of 
Lupoid of Bebenburg, bishop of Bamberg, written probably 
in 1340. 1 In a strictly legal, formal argument Lupoid, a 
canonist of repute, aims to establish the right of the Roman 
king and emperor as independent of papal sanction. The 
translatio imperii from the Greeks to the German Franks was, 
to be sure, made by Pope Leo III, but not in virtue of any 
inherent papal right. It was effected only casualiter on a great 
critical occasion when no other tribunal was entitled to act 
(c. xii). The electoral right has now become embodied in the 
college of the German electors. The person elected by them, 
or by a majority of them, becomes king and administrator of 
imperial rights in Italy and other provinces subject to the 
empire. He needs no nomination or confirmation from the 
pope or from the Roman church. The oath to the pope taken 
at coronation is not a feudal oath but a pledge of loyal protec- 
tion. In these doctrines we have the very spirit of Marsiglio's 
teaching on the same subject. The main purpose of the two 

1 Tractatus de juribus regni et imperii, ed. Herold, Basel 1562. See also Meyer, 
H., Lupoid von Bebenburg, Studien zu seinen Schriften, 1909. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 77 

treatises is the same : the defense of the imperial power against 
the claims of the Roman See. That the later does not quote the 
earlier by name cannot obscure the essential similarity of the 
two. The omission is sufficiently explained by the natural 
reluctance of the clerical writer to identify himself in any way 
with so pestilent a controversialist as Marsiglio. Lupold's 
treatise was the formulation in legal terms of ideas which 
already two years before, in 1338, had found their practical 
expression in the enactments of the German Electoral Union 
at Rense and in the imperial decree "Licet juris." The lan- 
guage of these famous documents marks the highest point of 
the unstable Ludwig's resistance to papal aggression. 

If we think of Ludwig as animated throughout by personal 
hostility to the power which had steadily opposed his most 
cherished schemes of political and dynastic ambition, we can 
certainly have no such conception of the man who came to the 
imperial throne over the ruins of the Bavarian-Wittelsbach 
policy. Charles IV, the Luxemburg-Bohemian rival and suc- 
cessor of Ludwig, was distinctly the candidate of clerical inter- 
ests. "King of the Parsons" and "The Pope's Errand-boy" 
were among the nicknames designed to throw contempt upon 
this apparent deserter from the true imperial-German cause. 
And yet, in that monumental document, the "Golden Bull" of 
1356, this same Charles IV set his hand to the most positive 
declaration yet made of the absolute right of the German 
electoral college to create the King of the Romans and to invest 
him with all imperial powers without reference of any kind to 
any outside power whatsoever. The Golden Bull, henceforth 
to be the corner stone of the German constitution, is the practi- 
cal embodiment of Marsiglio's theories of a political society. 

We have seen that Marsiglio was acutely conscious of the 
fact, that in championing the cause of imperial independence 
he was fighting the battle of national integrity everywhere. 
If, he says, this plenitudo potestatis is to be carried out to the 
consequences already foreshadowed by the aggressive policy 
of Boniface VIII and John XXII, then every human sover- 
eignty is in danger. How sound this estimate was is clearly 
shown in the affairs of England. The work of John Wycliffe, 

78 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

beginning almost at the moment of the publication of the 
Golden Bull, was from the first identified with the interests of 
English nationality as opposed to foreign clerical domination. 
Wycliffe's fundamental proposition, developed in his most 
important and most elaborate treatises * involved the whole 
problem of "Dominium" to which we have already referred. 
Among the heresies of Marsiglio his views on this subject took a 
prominent place. These views, hardly more than outlined in 
the Defensor Pads, were expanded by Wycliffe at portentous 
length. As a political theorist Marsiglio was primarily inter- 
ested in establishing the right of civil government to a life of 
its own independent of any outside control. Wycliffe, as a 
philosopher and theologian, was chiefly concerned with fixing 
the conditions of the ecclesiastical order. He came to the 
question of the relation between church and state from the side 
of the church. He saw, more clearly than any one before him, 
that the crucial problem was the nature of the Church's right to 
deal with the goods of this world as represented by the income 
from the vast properties, which under one or another form had 
slipped into its administrative control. 

In other words he was led to that fundamental distinction 
between the spiritualia and the temporalia which occupied so 
important a place in Marsiglio's definition of terms. The 
arguments of the Defensor may in this respect be regarded as 
prolegomena to Wycliffe's Dominium. So comprehensive is 
this word in Wycliffe's thought, that it covers pretty much 
the whole range of theological speculation. The mere posses- 
sion of earthly goods is but an item in the larger concept of a 
rule founded in the order of a divinely controlled universe. 
Marsiglio had drawn in sharply cut phrase the basic definition 
of the spiritual and the temporal, but he had offered no test by 
which in a specific case the right of control over temporal things 
was to be determined. 

That test it remained for Wycliffe to supply. He found it in 
his doctrine of "Righteousness," the keynote of his whole 

1 Johannis Wycliffe de dominio divino libri tres, ed. R. L. Poole, 1890. 
Johannis Wycliffe tractatus de civM dominio liber primus, ed. R. L. Poole, 1885; 
11. ii-iv, ed. J. Loserth, 1900-1904. 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 79 

theological system. God, he says, as the supreme righteous- 
ness, is lord of all things. All other lordship is derived from 
this ultimate source. Only the righteous man can be conceived 
of as having a right to any lordship at all. If any man fail in 
righteousness he, in so far, forfeits his right of lordship. What 
had appeared to be such must then be treated as only a limited 
right of use, not of absolute ownership. Righteousness, accord- 
ing to Wycliffe, is the state of grace into which a man is brought 
by a divine process independent of his own activity. Domi- 
nium, therefore, is limited to the elect. Any person outside 
that body is by this fact deprived of any claim to lordship. 

So far we are dealing with speculative, theological definitions, 
but when we come to their practical application we leave 
theology and enter the realm of hard, work-a-day politics. 
The critical problem for Wycliffe as for Marsiglio is found in 
the question: Supposing a pope is not among the elect, what 
then? Obviously he can have no dominium. But, who is to 
determine the fact of his unrighteousness? In answering this 
question Wycliffe, like all otheis before and since who have 
grappled with it, is obliged to fall back upon the evidence of 
personal conduct. If a pope so conduct the business of his 
great office as to offend the common sense of Christendom, then 
Christendom as a whole has the right to treat him as lacking in 
the divine gift of righteousness and may proceed to discipline 
him for his offence. Wycliffe's argument here, freed from its 
almost impenetrable tangle of scholastic involution, follows 
very nearly the fines of Marsigfio's thought. He does not, so 
far as I know, refer to him by name, but the resemblance is 
unmistakable, and the conclusion is irresistible that Wycliffe 
had before him the text of the Defensor Pads. 

Thus fairly launched on its career as a reformatory pamphlet 
Marsigfio's work penetrates every attempt at church reform 
made during the five generations between Wycliffe and Luther. 
It came to be one of the stock charges made against every leader 
of reform that he was repeating the heresies of Wycliffe and 
through him those of Marsiglio. Even though the reformer 
himself made no allusion to his fourteenth century predecessor, 
and may, indeed, have been more or less unconscious of the 

80 MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 

debt he owed him, the sure instinct of the still dominant but 
now thoroughly frightened Church pointed unerringly to the 
essential continuity of ideas from Marsiglio onward. 

As soon as lists of prohibited writings began to be published 
the Defensor Pads figured prominently among those of the 
worst class. Its place in this honorable company was firmly 
X established by the Council of Trent in the Index librorum pro- 
hibitorum of 1558. During the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies several editions of the Defensor appeared in France and 
Germany, the last at Frankfurt in 1692. The motive back of 
the earliest editions was mainly hostility to the papal power 
rather than interest in theories of the state. In the later edi- 
tions the political motive predominates. This is shown by the 
incorporation of the Defensor in the great collection of Goldast 
which bears the title: The Monarchy of the Holy Roman 
Empire or Treatises on the Imperial, Royal and Pontifical 
Jurisdiction, Frankfurt, 1614r-1668. 

Every modern writer on political theory has given to Marsig- 
lio some consideration, but seldom a space proportioned to the 
importance of his work. It is, therefore, a matter of congratu- 
lation that the administration of the Monumenta Germaniae 
Historica has decided to publish what is likely to be for a long 
time to come the definitive text of the Defensor Pacts and has 
entrusted the work to the scholar who appears at present to be 
best prepared by preUminary studies to undertake it. It is 
to be hoped that the obscurity which has so long rested on this 
extraordinary book will at last be lifted and that it will take 
its rightful place among those forces that have worked most 
powerfully in the making of the modern world. For the 
Defensor Pads, made under the stress of a specific conflict 
, remote in time and apparently of slight importance at the 
present day, yet deals with principles of human organization 
of permanent and decisive value. In a time like this, when the 
right of the common man to a voice in the making of the laws 
under which he is to live is being claimed more widely and more 
insistently than ever before,-it must seem most opportune 
that the work in which this doctrine is first clearly put before 
the peoples of modern Europe is to be given a form suited to its 

MARSIGLIO OF PADUA, DEFENSOR PACIS 81 

importance. Certainly American democracy, if it is to work 
out the mission with which it seems to be entrusted, cannot 
afford to refuse the support or to neglect the warnings it may 
derive from a study of Marsiglio's ardent plea for a Peace of 
the world based upon a just balance of social classes.