MEISTER ECKHART 

THAN Sara ae 

MEISTER ECKHART 
N 
EAS 
ES BY 

V. | FRANZ PFEIFFER 

LEIPZIG, 1857 

TRANSLATION 
WITH SOME OMISSIONS AND ADDITIONS 
BY 

C. pe B. EVANS 

LONDON 
JOHN M. WATKINS 
21 CECIL COURT, CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C. 2 

1947 

First published 1924 
Second impression 1947 

Thealor; | Leary 

m@HOO © |. OLOGY 

=. California 

University of Southern California Library 

PRINTED BY THE REPLIKA PROCESS 
IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
LUND HUMPHRIES 
LONDON * BRADFORD 

Transferred 

Methodist World Service Fund 

AV 

> 

Vig Hae 

, 

PREFACE 

THE impossibility of completing my edition of Meister Eckhart as 
quickly as it has been at various times desired and as I should 
myself have liked to do, as well as the wish no longer to withhold 
from scholars the writings of one of the deepest thinkers of all 
time, has decided me to publish in the meantime the portion 
contained in the text. The second part, with literary-historical 
introduction, notes, glossary, and various additions and appendices, 
will follow as soon as I can spare the time from my new duties. 

This first instalment. contains, with the exception of a few short 
pieces which I obtained only after it was prifited, everything of 
Eckhart’s which, during eighteen years of tireless research, I have 
been able to collect out of manuscripts and printed books. It is 
little enough compared with the works of Eckhart still known 
to Trithemius and of which he gives quite a long catalogue in his 
book De Scriptoribus Eccles. (s. Fabricii bibliotheca eccles. Ham- 
burgh, 1718, fol. pag. 180); but on the other hand what I offer 
here is at least three times the amount of what has hitherto been 
known, and the teaching, the philosophic system of this remarkable 
man can now be presented in a more definite and complete form 
than it was possible to do from the scanty and untrustworthy 
data possessed before. 

In order to give an account of the means within my reach and 
at the same time to give the reader some idea of the extent and 
~ difficulty of my work, I append a list of the printed matter and 

nuscripts used, together with a statement of their contents 
arranged and numbered to correspond with my edition. 

I. PARCHMENT MSS. 

1. a. Strassburg, stadtbibliothek, A. 98. 14th cent. 4to. 
(I, 16, 17, 26-28, 30-39, 41, 44, 46, 48, 50-53; II, 6.) 

2. B. Basel, universitätsbibliothek, B. XI, 10. 14th cent. 
12mo. (I. 17-25; IH, 6,7; IV.) 

Vv 

vi 

10. 

11. 
12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

MEISTER ECKHART 

. Einsiedeln, klosterbibliothek, No. 277. 14th cent. 4to. 

(I, 29, 40, 45, 49, 56, 59, 60, 88-90 ; II, 2, 11-14, 16; 
III, 21; IV.) 

. Berlin, k. bibliothek, cod. germ. 8, No. 12. 14th cent. 

(I, 7, 8, 10, 11, 18, 15, 16, 18, 20, 37, 101; III, 49-65. 
IV.) 

. Berlin, k. bibliothek, cod. germ. 8, No. 65. 14th cent. 

(I, 6, 10, 12, 14, 19, 34, 51, 76 (a); III, 1.) 

. Stuttgart, k. öffentl. bibliothek, brev. 4, No. 88. 14th 

cent. (I, 1-5, 7, 8, 15,55; II,6; III, 2, 70.) 

. Einsiedeln, klosterbibliothek, No. 278. 14th cent. 4to. 

(I, 5, 11, 13, 15-18, 25, 42, 43, 51, 54, 57, 58, 78, 92, 
98, 95, 99 ; III, 11, 12, 18, 20, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30; IV.) 

. München, k. hof- und staatsbibliothek, cod. germ. 133. 

14th cent. 12mo. (I, 45, 76 (a), 103; II, 6, 12; 
IV.) 

. Kloster-Neuburg bei Wien, No. 1141. 14th cent. 8vo. 

(I, 30, 33-35, 39, 72, 97, 98, 100; II, 2, 7, 10, 11, 
13-16.) 

. Wien, hofbibliothek, No. 2728. 14th cent. 4to. (I, 

67, 68; II, 2.) 

. Same, No. 2739. 14th cent. 4to. (II, 1.) 
. Basel, universitätsbibliothek, B. IX, 15. 14th cent. 

‘Ato. (I, 57, 61, 66, 71,98; II, 5; II, 10-16.) 

. Frankfurt, stadtbibliothek (old Dominican library), No. 

167. 14th cent. 8vo. (II, 14, 15.) 

. Karlsruhe, grossherzogliche bibliothek, cod. s. Petri, 

No. 85. 14th cent. 4to. (I, 8, 51, 70, 84; II, 12; 
II, 3, 15, 22, 25, 29.) 

. Giessen (in private ownership) from the kloster Altenburg 

bei Wetzlar. 14th cent. (III, 31-48.) 

. Wien, hofbibliothek, No. 2757. 14th cent. 4to. 

(III, 4, 5.) 

II. PAPER MSS. 

. München, k. hof- und staatsbibliothek, cod. germ. 365. 

15th cent. (I, 6, 7, 18, 14, 47, 55, 57-59, 63-66, 
713 11,:75 III, 66.) 

. Stuttgart, k. privatbibliothek, No. 1, 26 (old numbering). 

15th cent. 4to. (I, 1, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, 45, 54, 57, 61, 
62; II, 2.) 

. Berlin, k. bibliothek, cod. germ. 4, 125. 14th cent. 

(I, 6, 14.) 

. Basle, Adam Petri’s edition of Tauler’s sermons, 1521 

21. e. 

22. 

23. 
24. 

pa SS 

25. 1. 

26. k. 

Ziel. 

28. m. 

29. 

3 

30. 
31. 

9 

32. 
33. 

mS 

34-38. 

39. t. 

40. u. 
41. v. 

42. W. 

43-44 

45. Y. 

PREFACE vii 

and 1522. Fol. (I, 6-8, 10-14, 17-23, 25, 34, 36, 37, 
40-43, 45, 56-60, 65, 73-92, 98, 101, 102; III, 1, 15, 
21, 66.) 

Berlin, k. bibliothek, cod. germ. 4, 191, 14th-15th cent. 
(I, 8, 15; II, 11, 12; III, 28, 24; IV.) 

Melk, klosterbibliothek, L. 5. 15th cent. Fol. (iar: 
76 (b), 105-110; II, 2, 11.) 

Same, L.27. 15thcent. 12mo. (II, 2, 3.) 

. Coblenz, gymnasiums bibliothek, No. 48. 15th cent. 

4to. (I, 15, 57; II, 9; III, 8.) 

Stuttgart, own possession. 15th cent. 4to. (I, 9, 40, 
57.) 

Cologne, Jaspar von Gennep’s edition of Tauler’s sermons, 
1543. Fol. (I, 69; II, 1; III, 70.) 

Leipzig, Cunrad Kachelouen’s edition of Tauler’s sermons, 
1498. 4to. (I, 1-4.) 

Breslau, Gin possession of Cond. Prince-Bishop Melchior 
v. Diepenbrock. 15th cent. Fol. Tractate on Active 
and Potential Intellect. 

. Stuttgart, k. öffentliche bibliothek, cod. theol. fol. No. | 

155. 15th cent. (II, 4, 18.) 
Same, cod. theol. fol. No. 283. 15th cent. (III, 69.) 

. Same, cod. theol. 8, No.18. 15th cent. (II, 8, 11, 14, 

15; III, 9, 67.) 

Colmar. 15th cent. (III, 1.) 

München, k. hof- und staatsbibliothek, cod. germ. 116. 
15th cent. 8vo. (III, 17-19, 68.) 

s**, Same, cod. germ. 388, 411. 15th cent. 4t0.— 
447, 463. 15th cent. 8vo.—783. 15th cent. (III, 
70.) 

Stuttgart, k. öffentliche bibliothek, cod. theol. 8, No. 13. 
14th cent. (I, 40; II, 9; III, 13:) 

Schaffhausen, stadtbibliothek. 15thcent. 4to. (I, 104.) 

Stuttgart, k. öffentliche bibliothek, cod. theol. fol. 33, 
v. j. 1426. (II, 7.) 

Frankfurt, stadtbibliothek, No. 3500 (old Dominican 
library). 15th cent. 8vo. (II, 17.) 

az”. München, hof- und staatsbibliothek, cod. germ. 
218 and 4482. 15th cent. 4to. (II, 17.) 

Stuttgart, k. öffentliche bibliothek, cod. theol. 4to. 
No. 50. 15th cent. (III, 67.) 

In addition I have to note aMS. with forty sermons by Eckhart, 
paper, of the date 1440, in the possession of Prof. Karl Schmidt of 
Strassburg. Unfortunately this has remained inaccessible to me, 

Viil MEISTER ECKHART 

I only know what the possessor has disclosed in his French mono- 
graph on Eckhart (Mémoires de Vacadémie franc. mor. et polit. par 
savants étrangers. Paris, 1847. T. 2). 

With regard to the internal arrangement and ordering of my 
material I make the following observations. The broad division 
into Sermons, Tractates, Sayings was obvious. On the other 
hand it was difficult to decide what sequence the sermons ought 
to follow. An arrangement which showed the changes in Eckhart’s 
teaching in a logical manner was out of the question, and the same 
applies to putting them in order of age or time of delivery; the 
data for this are wholly lacking. It is quite exceptional for 
Eckhart to make any reference to a previous sermon. Among 
the earliest of these sermons, belonging perhaps to the period of 
his Vicar-Generalship in Bohemia (about 1307), I reckon those 
numbered 105-110 from the Melk MS., L. 5. (No. 22.) In the 
superscription of these Eckhart is so called instead of Meister 
Eckhart, a designation which points to the time»when the memory 
of his final years of study in Paris was still lively. These I have 
placed last, simply on the grounds that, like all the MSS. obtained 
from Austria, they seem to be much edited; superficially, in 
diction, they certainly are and I think too their matter has been 
tampered with. As being the simplest arrangement, the liturgical 
order of the Gospels commended itself but here great difficulties 
were encountered the sermons being prefaced by texts chosen 
quite at random and as a rule all reference to the Sunday or 
festival is wanting. The titles of the old Basle edition are for the 
most part arbitrary. 

I decided therefore to rely solely on my sources and the order in 
which their individual sermons were presented. With this end 
in view those manuscripts were chosen out which were specially 
distinguished for their age or authenticity, and from these again 
selection was made of those with superscriptions imputing them to 
Eckhart. In this way and in this way only I found it possible to 
enter into the genius and the method and the idiosyncrasy of 
Eckhart and gain a reliable standard whereby to determine those 
sermons which, though found among the authentic ones, were yet 
without his name. By this means I hope to have acquired the 
necessary practice and familiarity with Eckhart’s writings and I 
believe I need not fear that any important item of my collec- 
tion will ultimately prove to be wrongly attributed to Eckhart. 

The Sayings, with few exceptions, bear all the marks of authen- 
ticity and need no further verification. Only a couple of them are 
traceable to the complete sermons and tractates included, though 
most are fragments and portions of larger works. From this we 
can form some notion of the amount of Eckhart still lost to. us. 

PREFACE ie 

With regard to the fourth section, which I have called Liber 
Positionum, I had no external evidence of Eckhart’s authorship, 
but Eckhart’s genius and characteristic outlook seem to me to be 
unmistakably shown in these arguments in which, in the form of 
dialogues between master and pupil, a series of weighty philo- 
sophical and theological questions are ventilated. Further, the 
separate items of this work which only loosely hang together, I 
have met with only among Eckhart’s writings. The title I have 
borrowed from Trithemius’ Catalogue (see above) ; it might have 
been made for it. 

Obviously my text is not all of equal value and correctness ; 
who could expect it ? With the numerous pieces preserved only 
in late and bad MSS. it was often impossible owing to the careless- 
ness of the scribe to unravel the manifold confusion of thought 
and connection ; how was I to restore and supply words and whole 
sentences which had been omitted ? I mean to comment in the 
Notes on the passages which seem to me to be corrupt and give the 
emendations and conjectures which I have found it inexpedient 
to publish with the text. Of another kind but no less great was 
my difficulty with those passages which certainly appeared in the 
best MSS. but showed considerable variations among themselves. 
How important these discrepancies often are the variants will 
show. In cases of this sort the recognition and isolation of the 
authentic from the unauthentic later additions or distortions is 
rarely to be done with any certainty and for that reason I have 
sometimes adopted the expedient of putting the variants themselves 
in juxtaposition in the text.! 

As to the diction of the contents of this volume, which I have 
neither wished nor been able to give much order to, I have followed 
the oldest and best MSS. which, consistently with Eckhart’s 
home and birthplace, Strassburg, are written almost entirely in 
the Alemanic idiom: Middle German and the speech of Cologne 
do appear occasionally but notwithstanding Eckhart’s long 
sojourn on the lower Rhine, only rarely and in late MSS. 

STUTTGART, 5th July 1857. 

1 
The last two pages of Pfeiffer’s Preface are occupied with acknow- 
ledgments of the help and kindness received from professors, 
librarians, keepers of archives, etc. Among these appear the 
names of Wackernagel, P. Gall-Morel, Franz Hoffmann, and the 
Cardinal Prince-Bishop of Breslau, Melchior von Diepenbrock, 
1 Many examples of this occur. See especially I, Ixxvi and II, xi. 

= MEISTER ECKHART 

‘ who never tired of lending me a helping hand.’ He is especially 
grateful to the then Prefect of the Vatican Archives who enabled 
him to trace and placed at his disposal eight documents (s. Pertz. 
archiv 9, 449) relating to Eckhart and of much importance ‘ as 
showing the relations of Eckhart with the Church, his position with 
regard to the Archbishop of Cologne and the justification of the 
latter for setting in motion the Inquisition against him, as well as 
for the history of the powerful spiritual movement which at the 
beginning of the fourteenth century took place on the Rhine.’ 
All these documents he reserves for his projected volume of Notes, 
with the exception of one short quotation from Eckhart’s Declara- 
tion at Cologne, 18 Feb. 1327. This, together with other relevant 
documents, was afterwards published by Preger at the end of the 
first volume of his Geschichte der deutschen Mystik. 

Eckhart! (d. cir. 1827) has been called the father of the German 
mystics,’ the philosophical creative genius of the German mystics 3 
and the father of German speculation.t According to Dean Inge 
he is ‘next to Plotinus the greatest philosopher-mystic’ > and the 
most Plotinian of all Christian philosophers.’ ‘He was a learned ? 
member of the Dominican or Preaching Order and sometime lector 
biblicus at the University of Paris, then the Dominican College of 
St Jacob where he was given his title of Meister by Pope Boni- 
face VIII. But it was probably at Cologne that he graduated in 
the Scholasticism of Albertus Magnus (1205-1281) and Thomas 
Aquinas (1226-1274) whose system was at that time rapidly 
acquiring its hold. He held at different times important provincia 
posts and proved himself an able administrator and reformer of 
the numerous religious houses in his care but it was principally 
at Strassburg and afterwards at Cologne that he established his 
great influence as a teacher and ‘for an entire generation, with 
the boldest freedom, preached to the multitudes in the German 
tongue on topics bristling with difficulties for the orthodox faith.’ § 
For he had conceived the then novel idea of instructing the laity . 
and the many semi-religious communities and brotherhoods of that 
date—Beguines, Beghards, Friends of God (Gottesfreunde), ete.— 
no less than the religious of his Order, and for this purpose it was 
necessary to make the further innovation of using the vulgar tongue 
instead of Latin, the teaching medium of that day. His success 
in expounding the abstruse tenets of the Scholastic philosophy in 
an undeveloped language which he had to supply with words and 
fashion to his needs, has earned for Eckhart the titles of father of 
the German language and the father of German philosophic ® prose. 
Ultimately the Church authorities became alarmed at the enthusiasm 
roused by his teaching and especially at its effect upon the laity. 
He was accused of preaching to the people in their own language 

1 The following facts are taken chiefly from Preger’s Geschichte and Lasson’s 
Meister Eckhart. (See Bibliography for full titles.) 

2 Bach, p. 1. 3 Wackernagel, p. 298. 

* Bach. 5 Light, Life and Love, p. xv. 

6 Philosophy of Plotinus, vol. ii, p. 107. 

7 Tauler (1300-1361) describes him as ‘a man of prodigious learning, too 
profoundly versed .in the subtilties of God- and nature-wisdom for many of 
the scholars of his day rightly to understand him ’ (Sermons, Basle ed., 1521). 

® Rufus M. Jones, p. 218. ® Lasson, pp. 66, 69. 

xi 

- 

xii MEISTER ECKHART 

things that might lead to heresy ! and this led to his excommunica- 
tion in 1829, after his death, on the general grounds of preaching 
to the laity the secrets of the Church, a list of seventeen specific 
heretical and eleven objectional doctrines being appended to the 
inditement.2 To the first accusation he replied : ‘ If the ignorant 
are not taught they will never learn’; ‘the business of the 
doctor is to heal.’ The charge of heresy he strenuously denied 
and largely succeeded in rebutting while he lived. ‘I protest 
in the presence of God,’ he says, ‘that I have always avoided 
with horror all error in matters of faith,’ and he never made any 
recantation of his teaching although he publicly declared his 
willingness to retract any error ‘that might be proved against 
him.’® His ‘errors’ appear to_be the logical outcome of the 
system he taught. As Lasson says, ‘He taught what Dionysius 
and St Thomas taught . . . but he goes further than any of his 
predecessors and crosses the boundaries of Church dogma.’ 

There is only the scantiest material for a biography of Eckhart. 
Of his birth neither date nor place is known. It is argued that he 
was born before 1260 either at Strassburg in Saxony, or at 
Hochheim in Thüringia. The first known mention of his name is 
in a list of Professors at the University of Paris: fr. Echardus, 
Tutonicus, licentiatus per Bonifacium, 1302. In 1303 he was 
Provincial of the Order in Saxony, with its sixty convents, men’s 
and women’s. To this title he added in 1307 that of Vicar-General 
of Bohemia where he reformed the religious houses. In 1311 he 
returned to Paris University and in 1312 began his long sojourn 
as head of the Order at Strassburg. Eight years later (1320) he 
is Prior of Frankfurt. There is now some suspicion of his orthodoxy 
but the Order still supports him and he is given a Chair at the 
Dominican College in Cologne where he enhances his reputation as 
a preacher. Here Tauler, Suso and Ruysbroeck probably heard 
him, and Tauler also at Strassburg. In 1825-6, suspicion of his 
teaching having revived, Nikolaus of Strassburg was appointed his 
special Inquisitor and his case came before the Inquisition in 
Venice. He delivered his Protest before that body on 24 Jan. 
1327, and on 13 Feb. following made his public Declaration of 
orthodoxy in the Dominican Church at Cologne. This is the last 
date on which he is known to have been alive. The answer of the 
Inquisition to his appellation, refusing to accept it, is dated 
22 Feb. 1327, and it is conjectured that he died soon after. He 
was excommunicated by the Bull of John XXII, 27 March 1829. 

1 Inquisition at Venice, 1325. 

® Bull of John XXII. See Preger, Appendix. 
3 Declaration at Cologne, 13 Feb. 1327. 

ECKHART xiii 

After his excommunication in 1329 Eckhart gradually lost all 
but legendary fame and his writings survived mostly under other 
names. Five hundred years later, in 1829, Gorres speaks of him 
as ‘une figure chrétienne presque mythique.’1 But for at least 
two generations after his death his writings, secretly passed 
from hand to hand and frequently transcribed, formed what 
Lasson calls ‘ the text-books of God-intoxicated piety.’ To the 
preachers of his school, John Tauler (1300-1361), Suso (1300-1365), 
Ruysbroeck (1293-1381), all members of the Brotherhood of the 
Friends of God, and to others of less note, they were a veritable 
mine from which they drew not only inspiration but words, 
sayings, whole passages and even whole sermons. To the Basle 
1521 edition of Tauler’s sermons Adam Petri had appended a few 
pages of sermons under Eckhart’s own name and this led to his 
rediscovery by Schmidt in 1847.2. Tauler’s sermons were after- 
wards shown by Pfeiffer to be a valuable source of Eckhart’s 
writings and this applies also to the works of Suso and Ruys- 
broeck to a less degree. 

Pfeiffer’s collection of Eckhart’s works is the earliest and still 
by far the largest. He confined himself principally to writings 
in Alemanic, the High German dialect of Strassburg at that date, 
but there are a number of others in different dialects of German, a 
few in Latin,? and some in a mixture of the two.* There are often 
numerous variants of the same original, sometimes under Eckhart’s 
name but often attributed to others, e.g. Franke von Köln, Hermann 
von Fritslar, Nikolaus von Landau, Johannes von Sterngassen, 
Kraft von Royberg, all belonging to the fourteenth century. The 
names of David of Ausburg and Nikolaus of Strassburg might 
possibly be added but, as Pfeiffer points out, frequently the only 
test of authorship is the internal evidence of style and matter 
and this test has yet to be conclusively applied. A few of Pfeiffer’s 
attributions would seem to have been wrongly made and in 
some cases overworking has robbed the writing of its Eckhartian 
flavour. In the following translation the six last and doubtful 
sermons have been omitted and a few other numbers of Parts I 
and II have been replaced by substitutes, either discoveries of 
Pfeiffer’s or from independent sources. _ 

With regard to the authorship of these substitutes, I, lviii, 
II, xvii and xix, are attributed to Eckhart on the authority of 
Preger (see Geschichte, pp. 318-824); I, xii on that of Bittner 
(see M. Eckhart’s Schriften, etc., vol. ii, p. 228). Tractate i (from 
the Jostes collection) is evidently by the same hand as I, xix and 

1 Works of Suso, 1829. Quoted by Jundt. A 
2 Martensen had already published his Monograph in 1842. 
3 Denifle. Also Spamer’s Texte. 4 Spamer’s Texte and Jostes. 

_ xiv MEISTER ECKHART 

I, xliii by the same author as I, Ixxii. Sermon xlvi is found 
(see Jostes, No. 84) forming part of Pfeiffer’s Tractate iv. Of the 
other substitutes, I, ix is a typical Eckhart fragment from Hermann 
von Fritslar’s Das Heiligenleben (1849), a collection which must now 
be recognised as a source of Eckhart’s writings (see also II, vill). 
Lastly, I, x and xv (from Spamer’s Texte) appear to be compila- 
tions from Eckhart’s works. This applies also to Greith’s Second 
Book ! from which I, Ixxxix is taken. 

NOTE ON SCHOLASTICISM 

The Scholastic movement originated in the schools founded by 
Charlemagne (742-814). It aimed at reconciling the philosophies 
of Plato, Aristotle and the Neoplatonists ? (Plotinus, Porphyry, 
Proclus) with the doctrines of Christianity. The first and greatest 
period of Scholasticism, which culminated with Aquinas (d. 1274) 
and his Summa Theologica began with Scotus Erigena (d. cir. 877) 
who translated into Latin the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius (sixth 
_ century) and in reviving his system popularised also the philosophy 
of Aristotle as known chiefly in the Latin translations of his works 
and of Porphyry’s which had been made by Boéthius (d. 542). 
The tradition of Aristotle had also been handed down through the 
great Arabian Aristotelians represented later by Avicenna (d. 1037) 
and Averroes (d. 1193) the Latin translations of whose commen- 
taries Aquinas appears to have used. Through the same Moham- 
medan school came the so-called Theology of Aristotle, really the 
Enneads (iv—vi) of Plotinus. Finally, Proclus exerted a profound 
influence on the Scholastic philosophy not only through the 
medium of Dionysius’ writings but also directly through his own, 
for it was his Elements which, emanating from the Arabians under 
the name of the Liber de Causis, famous in the middle ages, 
was a favourite text-book in their schools.® 

x Greith attributes to Suso, by a process of exclusion, the untitled work 
which forms his Second Book. (See Die deutsche Mystik, pp. 81 and 96.) The 
original of this is an early fifteenth-century MS. of 342 small 4to pages from 
a Dominican Convent at St Gall, and reference to the various Eckhart 

collections shows it to be a ‘ Teaching System’ mainly, if not wholly, com- 
piled from his writings. 

ae Eckhart’s ‘New Philosophers’? ‘The Philosopher’ is Aristotle. Aquinas 
is called ‘The Doctor,’ and ‘a heathen doctor’ is often, but by no means 
always, Averroes. } 

Fee Ber Rig feed on Empire, J. B. Bury; Macmillan, 1923. 

mne, VCarra de Vaux; Paris, 1900. The M hysical Elements 

Proclus, Thos. M. Johnson; Missouri, U.S.A., 1909. nee S 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1521-2. TAULER (J.), Sermons. Adam Petri. Basle. 

1530. FLacn (Martin), Ein demütige ermanung, etc. Strassburg. (Four 
pages only.) 

1842. Syren (Bishop of Zealand), Meister Eckhart: Ein theologische 

tudie. 

1845. PFEIFFER (FRANZ), Deutsche Mystiker des vierzehuten Jahrhunderts, 
Bd. i. Leipzig. 

1847. Scumipt (K.), Studien und Kritiken, 1339, Heft 3, S. 663. And Etudes 
sur le mysticism allemand in the Mémoires de l’acadömie des Sciences 
morales et politiques. Paris. 

1850-1. PrEIFFER (FRANZ) in Zeitschrift für deutscher Alterthum. Leipzig. 
Bd. viii, Heit. 1 and 2, 1850. Also Heft 3, 1851. 

1857. PFEIFFER (Franz), Deutsche Mystiker, etc., Bd. ii. Meister Eckhart. 
Leipzig. 

1861. GreitH (E.), Die deutsche Mystik im Prediger-Orden (von 1250-1380). 
Friburg. 

1864. Bacu (JoserH), Meister Eckhart der Vater des deutschen Speculation. 
Wien. 

1868. Lasson (A.), Meister Eckhart der Mystiker. Berlin. (Monograph with 
Emendations to Pfeiffer’s text, for which see also Zt. f. dt. Phil., 1878.) 

1871. Junpr (A.), Essai sur le Mysticism spéculatif de Maitre Eckhart. 
Strasbourg. 

1872. SIEVERS, Zeitsch. f. d. Alt. Berlin. Bd. 15. (Twenty sermons from 
an Oxford MS., Laud. Misc. 479. 8.) 

1874. PREGER (W.), Geschichte der deutschen Mystik im Mittelalter. Leipzig. 
1 Theil. 

1875. WACKERNAGEL (W.), Altdeutsche Predigten und Gebete aus Hand- 
schriften. Basle. 

1875. Junpr (A.), Panthéism populaire. Paris. 

1885-6. DENIFLE, Meister Eckhart’s Latin Schriften etc., in Archives für 
Literatur und Kirchengeschichte des Mittelalters. Berlin. Vol. 2. 
(Latin sermons found at Erfurt.) 

1885. MıcHELsEN (C.), Meister Eckhart: Ein Versuch. Berlin. 

1895. Jostes (F.), Meister Eckhart und seine Jünger, Ungedruckte Texte. 
Friburg. (Contains 82 sermons, etc., from a Nuremberg MS. Als 
4 more in Appendix.) ‘ 

1895. Harrmann (F.), Die Geheimlehre in der Christlichen Religion nach 
Erklärung von Meister Eckhart. 

1900. Dzxacrorx, Essai sur le mysticism spéculatif en Allemagne au 14me 
siécle. Paris. 

xv 

xvi MEISTER ECKHART 

1905. ZueHHoLD (H.), Des Nikolaus von Landau Sermone als Quelle für die 
Predigt M. Eckharts, etc. Halle. f 

1908. SPAMER (A.), Zur Überlieferung des Pfeifferschen Eckharttexte in 
Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur, 
Bd. 34 (2). 

1909. Birrner (H.), Meister Eckhart’s Schriften und Predigten, 2 vols. Jena. 
(A very free translation from Middle High into modern German.) 

1912. SPAMER (A.), Texte aus der deutschen Mystik des 14 und 15 Jahr- 
hunderts. Jena. (Latin and German texts from MSS. in Berlin, 
Brussels, Cues, Oxford, etc.) 

In English, some account of Eckhart and his writings is found in the 
following works: Vaughan’s Hours with the Mystics ; Max Miiller’s Theosophy ; 
Dean Inge’s Light, Life and Love. Methuen, 1904 ; Von Hügel’s The Mystical 
Element of Religion. Dent, 1908. Vol. ii, and Studies in Mystical Religion 
by Rufus M. Jones. Macmillan, 1909. Also Karl Pearson’s “ Meister Eckhart 
the Mystic’ in Mind, vol. xi. 

PREFACE 

ECKHART 

CONTENTS 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. Sermons 
ye 
II. 

Im. 
IV. 

V. 
VI. 

VII. 
Vill. 
IX. 
xe 

XI. 

XII. 

XII. 
XIV. 

ot XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 

XVII. 

XIX. 
xX. 
XXI. 
XXII. 
XXII. 
XXIV. 
XXV. 
XXVI. 

AND COLLATIONS ! 

This is Meister Eckhart 2 

This is another Sermon 2 4 

This too is Meister Eckhart 2 

The Eternal Birth 

Deus Charitas est : 

Jesus went into the Temple . 

The Sons of God . 5 

The Castle of the Soul . 

The Eternal Birth ® . : 6 4 
Man has to seek God in Error and Forgetfulness ® 
The Hour cometh and now is e A 
Contemplation, Hints and Promises ? 

In this was manifested the Love of God . 

Like a Vase of Gold ; 

The Divine Being ® 

The Sixth Beatitude 

In Principio erat Verbum 

I know a Man in Christ 

Paul rose from the Ground N 

And behold there was a man .. . Simeon 

He that hateth his Soul 

The Lord put forth His Hand 

The Spirit of the Lord . 

St John saw in a Vision 

The Lord hath sent His Angel 

The Feast of the Virgin 

PAGE 

xi 

XV 

1 Collazie, Lat. collotio, sometimes translated table-talk (see Wackernagel). 
The discourses read aloud in monasteries during meal-times were called colla- 
tions, hence the use of the word collation for the meal itself. 

2 Title as in Pfeiffer’s text. 2 
3 From other sources than Pfeiffer’s Meister Eckhart. 

xvii 

XVill 

PAGE 

XXVII. Rejoice in the Lord ; i 
XXVIII. The Angel Gabriel was sent . : 79 
XXIX. The Angel Gabriel was sent . : tos 80 
XXX. ‘ Vision is the whole Reward ' 81 
XXXI The Man in the Soul 5 j 84 
XXXII. The Soul Spark. With Ad 1 Synderesis 86 
X XXIII. If ye then be risen with Christ . 92 
XXXIV. St Dionysius speaks of three kinds of Light 1 94 
XXXV. Stand in the Gate i 95 
XXXVI. Young Man, Arise ! 98 
XXXVII. Young Man, Arise! 100 
XXXVIII. Peace ; 102 
XXXIX. Every good Gift . 104 
XL. Every good Gift . : 107 
XLI. A Little and ye shall not see Me 110 
XLII. The Image and its Object 113 
XLIII. Knowledge and Love ! 116 

* XLIV. In All Things I seek Rest 118 
« XLV. In All Things I seek Rest 119 
XLVI. Poverty ! 122 
XLVII. This is Life fiterhal 123 
XLVIII. Behold, I send my Angel 125 
XLIX. Behold, I send my Angel 127 
L. I came forth from the Father 129 

LI. He sought to see . . . who He was 132 

LII. The good Housewife . 134 
LIII. Whosoever would come after me . 136 
LIV. From Him and through Him and in Him 137 

LV. God made the Poor for the Rich 139 

LVI. The Emanation and Return . 142 
LVII. Such is the Nature of God 144 
LVIII. Divine Understanding ! 146 
LIX. The Just lives in Eternity 149 
LX. Likes love and unite 152 
LXI. There comes forth a Rod oat of ie Root of eee 153 
LXII. What manner of Child shall this be ? 154 
LXIII. Atonement . - 156 
LXIV. The swift River . 158 
LXV. The Just live for ever . 160 
LXVI. Publish the Word . 164 
LXVII. The Powers of Heaven shall Ne ty 166 
LXVIII. The Powers of the Soul ? 5 169 
LXIX. The Kingdom of God is at hand 171 
LXX. This is a Sermon about our Lord’s Body 174 
LXXI. Boöthius says: He who wants to see true « 174 
LXXII. The Prophet says: Lord be merciful 175 
LXXIII. St Benedict’s Day 177 
LXXIV. The Promise of the Father . 179 
LXXV. Ascension Day . 183° 

eS 
1 From other sources than Pfeiffer’s M eister Eckh 
% Title as in Pfeiffer’s text. ay 

MEISTER ECKHART 

LXXVI. 

LXXVII. 
LXXVIII. 
LXXIX. 
LXXX. 
LXXXI 
LXXXI. 
LXXXII. 
LXXXIV. 
LXXXV. 
LXXXVI. 
LXXXVII. 
LXXXVIII. 
LXXXIX. 

XC. 
XCI. 
XCII. 
XCIII. 
XCIV. 
XCV. 
XCVI. 
XCVII. 
XCVIITI. 
XCIX. 
C. 

CI. 

CII. 
CII. 
CIV. 

CONTENTS 

Ascension Day Sermons 

i 3 5 ¢ 5 2 

2. I go to Him that sent me 

3. The Soul’s Place 

4. Hindrances 

The Image in the Soul’, 

The Speculative Intellect 

The Son of the Widow 

There is one Power in the Soul 

I have chosen you 

The Feast of Martyrs 

St Germanus’ Day 

Like the Morning Star . 

A new Commandment I give unto ae 

Detachment has four Steps 

The Poor in Spirit 

The Virgin Birth . 

1. The Word of God 

2. The Word of the Soul ! 

Elizabeth’s Full Time came . 

Rejoice O Heavens ß 

God-Parents and God- Children 

The Crossing 

The Soul . 

But now the Light i in God 

Riddance > 5 

Dives 

He went up into a vaMoantetn 

Be ye renewed in the Spirit of your Mind 

One God and Father of All 

In All Things I seek Rest. Part 1. 
Part II. 

Honour Thy Father 

Out of the Mouth of the Most High 
Suffering 2 5 

II. TRACTATES ? : 

Ub 
ie 
III. 

The Kingdom of God! 
The Nobility of the Soul : 
The Rank and Nature of the Soul: 

. The Soul’s Perfection 

The Book of Godly Comfort . 

2 Sister Katrei 

. Signs of the True Ground 5 
. The Birth of the Eternal Word in the Soul 

. Detachment 

Spiritual Poverty A 

PAGE 
185 

185 
189 
191 
193 
195 
196 
198 
201 
203 
205 
208 
210 
214 
217 
217 
221 
225 
226 
226 

232 
233 
234 
236 
238 
241 
242 
245 
248 
250 

257 
260 
262 

265 

267 
279 

306 
308 
312 
334 
336 
340 
348 

La Ss ae — nn 

1 From other sources than Pfeiffer’s Meister Eckhart. 
2 Titles as in Pfeiffer’s text, except xiv and xv. 

XxX MEISTER ECKHART 

XI. 1 
2 
3 
XII. The Drowning 
The Gloss on The Drownine.: 
XIII. The Flow into the Father : 
XIV. St John says, ‘I saw the Word in God 
XV. The Three Creations 2 
XVI. The Soul’s Rage . 
XVII. The Twofold Way ! A 
XVIII. Commentary on the Gospel of St ohn - 
XIX. The Beatific Vision ! ; R a 

® 

III. Sayınas . 

IV. Lisper PosiTtIonum 

1 From other sources than Pfeiffer’s Meister Eckhart. 

PAGE 
350 

356 
363 
368 
369 
371 
377 
382 
389 
390 
396 
408 

415 

443 

I 
SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 

Someone complained to Meister Eckhart that no one 
could understand his sermons. He said, To understand 
my sermons a man requires three things. He must have 
conquered strife and be in contemplation of his highest 
good and be satisfied to do God’s bidding and be a 
beginner with beginners and naught himself and be so 
master of himself as to be incapable of anger. 

Cod. Monac. Germ., 365, Fol. 1926. 

I 

THIS IS MEISTER ECKHART 
FROM WHOM GOD NOTHING HID 

Dum medium silentium tenerent omnia et nox in suo cursu 
medium iter haberet etc. (Sap. 18,4). ‘ For while all things were in 
quiet silence and the night was in the midst of her course, ete.’ , 
Here in time we make holiday because the eternal birth which God ~ 
the Father bore and bears unceasingly in eternity is now born in 
time, in human nature. St Augustine says this birth is always 
happening. But if it happen not in me what does it profit me ? 
What matters is that it shall happen in me. 

We intend therefore to speak of this birth as taking place in us: 
as being consummated in the virtuous soul ; for it is in the perfect 
soul that God speaks his Word. What I shall say is true only of 
the perfected man, of him who has walked and is still walking in 
the way of God; not of the natural undisciplined man who is 
entirely remote from and unconscious of this birth. 

‚There is a saying of the wise man: ‘ When all things lay in 
the midst of silence then leapt there down into me from on high, 
from the royal throne, a secret word.’ This sermon is about 
this word. 

Concerning it three things are to be noted. The first is, where- 
abouts in the soul God the Father speaks his Word, where she is 
receptive of this act, where this birth befalls. It is bound to 
be in the purest, loftiest, subtlest part of the soul. Verily, an 
God the Father in his omnipotence had endowed the soul with a 
still nobler nature, had she received from him anything yet more 
exalted, then must the Father have delayed this birth for the 
presence of this greater excellence. The soul in which this birth 
shall come to pass must be absolutely pure and must live in gentle 
fashion, quite peaceful and wholly introverted : not running out 
through the five senses into the manifoldness of creatures, but 
altogether within and harmonised in her summit. That is its 
place. Anything inferior is disdained by it. 

The second part of this discourse has to do with man’s conduct 

3 

4 MEISTER ECKHART 

in relation to this act, this interior speaking, this birth: whether 
it is more profitable to co-operate in it—perhaps by creating in 
the mind an imaginary image and disciplining oneself thereon by 
reflecting that God is wise, omnipotent, eternal, or whatever else 
one is able to excogitate about God—so that the birth may come 
to pass in us through our own exertion and merit ; or whether it 
is more profitable and conducive to this birth from the Father to 
shun all thoughts, words and deeds as well as all mental images 
and empty oneself, maintaining a wholly God-receptive attitude, 
such that one’s own self is idle letting God work. Which conduct 
subserves this birth best ? 

The third point is the profit and how great it is, which accrues 
from this birth. 

Note in the first place that in what I am about to say I intend 
to avail myself of natural proofs that ye yourselves can grasp, for 
though I put more faith in the scriptures than myself, nevertheless 
it is easier and better for you to learn by means of arguments 
that can be verified. 

First we will take the words : ‘ In the midst of the silence there 
was spoken in me a secret word.’ 

—But, Sir, where is the silence and where the place in which 
the word is spoken ? 

As I said just now, it is in the purest part of the soul, in the 
noblest, in her ground, aye in the very essence of the soul. That is 
mid-silence for thereinto no creature did ever get, nor any image, 
nor has the soul there either activity or understanding, therefore she 
is not aware of any image either of herself or any creature. What- 
ever the soul effects she effects with her powers. When she under- 
stands she understands with her intellect. When she remembers 
she does so with her memory. When she loves she does so with her 
will. She works then with her powers and not with her essence. 
Now every exterior act is linked with some means. The power of 
seeing is brought into play only through the eyes ; elsewhere she 
can neither do nor bestow such a thing as seeing. And so with 
all the other senses: their operations are always effected through 
some means or other. But there is no activity in the essence of 
the soul ; the faculties she works with emanate from the ground of 
the essence but in her actual ground there is mid-stillness ; here 
alone is rest and a habitation for this birth, this act, wherein God 
the Father speaks his Word, for it is intrinsically receptive of 
naught save the divine essence, without means. Here God enters 
the soul with his all, not merely with a part. God enters the 
ground of the soul. . None can touch the ground of the soul but 
God only. No creature is admitted into her ground, it must stop 
outside in her powers. There it sees the image whereby it has been 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 5 

drawn in and found shelter. For when the soul-powers contact 
a creature they set to to make of the creature an image and likeness 
which they absorb. By it they know the creature. Creatures 
cannot go into the soul, nor can the soul know anything about a 
creature which she has not willingly taken the image of into herself. 
She approaches creatures through their present images ; an image 
being a thing that the soul creates with her powers. Be it a stone, 
a rose, a man, or anything else that she wants to know about, she 
gets out the image of it which she has already taken in and is 
thus enabled to unite herself with it. But an image received in 
this way must of necessity enter from without through the senses. 
Consequently there is nothing so unknown to the soul as herself. 
The soul, says a philosopher, can neither create nor absorb an 
image of herself. So she has nothing to know herself by. Images 
all enter through the senses, hence she can have no image of herself. 
She knows other things but not herself. Of nothing does she 
know so little as of herself, owing to this arrangement. Now thou 
must know that inwardly the soul is free from means and images, 
that is why God can freely unite with her without form or similitude. 
Thou canst not but attribute to God without measure whatever 
power thou dost attribute to a master. The wiser and more 
powerful the master the more immediately is his work effected 
and the simpler it is. Man requires many instruments for his 
external works ; much preparation is needed ere he can bring 
them forth as he has imagined them. The sun and moon whose 
work is to give light, in their mastership perform this very 
swiftly : the instant their radiance is poured forth, all the ends of 
the world are full of light. More exalted are the angels, who need 
less means for their works and have fewer images. The highest 
Seraph has but a single image. He seizes as a unity all that his 
inferiors regard as manifold. Now God needs no image and has 
no image : without image, likeness or means does God work in the 
soul, aye, in her ground whereinto no image did ever get but only 
himself with his own essence. This no creature can do. 

—How does God the Father give birth to his Son in the soul : 
like creatures, in image and likeness ? 

No, by my faith! but just as he gives him birth in eternity and 
no otherwise. 

—Well, but how does he give him birth there’? 

See. God the Father has perfect insight into himself, profound 
and thorough knowledge of himself by means of himself, not. by 
means of any image. And thus God the Father gives birth to his 
Son, in the very oneness of the divine nature. Mark, thus it is 
and in no other way that God the Father gives birth to his Son 
in the ground and essence of the soul and thus he unites himself 

6 MEISTER ECKHART 

with her. Were any image present there would not be real union 
and in real union lies thy whole beatitude. 

Now haply thou wilt say: ‘ But there is nothing innate in th 
soul save images.’ No, notso! If that were true the soul would 
never be happy, for God cannot make any creature wherein thou 
canst enjoy perfect happiness, else were God not the highest 
happiness and final goal, whereas it is his will and nature to be 
the alpha and omega of all. No creature can be happiness. And 
here indeed can just as little be perfection, for perfection (perfect 
virtue that is to say) results from perfection of life. Therefore 
verily thou must sojourn and dwell in thy essence, in thy ground, 
and there God shall mix thee with his simple essence without the 
medium of any image. No image represents and signifies itself : 
it stands for that of which it is the image. Now seeing that thou 
hast no image save of what is outside thee, therefore it is impossible 
for thee to be beatified by any image whatsoever. 

The second point is, what it does behove a man to do in order 
to deserve and procure this birth to come to pass and be con- 
summated in him : is it better for him to do his part towards it, to 
imagine and think about God, or should he keep still in peace and 
quiet so that God can speak and act in him while he merely waits 
on God’s operation? At the same time I repeat that this speaking, 
this act, is only for the good and perfect, those who haveso absorbed 
and assimilated the essence of virtue that it emanates from them 
naturally, without their seeking ; and above all there must live in 
them the worthy life and lofty teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Such. are permitted to know that the very best and utmost of 
attainment in this life is to remain still and let God act and speak 
in thee. When the powers have all been withdrawn from their 
bodily forms and functions, then this Word is spoken. Thus he 
says: ‘in the midst of the silence the secret word was spoken to 
me.’ The more completely thou art able to in-draw thy faculties 
and forget those things and their images which thou has taken in, 
the more, that is to say, thou forgettest the creature, the nearer 
thou art to this and the more susceptible thou art to it. If only 
thou couldst suddenly be altogether unaware of things, aye, couldst 
thou but pass into oblivion of thine own existence as St Paul did 
when he said: ‘ Whether in the body I know not, or out of the 
body I know not, God knoweth!’ Here the spirit had so entirely 
absorbed the faculties that it had forgotten the body : memory no 
longer functioned, nor understanding, nor the senses, nor even 
those powers whose duty it is to govern and grace the body ; 
vital warmth and energy were arrested so that the body failed not 
throughout the three days during which he neither ate nor drank. 
Even so fared Moses when he fasted forty days on the mount and 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 7 

was none the worse for it: on the last day he was as strong as on 
the first. Thus’a man must abscond from his senses, invert his 
faculties and lapse into oblivion of things and of himself. Anent 
which a philosopher apostrophised the soul: ‘ Withdraw from the 
restlessness of external activities!’ And again: ‘ Flee away and 
hide thee from the turmoil of outward occupations and inward 
_ thoughts for they create nothing but discord!’ If God is to 
speak his Word in the soul she must be at rest and at peace ; 
then he speaks in the soul his Word and himself : not an image but 
himself. Dionysius says: ‘God has no image nor likeness of 
himself seeing that he is intrinsically all good, truth and being.’ 
God performs all his works, in himself and outside himself, simul- 
taneously. Do not fondly imagine that God, when he created the 
heavens and the earth and all creatures, made one thing one day 
and another the next. Moses describes it thus it is true, never- 
theless he knew better: he did so merely on account of those who 
are incapable of understanding or conceiving otherwise. All God 
did was : he willed and they were. God works without instrument 
and without image. And the freer thou art from images the 
more receptive thou art to his interior operation ; and the more 
introverted and oblivious thou art the nigher thou art thereto. 
Dionysius exhorted his disciple Timothy in this sense saying : 
’ * Dear son Timothy, do thou with untroubled mind swing thyself 
up above thyself and above thy powers, above all modes and all 
existences, into the secret, still darkness, that thou mayest attain 
to the knowledge of the unknown super-divine God.’ All things 
must be forsaken. God scorns to work among images. 

Now haply thou wilt say : ‘ What is it that God does without 
images in the ground and essence?’ That I am incapable of 
knowing, for my soul-powers can receive only in images ; they have 
to recognise and lay hold of each thing in its appropriate image : 
they cannot recognise a bird in the image of a man. Now since 
images all enter from without, this is concealed from my soul, 
which is most salutary for her. Not-knowing makes her wonder 
and leads her to eager pursuit, for she knows clearly that it is 
but knows not how nor what it is. No sooner does a man know the 
reason of a thing than immediately he tires of it and goes casting 
about for something new. Always clamouring to know, he is ever 
inconstant. The soul is constant only to this unknowing knowing 
which keeps her pursuing. 

The wise man said concerning this : ‘ In the middle of the night 
when all things were in quiet silence there was spoken to me a 
hidden word.’ It came like a thief, by stealth. What does he 
mean by a word that was hidden? The nature of a word is to 
reveal what is hidden. It appeared before me, shining out with 

8 MEISTER ECKHART 

intent to reveal and giving me knowledge of God. Hence it 
is called a word. But what it was remained hidden from me. 
That was its stealthy coming ‘in a whispering stillness to reveal 
itself.” It is just because it is hidden that one is and must be 
always after it. It appears and disappears: we are meant to 
yearn and sigh for it. | 

St Paul says we ought to pursue this until we espy it and not 
‚stop until we grasp it. When he returned after having been caught 
up into the third heaven where God was made known to him and 
where he beheld all things, he had forgotten nothing, but it was so 
deep down in his ground that his intellect could not reach it: it 
was veiled from him. He was therefore obliged to pursue it and 
search for it in himself, not outside himself. It is not outside, it 
is inside: wholly within. And being convinced of this he said, 
‘I am sure that neither death nor any affliction can separate me 
from what I find within me.’ 

There is a fine saying of one heathen philosopher to another 
about this, he says: ‘I am aware of something in me which 
sparkles in my intelligence ; I clearly perceive that it is somewhat 
but what I cannot grasp. Yet methinks if I could only seize it 
Ishould know all truth.’ To which the other philosopher replied : 
‘Follow it boldly! for if thou canst seize it thou wilt possess 
the sum-total of all good and have eternal life!’ St Augustine 
expresses himself in the same sense : ‘ I am conscious of something 
within me that plays before my soul and is as a light dancing 
in front of it; were this brought to.steadiness and perfection in 
me it would surely be eternal life!’ It hides yet it shows. It 
comes, but after the manner of a thief, with intent to take and to 
steal all things from the soul. By emerging and showing itself 
somewhat it purposes to decoy the soul and draw it towards itself 
to rob it and take itself from it. As saith the prophet: ‘ Lord 
take from them their spirit and give them instead thy spirit.’ 
This too the loving soul meant when she said : ‘ My soul dissolved 
and melted away when Love spoke his word : when he entered I 
could not but fail.’ And Christ signified it by his words : ‘ Whoso- 
ever shall leave aught for my sake shall be repaid an hundredfold, 
and whosoever will possess me must deny himself and all things 
and whosoever will serve me must follow me nor go any more after 
his own.’ 

Now peradventure thou wilt say: ‘ But, Sir, you are wanting 
to change the natural course of the soul! It is her nature to 
take in through the senses, in images. Would you upset this 
arrangement ?’ 

No! But how knowest thou what nobility God has bestowed 
on human nature, what perfections yet uncatalogued, aye yet 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 9 

undiscovered ? Those who have written of the soul’s nobility 
have gone no further than their natural intelligence could carry 
them: they never entered her ground, so that much remained 
obscure and unknown to them. ‘I will sit in silence and hearken 
to what God speaketh within me,’ said the prophet. Into this 
retirement steals the Word in the darkness of the night. St John 
says, ‘ The light shines in the darkness : it came unto its own and 
as many as received it became in authority sons of God : to them 
was given power to become God’s sons.’ 

Mark now the fruit and use of this mysterious Word and of this 
darkness. In this gloom which is his own the heavenly Father’s 
Son is not born alone : thou too art born there a child of the same 
heavenly Father and no other, and to thee also he gives power. 
Observe how great the use. No truth learned by any master by 
his own intellect and understanding, or ever to be learned this side 
the day of judgment, has ever been interpreted at all according to 
this knowledge, in this ground. Call it an thou wilt an ignorance, 
an unknowing, yet there is in it more than in all knowing and 
understanding without it, for this outward ignorance lures and 
attracts thee from all understood things and from thyself. This is 
what Christ meant when he said : ‘ Whosoever denieth not him- 
self and leaveth not father and mother and is not estranged from 
all these, he is not worthy of me.’ As though to say: he who 
abandons not creaturely externals can neither be conceived nor born 
in this divine birth. But divesting thyself of thyself and of every- 
thing external thereto does indeed give it thee. And in very truth 
I believe, nay I am sure, that the man who is established herein 
can in no wise be at any time separated from God. I hold he 
can in no wise lapse into mortal sin. He would rather suffer the 
most shameful death, as the saints have done before him, than 
commit the least of mortal sins. I hold that he cannot willingly 
commit, nor yet consent to, even a venial sin, whether in himself or 
in another. So strongly is he drawn and attracted to this way, so 
much is he habituated to it, that he could never turn to any other : 
to this way are directed all his senses, all his powers. 

May the God who has been born again as man assist us in 
this birth, continually helping us, weak man, to be born again in 
him as God. Amen. 

II 
THIS IS ANOTHER SERMON 

Ubi est qui natus est rex Judeorum ? (Matt. 2,). Where is he 
who is born King of the Jews ? Now concerning this birth, mark 
where it befalls. I say again as I have often said before that this 

10 MEISTER ECKHART 

birth befalls in the soul exactly as it does in eternity, neither more 
nor less, for it is the same birth: this birth befalls in the ground 
and essence of the soul. , 

Certain questions arise. Granting that God is in all things as 
intelligence (or mind) and is more instinct in things than they are 
in themselves and more natural ; and granting that God wherever 
he is is in operation, knowing himself and speaking his Word, 
then mark in what respects the soul is better fitted for this divine 
operation than other rational creatures God exists in. 

God is in all things as being, as activity, as power. But he is 
procreative in the soul alone for though every creature is a vestige 
of God, the soul is the natural image of God. This image is 
perfected and adorned in this birth. No creature but the soul is 
susceptible to this birth, this act. Such perfection as enters the 
soul, whether it be divine light, grace or bliss, must needs enter 
the soul in this birth and no otherwise. Do but foster this birth 
in thee and thou shalt experience all good and all comfort, all 
happiness, all being and all truth. What comes to thee therein 
brings thee true being and stability and whatsoever thou mayst 
seek or grasp, without it, perishes, take it how thou wilt. This 
alone gives life ; all else corrupts. Moreover, in this birth thou 
dost participate in the divine influx and its gifts. This is not 
received by creatures wherein God’s image is not found : the soul- 
idea belongs to the eternal birth alone and this happens only 
and solely in the soul, begotten of the Father in the ground and 
innermost recesses of the soul whereinto never image shone nor 
soul-power peeped. 

Another question is: If this birth befalls in the ground and 
essence of the soul, then it happens alike in sinner and in saint, 
so what use or good is it to me? The ground of nature is the 
same in both, nay even in hell the nobility of nature persists 
eternally.—It is characteristic of this birth that it always 
comes with fresh light. It always brings great enlightenment 
to the soul because it is the nature of good to diffuse itself. 
In this birth God pours into the soul in such abundance of light, 
the ground and essence of the soul are so flooded with it, that it 
runs over into her powers and into the outward man as well. 
Thus it befell Paul when upon his journey God touched him with 
his light and spake to him: the reflection of this light showed 
outwardly so that his companions saw it surrounding Paul like 
the saints. The superfluity of light in the ground of the soul 
wells over into the body which is filled with radiance. No sinner 
can receive this light nor is he worthy to, being full of sin and 
wickedness, or darkness. As he (John) says, ‘The darkness 
neither receives nor comprehends the light.’ Because the 

 SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 11 

avenues by which the light would enter are choked and obstructed 
with guile and darkness. Light and darkness are incompatible, 
like God and creatures. Enter God, exit creatures. Man is quite 
conscious of this light. Directly he turns to God this light begins 
to glint and sparkle in him, telling him what to do and what to 
leave undone, with many a shrewd hint to boot of things he 
hitherto ignored and knew nothing of.—How dost thou know ?— 
Suppose thy heart is vehemently moved to retire from the world. 
How could that be if not by this light? It is so charming, so 
delightful, it makes other things so tiresome which are not God ° 
or God’s. It attracts thee to God and thou art sensible of many a 
virtuous impulse albeit uncertain whence it comes. This interior 
mood is in no wise due to creatures nor is it any of their bidding, 
for what creatures effect and direct comes in from without. But 
thy ground alone is stirred by this force and the freer thou dost keep 
the more truth and discernment are thine. No man was ever lost 
save for the reason that once having left his ground he has let 
himself become too permanently settled abroad. St Augustine 
says: Many there be that have sought light and truth but only © 
abroad where they are not. They finally go out so far that they 

never get back nor find their way in again. Neither have these 

found the truth for the truth is within in their ground, not without. 

So he who means to see this light and find out the whole truth 

must foster the awareness of this birth within himself, in his 

ground, so shall his powers all be lighted up and his outer man as 

well. Directly God inwardly stirs his ground with the truth its 

light darts into his powers, and lo, that man knows more than 

anyone could teach him. As the prophet says, ‘I know more 

than I was ever taught.’ It is because this light cannot lighten 

and shine in sinners that this birth cannot occur in them. This 

birth is inconsistent with darkness and sin therefore it befalls not 

in the powers but in the ground and essence of the soul. 

Then comes the question : If God the Father labours only in the 
ground and essence of the soul, not in her powers, what have the 
powers got to do with it? How do they help by being idle and 
taking holiday ? What is the use, seeing this birth befalls not 
in the powers ?—It is well asked. Butconsider. Every creature 
works towards some end. The end is ever the first in intention 
and the last in execution. And God too works for a wholly blessed 
end, to wit, himself: to bring the soul and all her powers into 
that end, into himself. For this God’s works are wrought, for 
this the Father brings his Son to birth in the soul, that all the 
powers of the soul may end in this. He lies in wait for all the soul 
contains, all are bidden to his royal feast. Here, the soul is 
scattered abroad among her powers and dissipated in the act of 

12 MEISTER ECKHART 

each : the power of seeing in the eye, the power of hearing in the 
ear, the power of tasting in the tongue, and her powers are accord- 
ingly enfeebled for their interior work, scattered forces being . 
imperfect. It follows that for her interior work to be effective, she 
must call in all her powers, recollecting them out of extended things 
to one interior act. St Augustine says, ‘ The soul is where she 
loves rather than where she animates the body.’ Once upon a 
time there was a heathen philosopher who studied mathematics. 
He was sitting by the embers making calculations in pursuance 
of his art when there came along a man brandishing a sword, who, 
not witting that it was the master, cried out, ‘ Quick, thy name, 
or I shall slay thee!’ The master was too much absorbed to see 
or hear his enemy and failed to catch the threat. So after hailing 
him several times the enemy cut off his head. And this to acquire 
a mere natural science! How much more does it behove us to » 
withdraw from things in order to concentrate our powers on 
perceiving and knowing the one infinite and immortal truth! To 
this end do thou assemble thy entire mind and memory : turn them 
into the ground where thy treasure lies hid. But for this thou must 
drop all other activities ; thou must get to unknowing to find it. 
The question is, Were it not better for each power to go on with 
_ its own work, then none would hinder the others in their work nor 
yet God in his? Can there not be creaturely knowledge in me 
that is no hindrance, as God knows all things without hindrance 
and so do the saints ?—I answer: The saints behold God in a 
simple image and in that image they discern all things; and God 
himself sees himself thus, perceiving all things in himself. He 
need not turn, as we do, from one thing to another. Supposing 
that in this life we were always confronted with a mirror wherein 
we see and recognise all things at a glance in one single image: 
neither act nor knowledge would be a hindrance then. At present 
"we must turn from one thing to another: we can only mind one 
thing at the expense of all the others. And the soul is bound so 
straitly to her powers that where they flow she must flow with 
them; the soul must be present at everything they do, and 
attentive too, or nething would come of their exertions. The 
drain of attending to external acts is bound to weaken her interior 
operation. For this nativity God wants, and he must have, a 
vacant, free and unencumbered soul wherein is nothing but himself 
alone, which waits for naught and nobody but him. As Christ 
says: ‘ Whoso loveth aught but me, whoso cleaveth to father 
or mother, or many other things, he is not worthy of me. I came 
not upon earth to bring peace but a sword; to cut away all things, 
to part thee from brother, child, mother and friend, which are 
really thy foes.’ For verily thy comforts are thy foes. Doth 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 13 

thine eye see all things and thine ear hear all things and thy heart 
remember them all, then in these things thy soul is destroyed. 

A master says, ‘ To achieve the interior act one must assemble 
all one’s powers as it were into one corner of one’s soul, where, 
secreted from images and forms one is able to work. We must 
sink into oblivion and ignorance. In this silence, this quiet, 
the Word is heard. There is no better method of approaching 
this Word than in silence, in quiet: we hear it and know it aright 
in unknowing. To one who knows naught it is clearly revealed. 

Haply thou wilt object : ‘ You place our salvation in ignorance, 
Sir. That seems a mistake. God made man to know: “ Lord 
make them to know,” says the prophet. Where there is ignorance 
there is defect and illusion: he is a brutish man, an ape, a fool, 
and so remains as long as he is ignorant.’—But this is transformed 
knowledge, not ignorance which comes from lack of knowing ; 
it is by knowing that we get to this unknowing. Then we know 
with divine knowing, then our ignorance is ennobled and adorned 
with supernatural knowledge. Then in our passion we are more 
perfect than in action. According to one authority, the sense of 
hearing is much nobler than the sense of sight, for we learn wisdom 
more by ear than eye and live this life more wisely. We read 
about a heathen philosopher who was lying at death’s door while 
his pupils were discussing in his presence some noble science, that, 
lifting up his dying head and listening, he exclaimed, ‘ O teach me 
even now this art that I may practise it eternally!’ Hearing 
draws in more, seeing leads out more, the very act of seeing. 
In eternal life we are far more happy in our ability to hear than in 
our. power to see, because the act of hearing the eternal Word is 
in me, whereas the act of seeing goes forth from me: hearing, 
Iam receptive ; seeing, Iam active. But our bliss does not consist 
in being active but in being receptive to God. As God excels 
creature, so is God’s work more excellent than mine. It was 
out of love that God did set our happiness in suffering, for we 
undergo far more than we do and receive incomparably more than 
in return we give; moreover, each divine gift is the preparation 
for some new and richer gift, each gift increasing our capacity and 
our desire to receive a greater still. Some theologians say that 
the soul is symmetrical with God in this respect. For as God is 
infinite in giving, so the soul is infinite in receiving or conceiving. 
And the soul is as profound to suffer as God is omnipotent to act, 
hence her transformation by God into God. God must act and 
the soul must suffer; for him to know and love himself in her, 
for her to know with his knowledge, love with his love; and 
since she is far happier in his than hers it follows that her happiness 
depends upon his work more than on her own. 

14 MEISTER ECKHART 

_ The pupils of St Dionysius asked him why Timothy outstripped 
them in perfection ? Dionysius said, ‘ Timothy is a God-receptive 
man. He who is expert at this outstrippeth all men.’ In this 
sense thy unknowing is not a defect but thy chief perfection, and 
suffering thy highest activity. Kill thy activities and still thy 
faculties if thou wouldst realise this birth in thee. To find the 
newborn King in thee all else thou mightest find must be passed 
by and left behind thee. May we outstrip and leave behind such 
things as are not pleasing to the newborn King. So help us thou 
who didst become the child of man that we might become the 
children of God. Amen. 

II 

THIS TOO IS MEISTER ECKHART 
WHO ALWAYS TAUGHT THE TRUTH 

In his, que patris mei sunt, oportet me esse (Luc. 2,,). “I must 
be about my Father’s business.” This text is opportune to what 
we have to say concerning the eternal birth which took place here 
in time and is still happening daily in the innermost recesses of 
the soul, in her ground, remote from all comers. To become 
aware of this interior birth it is above all necessary to be about 
our Father’s business. 

What is peculiarly the Father’s? Power is ascribed to him 
beyond either of the other Persons. And I tell you, no one can 
experience this birth without a mighty effort. None can attain 
‘ this birth unless he can withdraw his mind entirely from things. 
And it requires main force to drive back all the senses and inhibit 
them. Violence must be offered to them one and all or this cannot 
be done. As Christ said: ‘The kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence and the violent take it by force.’ 

Regarding this birth there arises the question, Does it happen 
continuously or only at intervals when one is disposed for it, 
what time one is exerting oneself to the utmost to forget things 
altogether and be conscious in this ? 

Here let us discriminate. Man possesses an active intellect, a 
passive intellect and a potential intellect. Active intellect is ever in 
act, ever doing something, be it in God or in creature, to the honour 
and glory of God. That is its province and hence its name active. 
But when God undertakes the work the mind must preserve a state 
of passivity. Potential intellect again has regard to both these, 
to the action of God and the passion of the soul, to its acting 
potentially. In the one case the mind is active, when it is function- 
ing, to wit; in the other receptive, when God takes up the work and 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 15 

then the mind ought, nay must, remain still and allow God to act. 
Now ere this is begun by the mind and finished by God, the spirit 
has prevision of it, potential knowledge of its happening. This 
is the meaning of potential intellect, which, however, is often 
neglected and does not bear fruit. When the mind is exerting — 
itself in real earnest, God interests himself in the mind and its work, 
and then the soul sees and experiences God. But since the un- 
interrupted vision and passion of God is intolerable to the soul 
in this body, therefore God withdraws from the soul from time to 
time, as it is said, ‘ A little while ye see me, and again a little while 
and ye do not see me.’ \ 

When our Lord took his three disciples with him up the mountain 
and showed them the transfiguration of his body by union with 
the Godhead, which also we shall have in our archetypal body, 
straightway Peter, beholding it, was fain to remain there always. 
Verily, where we find good we are loath to leave it, in so far as 
it is good. Where intuition finds, love follows and memory and 
all the soul to boot. And our Lord knowing this hides himself 
sometimes ; for the soul is the impartible form of the body, so 
she turns as a whole to whatevershe turns. Were she conscious of 
good, God to wit, immediately, uninterruptedly, she would never 
be able to leave it to influence the body. 

Thus it befell Paul: had he remained a hundred years there, 
where he knew the good, he would never have returned to his body, 
he would have forgotten it completely. Seeing then that it is 
wholly foreign to this life, and incompatible therewith, the good 
God veils it when he will and unveils it again when he chooses and 
when he knows, like a trusty physician, that it is best and most 
useful for thee. This withdrawal is not thine, but his whose is 
also the work ; let him do it or not as he will, he knows what is 
good for thee. It is in his hands to show or not according as he 
knows thee able to endure it. God is not a destroyer of nature, 
he perfects it, and this God does ever more and more as thou art 
fitted for it. ; 

Haply thou wilt object : Alas, Sir, if this requires a mind quite 
free from images and without activity, albeit both are natural to 
its powers, then how about those outward works we must do 
sometimes, works of charity, external ones, such as teaching and 
comforting those in need thereof: are we debarred by these ? 
things which so occupied our Lord’s disciples, notably St Paul, who 
endured a father’s care on account of other people : are we to be 

‘deprived of this great good because we are engaged in charities ? 

The answer is this. The one is perfect, the other very profitable. 
Mary was praised for choosing the best, but Martha’s life was very 
useful, serving Christ and his disciples. St Thomas says the 

16 MEISTER ECKHART 

active life is better than the life of contemplation, so far as we 
actually spend in charity the income we derive from contemplation. 
It is all the same thing ; we have but to root ourselves in this same 
ground of contemplation to make it fruitful in works, and the 
object of contemplation is achieved. True, there is motion, but 
no more than one; it comes from one end, God, and goes back to 
the same. As though I went from one end to the other of this 
house ; that would in sooth be motion, but of one in the same. 
Even so in this activity we are in the state of contemplation in 
God. The one is centred in the other and perfects the other. 
God’s purpose in the union of contemplation is fruitfulness in 
works ; for in contemplation thou servest thyself alone, but the 
many in good works. 

Hereto Christ admonisheth us by his whole life and the lives of 
all his saints, every one of whom he drove forth into the world 
to teach the multitude. St Paul said to Timothy, ‘ Beloved, 
preach the Word.’ Did he mean the outward word that beats 
the air? Nay, surely! He meant the in-born, hidden Word 
that lies secreted in the soul ; it was this that he exhorted them to 
preach, to the end that it might be made known to and nourish the 
powers of such as spend themselves wholly in the exterior life. 
That what time thy fellow-man hath need of thee thou mayst be 
found ready to serve him to the best of thy ability. It must be 
within thee, in thought, in intellect and will, and shine forth in 
thy deeds. As Christ said, ‘ Let your’ light shine before men.’ 
He was thinking of those people who care only for the contemplative 
life and neglect the virtuous uses of it, which, they say, do not 
concern them, they are passed that stage. Not these had Christ 
in mind when he observed : ‘ The seed fell upon good ground 
and yielded fruit an hundredfold,’ but these he meant when he 
declared : ‘ The tree that beareth not fruit shall be cut down.’ 

Thou mayst object: ‘ But, Sir, what of that silence you said 
so much about? This means images galore. Every one of these 
acts has its appropriate image, be the act internal or external ; 
whether it be teaching one or comforting another or arranging 
this or that, so what quiet can I get withal ? If the mind sees and 
formulates and the will wills and memory holds it fast, does not 
all this necessitate ideas ? ’ 

Let me explain. We were speaking just now of the active 
intellect and the passive intellect. Active intellect abstracts the 
images of outward things, stripping them of matter and of accidents, 
and introduces them to the passive intellect, begetting their mental 
prototypes therein. And the passive intellect made pregnant 
by the active in this way, knows and cherishes these things with 
the help of active intellect. Passive intellect cannot keep on 

- SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 17 

knowing things unless the active intellect keeps on enlightening 
it. Now observe. What the active intellect does for the natural 
man that and far more does God do for the solitary soul : he turns 
out active intellect and installing himself in its stead he himself 
assumes the duties of the active intellect. 

When a man is quite idle, when his intellect is at rest within 
him, then God takes up the work: he himself is the agent who 
produces himself in the passive intellect. What happens is this. 
The active intellect cannot give what it has not got: it cannot 
have two ideas together, but first one and then the other. What 
though light and air show multitudes of forms and colours all at 
once, thou canst only observe them one after another. And so 
with thy active intellect, which resembles the eye. But when God 
acts in lieu of thy active intellect he engenders many images together . 
in one point. Suppose God prompts thee to some one good deed, 
thy powers are all proffered for all virtuous things, thy mind being 
straightway set on good in general. All thy possibilities for good 
take shape and come into thy mind collectively, focussed to one 
point. Clearly this is not the work of thine own intellect which 
has in no wise the perfection nor plenitude for it ; rather is it the 
work and product of him who has all forms at once in himself. 
As Paul says: ‘I can do all things in him who strengtheneth me; 
in him I am undivided.’ Know then, the ideas of these acts are 
not thine own: they belong to the author of thy nature who has 
planted therein both their energy and form. Lay no claim thereto, 
for it is his not thine. True, thou receivest it temporally, but it is 
gotten and born of God beyond time, in eternity above images. 

Thou wilt say, perhaps: From the moment my intellect is 
divested of its natural activity and no longer has either form or 
action of its own, what is preserving it? It must have a hold 
‘somewhere; the powers, whether memory, intellect or will, are 
bound to have some lodgment somewhere, some place to work in. 

The answer is this. Intellect’s object and sustenance is essence, 
not accident, just pure unadulterated being in itself. On descrying 
something real the intellect forthwith relies upon it, comes to rest 
thereon, pronouncing its intellectual word concerning the object 
attained. As long as intellect fails to find the actual truth of 
things, does not touch bedrock in them, it stays in a condition of 
quest and expectation, it never settles down to rest, but labours 
incessantly to trace things to their cause, that is, it is seeking and 
waiting. It spends perhaps a year or more in research on some 
natural fact, finding out what it is, only to work as long again 
stripping off what it is not. All this time it has nothing to go by, 
it makes no pronouncement at all in the absence of experimental 

knowledge of the ground of truth. Intellect never rests in this 
* 2 

18 MEISTER ECKHART 

life. However much God shows himself in this life it is nothing 
to what he really is. Truth lies in the ground, but veiled and 
concealed from the intelleet. And meanwhile the mind has no 
support to rest on as on something permanent. It gets no rest 
at all, but goes on .expecting and preparing for something still to 
come but so far hidden. There is no knowing what God is. 
Something we do know, namely, what God is not. This the dis- 
cerning soul rejects. Intellect, meantime, finding no satisfaction in 
any mortal thing, is waiting, as matter awaits form. As matter is 
insatiable for form, so is intellect unsatisfied except with the 
essential, all-embracing truth. Only the truth will do, and this 
God keeps withdrawing from it step by step, purposing to arouse 
its zeal and lure it on to seek and grasp the actual causeless good : 
that, not content with any mortal thing, she may clamour more 
and more for the highest good of all. 

But thou wilt say: ‘ Alas, Sir, you laid so much stress on our 
quieting our faculties and now this calm resolves itself into yearn- 
ing and lamenting : to a muckle moan and clamour for something 
not possessed, which puts an end to peace and quiet. This may be 
desire or purpose or praise or thanksgiving or any of their brood, 
but it is not perfect peace and absolute stillness.’ 

I answer that, when thou hast emptied thyself entirely of thine 
own self and all things and of every sort of selfishness and hast 
transferred, united and abandoned thyself to God in perfect faith 
and complete amity, then everything that is born in thee or that 
enters into thee, external or internal, joyful or sorrowful, sour or 
sweet, is no longer thine own ai all, but is altogether thy God’s to 
whom thou hast abandoned thyself. Tell me, whose is the spoken 
word ? His who speaks it or his who hears it? Though it fall 
to the hearer ‘it really belongs to the speaker, to him who gives it 

birth. The sun, for example, throws out light into the air and- 

the air receives the light and transmits it to the earth. Now, 
although the light seems in the air, it is really in the sun: the 
light is actually from the sun, originating in the sun, not in the air : 
the air entertains it and passes it on to anything that can be lighted 
up. And so with the soul. God begets in the soul his child, his 
Word, and the soul conceiving it passes it on to her powers in 
varied guise, now as desire, now as good intent, now as charity, now 
as gratitude, or as it may take thee: It is his, not thine at all. 
What is thus wrought by God take thou as his and not thine own, 
as it is written, ‘ The Holy Ghost asketh in us with unutterable 
yearnings.” He prays in us, not we ourselves. St Paul says, 
ee one is able to say, Lord Jesus Christ, except in the Holy 
ost. 

Above all, lay no claim to anything. Let go thyself and let 

“ 

_ SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 19 

God act for thee and in thee as he pleases. This work is his, this 
Word is his, this birth is his and all thou art to boot. For thou 
hast abandoned thyself and art gone out of thy faculties and thy 
personal nature. God installs himself in thy nature and powers 
when, self-bereft of all belongings, thou dost take to the desert, as 
it is written, ‘ A voice crying in the wilderness.’ Let this eternal 
voice cry on in thee at its sweet will and do thou be a desert in: 
respect of self and creatures. 

Maybe thou wilt say: ‘ But, Sir, what must one do to become 
this desert, void of self and creatures? Should one stay waiting 
for God all the time and do nothing oneself or should one do some- 
thing between whiles, such as praying or reading or some good 
occupation like going to church or studying the Bible? Not, of 
course, taking things in from without, but everything from within, 
from one’s God. Besides, is there not something we miss by 
neglecting these things ? ’ 

My answer is this : Outward works were instituted and appointed 
for the purpose of directing the outer man to God and training him 
to ghostly life and virtues lest haply he should stray out of himself 
into ineptitudes: to act as a curb upon his inclination to run 
away from self to things abroad ; so that when God shall choose 
to work in him he shall find him close at hand and not first have to 
fetch him back from things gross and alien. The greater is the 
pleasure in external things the harder work it is to leave them ; 
the stronger the love the sharper the pain when it comes to parting. 

All pious practices—praying, reading, singing, watching, fasting, 
penance, or whatever discipline it be—were contrived to catch and 
keep us from things alien and ungodly. Suppose one feels God’s 
spirit is not working in one, but rather that one’s inner man is God- 
forsaken, that is the proper moment for the outward man to exer- 
cise the practical virtues, and particularly such as are most feasible 
and useful to him ; not for his own selfish ends, but that, respect 
for truth preserving him from being led away by what is gross, he 
may stick straitly to God who will not need to seek him far 
afield, but will find him there at hand when he chooses to return 
and carry on his own work in his soul. But given that a man has 
genuine experience of the interior life, then let him boldly drop all 
outward disciplines, even those practices which thou art vowed to 
and from which neither pope nor prelate can release thee. From 
vows made to God no man can excuse thee: such vows are a bond 
between thyself and God. But supposing one has taken solemn 
vows of fasting, say, or prayer or pilgrimage, then on entering some 
order, one is‘released from them forthwith : in the order, obligation 
is to goodness as a whole, to God himself. 

And so I say here. Whatever one’s vows to manifold things, 

20 MEISTER ECKHART 

initiation into the real interior life releases from them. While 
the interior experience lasts, maybe a week, a month, a year, no 
hours are neglected by the monk or nun, for God who occupies - 
them will also answer for them. On returning to himself the 
religious shall perform his vows for the time present, but the 
time elapsed and lost, as thou dost think, ’tis no business of thine 
to make good. God makes good any time he takes up. Think 
not to make it good by any act of creature, for the smallest act of 
God outweighs all the work of creatures put together. I am speak- 
ing here of clerks and those enlightened souls who are illumined by 
God and by the scriptures. But what about the poor profane who, 
ignorant of corporal discipline, has assumed some vow or other, 
praying or the like? My view is this. If he finds it hampering 
and that he draws much nigher God and much more easily without 
it, let him boldly give it up, for whatever brings nearest to God is 
the best. Paul implied this when he said: ‘ But when that which 
is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away.’ Vows 
taken before priests, vows of marriage, for example, are very 
different from these other obligations which amount to solemn 
promises of oneself to God. Vows taken with the laudable 
intention of binding oneself to God are for the moment the best 
way. But supposing that we find a better way, a way we feel 
and know to be much better, then the first may be deemed null 
and void. 

IV 
THE ETERNAL BIRTH 

Et cum factus esset Jesus annorum duodecim etc. (Luc. 24). 
We read in the gospel that when our Lord was twelve years old he 
went with Joseph and Mary to Jerusalem into the temple; and 
when they went out, Jesus remained behind in the temple without 
their knowing it. And when they reached home and missed him, 
they sought him among acquaintances and among strangers, 
among their kindred, and among the multitude, and found him not ; 
they had lost him in the crowd. So there was nothing for it but 
to return whence they were come; and when they got back to 
their starting-point, into the temple, there they found him. 

If thou wilt find this noble birth, verily thou must quit the 
multitude and return to the starting-point, into the ground out of 
which thou art come. The powers of the soul and their works, 
these are the multitude : memory, understanding and will; these 
all diversify thee, therefore thou must leave them all: sensible 
perception, imagination and everything wherein thou findest 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 21 

thyself and hast thyself in view. Thereafter thou mayest find 
this birth, but, believe me, not otherwise. He has never been 
found among friends, nor among kindred nor acquaintances, 
there rather does one lose him altogether. 

Now the question arises, whether this birth is to be found in 
anything which, albeit relating to God, is nevertheless taken in 
from without through the senses, in any presentment of God as 
good, wise, or compassionate, or whatever intellect can conceive of 
divinity : whether this birth is to be found in any such-like things ? 
In truth, no! for, although good and godlike, they are neverthe- 
less introduced from without through the senses; all must well 
up from within, out of God, if this birth is to shine with a really 
clear light, and thy own work must lie over, every faculty serving 
his ends not thine own. If this work is to be done, God alone must 
do it, and thou must undergo it. Where from thy willing and 
knowing thou truly goest out, God with his knowing surely and 
willingly goes in and shines there clearly. Where God thus knows 
himself thy knowledge is of no avail and cannot stand. Do not 
fondly imagine that thy reason can grow to the knowledge of God ; 
that God shall shine in thee divinely no natural light can help to 
bring about ; it must be utterly extinguished and go out of itself 
altogether, then God can shine in with his light bringing back with 
him everything thou wentest out of and a thousandfold more, 
besides the new form containing it all. 

Of this we have an allegory in the gospel. When our Lord had 
talked so friendly with the Gentile woman at the well, she left her 
pitcher there, and running to the town announced to her people 
that the true Messiah was come. The people, not believing her 
report, went out with her to see him for themselves. Then said 
they unto her, ‘ Now we believe, not because of thy words, but 
because we have seen him in person.’ Verily, neither by any 
creaturely science nor by thine own wisdom canst thou be brought 
to know God divinely. To know God God-fashion, thy knowledge 
must change into downright unknowing, to a forgetting of thyself 
and every creature. 

Now haply thou wilt say: ‘ Prithee, Sir, what is the use of my 
intellect if it has to be inert and altogether idle? Is it my best 
plan to raise my mind to the unknowing knowing which obviously 
cannot be anything? For if I knew anything it would not’ be 
ignorance, nor should I be idle and destitute. Must I remain in 
total darkness ? ’ 

—Aye, surely! Thou canst do no better than take up thy abode 
in total darkness and ignorance. 

—‘ Alas, Sir! must everything go then, and is there no return ?’ 

—No, truly! By rights there is no return. 

22 MEISTER ECKHART 

—‘ But what is this darkness ? What does it mean, what is 
its name ?’ 

—It can only be called a potential receptivity, which, however, . 
is not altogether wanting in nor indigent of (real) being: the 
merely potential conception wherein thou shalt be perfected. 
Hence there is no return from it. An thou returnest it is not 
because of any truth; it is either the senses, the world or the 
devil. And persisting in this turning back, thou dost inevitably 
lapse into sin and art liable to backslide so far as to have the eternal 
fall. Wherefore there is no turning back, only a pressing forward and 
following up this possibility to-its fulfilment. It never rests until 
fulfilled with all being. As matter never rests until fulfilled with 
. every possible form, so intellect never rests till it is filled to the full 
of its capacity. ! 

Concerning this a heathen master says: ‘ Nature has nothing 
swifter than the heavens which surpass all else in swiftness.’ But 
surely the mind of man outstrips them. Given that it retains its 
vigour and stays undemeaned and undismembered by what is base 
and gross, it can outstrip high heaven nor slacken till the summit, 
where it is fed and cherished by the Arch-Good, by God himself. 

How profitable then to ensue this possibility, for by keeping 
thyself empty and bare, merely tracking and following and giving 
up thyself to this darkness and ignorance without turning back, 
thou mayest well win that which is all things. And the more thou 
art barren of thyself and ignorant of things the nearer thou art 
thereto. Of this barrenness it is written in Hosea: ‘I will lead 
my friend into the desert and will speak to her in her heart.’ 
_ The genuine Word of eternity is spoken only in eternity, where man 
is a desert and alien to himself and multiplicity. For this desolate 
self-estrangement the prophet longed, saying: ‘Who will give 
me the wings of a dove that I may fly away and be at rest!’ 
Where shall I find peace and rest? Verily in rejection, in desola- 
tion and estrangement from all creatures. Wherefore David 
says: ‘I had rather be an abject in the house of my God than 
have honour and riches in the tabernacles of sinners.’ 

Now haply thou wilt say : ‘ Alas, Sir, after all, is it necessary to 
be barren and estranged from everything, outward and inward : 
the powers and their works, must all go? It is a grievous matter. 
for a man thus to be left by God without support ; for God to thus 
augment his misery, neither enlightening nor encouraging nor 
working in him, for that is what your teaching means. For a 
person in such downright nothingness would it not be better to be 
doing something to beguile the gloom and desolation ; to pray or 
read or go to church or else make shift by working at some useful 
occupation ? ’ 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 23 

No, be sure of this: absolute stillness, absolute idleness is best 
of all. Know that thou canst not without harm exchange this 
state for any other whatsoever. Fain wouldst thou partly fit 
thyself and let God partly fit thee, but that cannot be. Art never 
so quick to think of this fitness and desire it, God forestalls thee 
always. But granting, what is impossible, that it is shared: 
that the preparation for this working or infusion is jointly his and 
thine, know then, that God is bound to act, to pour himself out 
(into thee) as soon as ever he shall find thee ready. Think not it is 
with God as with a human carpenter, who works or works not as 
he chooses, who can do or leave undone at his good pleasure. It 
is not thus with God ; but finding thee ready he is obliged to act, to 
overflow into thee ; just as the sun must needs burst forth when 
the air is bright and clear, and is unable to contain itself. Forsooth, 
it were a very grave defect in God if, finding thee so empty and so 
bare, he wrought no excellent work in thee nor primed thee with 
glorious gifts. 

In the same sense philosophers declare that the instant the 
child-stuff is ready in the mother’s womb, God pours into the body 
its living spirit, that is, the soul the form of the body. It is one 
flash, the being-ready and the pouring-in. Nature reaching her 
summit, God dispenses his grace: the instant the spirit is ready 
God enters without hesitation or delay. In the book of Mystery 
it is written that our Lord offers himself to men: ‘ Behold I 
stand at the door and knock, waiting for someone to let me in, 
with him will I sup.’ Thou needst not seek him here or there, 
_ he is no further off than at the door of thy heart ; there he stands 
lingering, awaiting whoever is ready to open and let himin. Thou 
needst not call to him afar, he waits much more impatiently than 
thou for thee to open to him. He longs for thee a thousandfold 
more urgently than thou for him: one point the opening and the 
entering. x 

Thou wilt say, perhaps: ‘How can that be? I have no inkling 
. of him.’— Know, that to find him is not in thy power but in his. 
He discovers himself when he chooses and he hides himself too 
when he will. This is what Christ meant when he said to 
Nicodemus, ‘ The spirit breatheth where he will; thou hearest 
his voice, but knowest not whence he cometh nor whither he goeth.’ 
This is a contradiction: ‘ Thou hearest but knowest not.’ By 
hearing we know. Christ meant that through hearing it is imbibed 
or absorbed ; as though to say: thou receivest it but unawares. 
For know, God cannot leave anything void and unfilled; that 
aught should be empty or void is not to be endured by nature’s 
God. Anthou seemest, therefore, not to find him and to be wholly 
empty of him, yet that is not the case. For were there any 

24 . MEISTER ECKHART 

emptiness under heaven, whatever it might be, or great or small, 
the heavens must either draw it up to them or, bending down- 
wards, fill it with themselves. God, nature’s lord, on no account ~ 
permits of anything remaining empty. Wherefore stand still 
and waver not, lest turning away from God now for the moment 
thou never turn back to him again. 

Peradventure thou wilt say: ‘ Well, Sir, since you are always 
assuming that some day this birth will happen in me, that the Son 
will be born in me, can I have any sign whereby to recognise that 
it has taken place ?’ 

Yes, surely! There would be three signs. I will tell you one of 
them. I am often asked whether it is possible to reach the point 
of not being hindered by anything in time, either by multiplicity 
or matter? Indeeditis! Ifthis birth really happens no creature 
can hinder thee, all point thee to God and this birth. We find 
in lightning an analogy for this. Whatever it strikes, whether tree, 
beast or man, it turns towards itself with the shock. A man with 
his back to it instantly flings round to face it; all the thousand 
leaves of the tree turn over to front the stroke. So with all 
whom this birth befalls, they are promptly turned towards this 
birth with everything present, be it never so earthly. Nay, even 
what was formerly a hindrance is now nothing but a help. Thy 
face is turned so full towards this birth, no matter what thou dost 
see and hear, thou receivest nothing save this birth in anything. 
All things are simply God to thee who seest only God in all things. 
Like one who looks long at the sun, he encounters the sun in 
whatever he afterwards looks at. If this is lacking, this looking for 
and seeing God in all and sundry, then thou lackest this birth. 

Thou mayest question: ‘Ought anyone so placed to practise 
penance? Does he lose anything by dropping penitential © 
exercises ? ’ J 

Penitential practices, among other things, were instituted for a 
special object. Fasting, watching, praying, kneeling, scourging, 
wearing of hair shirts, hard lying or whatever it may be, were all 
invented because body and flesh stand ever opposed to spirit. 
The body being far too strong for it, there is always battle joined 
between them, a never-ending conflict. Here the body is bold and 
strong for here it is at home; the world helps it, the earth is its 
fatherland, it is helped by all its kindred: food, drink, ease—all 
are opposed to spirit. The spirit is an alien here, in heaven are its 
kindred, its whole race ; there dwell its loved ones: To succour 
the spirit in its distress and to impede the flesh somewhat in 
this strife lest it conquer the spirit, we put upon it the bridle of 
penitential practices to curb it, so that the spirit can control it. 
This is done to bring it to subjection; but to conquer and curb it 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 25 

a thousand times better, put thou upon it the bridle oflove. With 
love thou overcomest it most surely, with love thou loadest it most 
heavily. God lies in wait for us therefore with nothing so much as 
' with love. For love is like the fisherman’s hook. To the fisher- 
man falls no fish that is not caught on his hook. Once it takes the 
hook the fish is forfeit to the fisherman ; in vain it twists hither 
and thither, the fisherman is certain of his catch. And so I say 
of love: he who is caught thereby has the strongest of all bonds 
and yet a pleasant burden. He who bears this sweet burden 
fares further, gets nearer therewith than by using any harshness 
possible to man. Moreover, he can cheerfully put up with 
whatever befalls, cheerfully suffer what God inflicts. Naught 
makes thee so much God nor God so much thine own as this 
sweet bond. He who has found this way will seek no other. He 
who hangs on this hook is so fast caught that foot and hand, 
mouth, eyes and heart and all that is man’s is bound to be God’s. 

So then thou canst not, better than by love, prevail over thy 
foe and stop him doing thee a mischief. Wherefore it is written : 
“Love is strong as death and hard as hell.’ Death separates 
soul from body, but love separates all things from the soul; she 
will not tolerate at any cost what is not God nor God’s. Who is 
caught in this net, who walks in this way, whatsoever he works is 
wrought by love, whose alone the work is: busy or idle it matters 
nothing. Such an one’s most trivial action is more profitable, 
his meanest occupation is more fruitful to himself and other people 
and to God is better pleasing than the cumulative works of other 
men, who, though free from mortal sin, are yet inferior to him in 
love. He rests more usefully than others labour. 

Await thou therefore this hook, so thou be happily caught, and 
the more surely caught so much the more surely freed. 

That we may be thus caught and freed, help us O thou who art 
love itself. Amen. 

V 
DEUS CHARITAS EST 

Deus charitas est et qui manet in charitate in deo manet et deus in 
eo (1 Joh. 4,,). ‘God is love, and he who dwells in love dwells in 
God and God in him.’ This is the epistle we read at Mass, and 
it is St John speaking. ' 

Take the opening words: ‘God is love.’ That is so, inasmuch 
as all that can love, all that does love, he compels by his love to 
love him. God is love, secondly, inasmuch as every God-created 
and loving thing compels him by its love to love it, willy-nilly. 

26 MEISTER ECKHART 

God is love, thirdly, inasmuch as his love drives all his lovers out 
of multiplicity. The love of God in multiplicity pursues the love 
which is himself right out of multiplicity into his very unity. © 
God is love, fourthly, who by his love provides all creatures with 
their life and being, preserving them in his love. The colour of 
the cloth is preserved in the cloth : even so creatures are preserved 
in existence by love, that is, God. Take the colour from cloth, 
its subsistence is gone: so do creatures all lose their subsistence if 
taken from love, to wit, God. God is love, and so lovely is he that 
lovers all love him, willy-nilly. No creature is so vile as to love 
what is bad. What we love must be good or must seem to be good. 
But creaturely good, all told, is rank evil as compared with God. 
St Augustine says, ‘ Love, that in meditating love thou mayst 
provide the wherewithal to satisfy thy soul.’ God is love. 

My children, mark me, I pray you. Know! God loves my soul 
so much that his very life and being depend upon his loving me, 
whether he would or no. To stop God loving me would be to 
rob him of his Godhood; for God is love no less than he is truth; 
as he is good, so is he love as well. It is the absolute truth, as God 
lives. There were certain theologians who maintained that the 
love which is within us is the Holy Ghost, but this is false. For 
the bodily food we take is changed into us, but the spiritual food 
we receive changes us into itself, hence love divine is not preserved 
in us, otherwise there would be two. Divine love preserves us 
in itself as one in the same. 

’* God is love, and he who dwells in love dwells in God and God 
in him.’ There is a difference between ghostly things and bodily 
things. One ghostly thing dwells in another; but nothing 
bodily dwells in another. There may be water in a tub, with 
the tub round it. But where the wood is the water is not. In 
this sense no material thing dwells in another. But spiritual 
things dwell in each other : each several angel with all his joy and 
happiness is in every other angel as well as in himself, and every 
angel with all his joy and happiness dwells in me, and God to. 
boot with his entire beatitude, though I discern it not. 

If anyone should ask me what God is, I should answer: God is 
love, and so altogether lovely that creatures all with one accord 
essay to love his loveliness, whether they do so knowingly or 
unbeknownst, in joy or sorrow. Instance the lowest angel in 
his pure nature: the smallest spark or love-light that ever fell 
from him would light up the whole world with love and joy. See 
his innate perfection! Moreover, as I have explained at various 
times, the angels are numerous beyond number.—But to leave love 
and come to knowledge. If only we knew God it would be easy 
to forsake the world. All that God ever made or shall yet make, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 27 

all this (I say), if God should give it to my soul without himself, 
he staying, so to speak, a hair’s-breadth off, would not content 
my soul nor make me happy. Iam happy when all things are in 
me and God, and where Iam God is, and where God is I am. 

He who dwells in love dwells in God and God in him.’ Suppose 
I am in God, then where he is I am; and if God is in me, then, 
unless the scriptures lie, where I am God is. It is the absolute 
truth, as God is God. 

£ F aithful servant, I will set thee over all my goods,’ i.e. the 
manifold goodness of God in creatures will I set thee over. 
Secondly, ‘I will set thee over all my goods’ means: at the 
source of creature happiness, in the pure unity of God himself 
wherein he has his own felicity. In other words: God being 
the good, in that sense will he set us above his manifold goodness. 
Thirdly, he will set us over all his goods, means : above all name- 
‚ables, all effables, all so-called good things and all intelligibles. 
Thus he sets us over all his goods. \ 

“ Father, I pray thee, make them one as I and thou are one.’ 
Where two grow one, one loses its nature. Ergo, tor God and the 
soul to be one the soul has to lose her own life and nature. They 
are one as regards what is left. But for them to be one, one must 
lose its identity and the other must keep its identity. Then they 
are the same. Now, the Holy Ghost says: ‘I pray thee, let 
them be one as we are one. I pray thee, make them the same 
in us.’ 

When I pray for aught my prayer goes for naught; when I 
pray for naught I pray as I ought. When I am one with that 
wherein are all things, past, present and to come, all the same 
' distance and all just the same, then they are all in God and all 
inme. There is no thought of Henry or of Conrad. Praying for 
aught save God alone is idolatry and unrighteousness. They 
pray aright who pray in spirit and in truth. When praying 
for someone, for Henry or Conrad, I pray at my weakest. When 
praying for no one I pray at my strongest, and when I want 
nothing and make no request I am praying my best, for in God is 
no Henry nor no Conrad. To pray to God for aught save God 
is wrong and faithless, and, as it were, an imperfection. For to 
set up something beside God is, as I lately said, but to make 
naught of God and God of naught. Whoso is far and foreign to 
himself as the chief angel of the Seraphim is far from him, that 
man owns that same angel just as God does and is God, and that’s 
the naked truth, as God is God. ‘God is love, and he that is in 
love is in God and God in him.’ 

May all of us attain this love whereof I speak. So help us 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 

28 MEISTER ECKHART 

VI 
JESUS WENT INTO THE TEMPLE 

Intravit Jesus in templum dei et ejiciebat omnes vendentes et 
ementes etc. (Matt. 21,). We read in the gospel that our Lord 
went into the temple and cast out all them that sold and bought 
and said to them that sold doves: ‘ Take these things hence!’ 
It was his purpose to have the temple cleared, as though he said : 
This temple is by rights mine own and I want it to myself to be 
lord therein. This temple that God means to rule in is man’s soul 
which he has made exactly like himself, as saith the Lord, * We 
will make man in our image and likeness.’ Which he did. So 
like himself God made man’s soul that nothing else in earth or 
heaven resembles God so closely as the human soul. God wants 
this temple cleared of everything but himself. This is because 
this temple is so agreeable to him and he is so comfortable in this 
temple when he is there alone. 

Now consider who they were that sold and bought therein and 
who they are still. Mark me well: I name none but the virtuous. 
Yet, even so, I can point out who the merchants were, and still are 
to this day, that thus buy and sell: those whom our Lord drove 
forth and cast out. He still does so to those that buy and sell 
in this temple: he would not leave a single one therein. Lo, 
they are merchants all who, while avoiding mortal sin and wishing 
to be virtuous, do good works to the glory of God, fasts, for example, 
vigils, prayers, etc., all of them excellent, but do them with a view 
to God’s giving them somewhat, doing to them somewhat, they 
wish for in return. All such are merchants. This is plain to see, 
for they reckon on giving one thing for another and so to barter 
with our Lord, though they are mistook as to the bargain. For 
all they have and have the power to do, they have from God and 
do effect by means of God alone. God has no call to do to them 
or give to them anything unless he choose to. For what they are 
they are from God and what they have they get from God, not from 
themselves. God is in no wise bounden to requite their acts or 
gifts, except he care to do so of his own free will, apart from what 
they do or give; for they give not of their own nor do they act of 
their own selves, as God says, ‘ Without me ye can do nothing.’ 
They be sorry fools who bargain with our Lord like this; they 
know little or nothing of the truth. God cast them out of the 
temple and drove them forth. For light and darkness cannot 
dwell together. God is the truth, he is the light itself. When 
God enters the temple he drives out ignorance and darkness, 
revealing himself in the light of truth. Merchants go when the 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 29 

truth appears, for the truth needs no merchanting. God seeks 
not his own, he is perfectly free in all his acts, which he does in 
true love. So does the man who is at one with God: he is 
perfectly free in all his deeds; he does them out of love and 
without why, just to glorify God, not seeking his own therein, God 
energising in him. 

Moreover I maintain: as long as we work at all for gain, while 
we desire aught God may have given or may give, we rank with 
these merchants. Wouldst thou be free from any taint of trade ? 
then do what good thou canst and do it solely to God’s glory, as 
exempt from it thyself as#though thou wert not. Ask nothing 
whatever in return. So done thy works are ghostly and godly ; 
the merchants are driven from the temple and God is there alone 
when one has no intention but God. Behold thy temple cleared of 
merchants. The man who is intent on God alone and on God’s 
glory, verily he is free from any taint of commerce in his deeds, 
nor is he in any wise self-seeking. 

I have related further how Jesus said to them that sold doves : 
‘Take these things hence!’ These people he did not drive forth 
nor rebuked them harshly: he said quite mildly: ‘ Take these 
things away!’ Asthough to say, it is not wrong albeit a hindrance 
to the pure and simple truth. These are virtuous folk, working 
for God impersonally though subject to personal limitations, to 
time and number, to before and after. Their activities keep them 
from the highest truth, from being absolutely free like our Lord 
Jesus Christ who is receiving himself afresh incessantly and 
a-temporally from his heavenly Father and in that same now is 
borne back again unceasingly with praise and thanksgiving into 
the Father, perfect, vieing with him in his majesty. Even so, to. 
be receptive to the sovran truth, a man must be without before 
and after, without the hindrance of any acts or images that are 
within his ken, but freely receiving the divine gift in the perennial 
now and bearing it back unhindered in the light of the same with 
praise and thanksgiving in our Lord Jesus Christ. Then the 
doves are gone, to wit, the obstacle of ownership in actions, good 
in themselves, wherein one has any self-interest at all. ‘Take 
these things hence!’ said our Lord, as though to say, they are 
blameless but they are in the way. 

When the temple is free from obstructions (possessions and 
strangers to wit), it looks right beautiful, shining out bright and 
clear above everything God has created and through everything 
God has created, so that none can compare with it but the uncreated 
God alone. In very truth, there is none like this temple but the 
uncreated God himself. Nothing below the angels is the least 
like this temple. The very highest angels are the same as this 

30 MEISTER ECKHART 

temple of the human soul in many ways, but not entirely. This 
partial likeness with the soul they have in love and knowledge. 
But there is a limit set them which they cannot pass. The soul 
goes on beyond. Suppose the soul to be identical with the highest 
human being here in time, natheless that man has the potential 
freedom to soar to untold heights above the angels in the now of 
each, new without number, that is, without mode: above the 
angelic mode and every created intelligence. God who alone is 
uncreated is her sole peer in freedom, though not in uncreated- 
ness, for the soul is created. Emerging into the unclouded 
light she in her naught leaps so far into his naught that she is 
helpless to regain the state of her created aught. God with his 
uncreatedness supports her nothing-at-all, preserving the soul in 
his all-in-all. The soul has dared to come to naught and, failing 
by herself to reach herself, she swoons away ere God comes to her 
rescue. It must needs be so. 

Jesus, as I said, went into the temple and cast out them that 
bought and sold and he began to command the rest, ‘ Take these 
things hence!’ The words I have here read, ‘ Jesus went in 
and began to say, “ Take these things hence!”’ Observe, there 
was no one there but Jesus when he began to speak in the temple 
of the soul. Be sure of this : while anyone else is speaking in the 
temple (i.e. the soul) but Jesus, Jesus is silent, as though he were 
away, nor is he at home in the soul while she has strange guests 
to talk to. For Jesus to speak in the soul she must be all alone, 
and she has to be quiet to hear what he says. Well then, he comes 
in and starts speaking. What is it he says ? He says what he is. 
What is he, then? He is the Word of the Father. In this same 
Word the Father speaks himself, all his divine nature, all that God 
is, just as he knows it, and he knows it as it is, for he is perfect 
in knowledge and power. It follows that he is perfect in speech 
too. In pronouncing the Word he utters himself and all things in 
another Person to whom he gives the nature that he has himself, 
and speaks all intelligences in echo of the actual Word, accord- 
ing to the indwelling image ; like the sun-rays shining forth, so 
each (intelligence) is a word in itself, not the same in all respects 
as the Word, but: they have the power to receive by grace the 
same nature -as the actual Word, and this Word as it is in 
itself the Father spoke entire by the Word and everything in 
that Word. 

If this is what the Father said, then what is Jesus saying in the 
soul? As I have told: the Father speaks his Word ; he speaks 
in this Word and no otherwhere, and Jesus speaks in the soul. 
His manner of speaking is to reveal himself and what the Father 
said in him, so far as the soul is able to receive it. He reveals the 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 31 

Father in the soul in infinite power. Experiencing this power in 
the Son the soul waxes powerful in like emanation till she is the ‘ 
same in might and virtue and every perfection, so that neither joy 
nor sorrow nor aught that God has made in time avails to destroy 
that soul, she standing staunch as it were in this divine power 
against which all else is insignificant and futile. 

Secondly : Jesus reveals himself in the soul in infinite wisdom, 
himself to wit, the wisdom wherein the Father knows himself in 
full paternal power. The very Word, which is wisdom itself, and - 
all that is therein, is, at the same time, one alone. When wisdom 
is in union with the soul, doubt, error and illusion are entirely 
removed, she is set in the bright pure light of God himself, as saith 
the prophet, ‘ Lord in thy light shall we see light.” Then God is 
_known by God in the soul; she discerns with his wisdom both 
herself and all things. She knows not this same wisdom with 
herself, but with this widsom she discerns the Father fruitful 
in travail and his real being in impartible oneness void of 
all distinctions. 

Jesus manifests himself further in infinite suavity and fullness 
in all receptive hearts. When Jesus reveals himself in this 
plenitude of sweetness, uniting with the soul, then on this amiable 
tide the soul floats into herself and out of herself and beyond the 
+ things of grace, back in unmitigated power into her first source. 
Thus the outward man is obedient, even unto death, to the inner 
man now established in peace in the service of God for ever. 

May Jesus enter into us and clear out and cast away all hindrances 
of soul and body to the end that we are one with him here upon 
earth and there in heaven. So help us God. Amen. 

VII 
THE SONS OF GOD 

Videte, qualem charitatem dedit nobis pater, ut filii dei nominemur 
et simus (1 Joh. 3,). . It must be understood that this is all the 
same thing : knowing God and being known by God, and seeing 
God and being seen by God. We know God and see him because 
he makes us know and see. Even as the luminous air is not . 
distinguishable from its luminant, for it is luminous with what 
illumines it, so do we know by being known, by his making us 
conscious. Christ said, ‘ Again ye shall see me.’ That is to say: 
by making you see I make you see me, whereat ‘ your heart shall 
rejoice,’ rejoice in the vision and knowledge of God, and ‘ your 
joy no man taketh from you.’ 

32 MEISTER ECKHART 

St John says : * Behold what manner of charity the Father hath 
bestowed upon us that we should be called and should be the sons 

of God.’ He says not only ‘should be called’ but ‘should be.’ 

Now I maintain that we can no more be wise without wisdom 
than Son without the filial nature of God’s Son : without having 
the very same nature as the Son of God himself. Wouldst thou 
be the Son of God? Thou canst not, without having the same 
nature as the Son of God. But this is hidden from us here, as it 
is written, ‘ Beloved, now we are God’s sons (and it doth not yet 
‘appear what we shall be), but we know that he is our exemplar 
and we shall be like him.’ That is, the same as he is: same life 
and enjoyment and understanding, exactly the same as he is, 
when we see him as God. I say, God cannot make me the Son of 
God without I have the nature of God’s Son, any more than God 
can make me wise without my having wisdom. Though we are 
God’s sons, we do not realize it yet: ‘it doth not yet appear ’ to 
us, but this much we do know, he says, ‘ we shall be like him.’ 
Sundry things in our souls overlay this knowledge and conceal it 
from us. + 

The soul has something in her, a spark of intellect, that never 
dies ; and in this spark, as at the apex of the mind, we place the 
paradigm of the soul ; and there is also in our souls knowledge of 
externals, sensible and rational perception, present there as images 
and words which obscure it from us. How are we God’s sons ? 
By having one nature with him. But any realization of this, of 
being God’s sons, is subjective not objective knowledge. The 
inner consciousness strikes down to the very essence of the soul. 
Not that it is the soul itself, but it is rooted there and is in a measure 
the life of the soul, her intellectual life, the life, that is, wherein 
a man is born God’s Son, born into the eternal life, for this know- 
ledge is a-temporal, unextended, without here and without now. 
In this life all things are the same thing and all things common ; 
all things are all in all and all atoned. 

I will give you an illustration. In the body the members are 
united so that eye belongs to foot and foot to eye. Could the 
foot speak, it would declare that the eye seems rather in the foot 
than in the head, and the eye would say the same the other way 
about. Accordingly, I trow that the grace which is in Mary is 
really more an angel’s and is more in him (yet being in Mary) than 
if it were in him or in the saints. For everything that Mary has 
belongs to every saint, so the grace in Mary is his own and he enjoys 
it more than if it really were in him. 

But such a simile is too gross and carnal, depending as it does on 

a 

bodily imagery. I will give you another, therefére, more subtle, ‘ 

less material. I assert that in heaven all is in all and all one 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 33 

and all ours. The grace our Lady has exists in me (when I am 
yonder), not as welling up in and flowing out of Mary, but as in me 
as my own and not of foreign origin. I contend that there what 
one has another has, not as from another nor as in another, but 
in its own self, so that the grace in one is simultaneously in another 
as his own grace. Thus spirit is in spirit. And that is why I say 
I cannot be the son of God unless I have the very nature the Son 
of God has there; and that having this same nature makes us 
the same as he is, we seeing him as God. ‘But it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be.’ Meaning, I take it, that there is then 
no like nor different, but: wholly without distinction we are the 
same in essence and in substance and in nature as he is himself. 
This is not apparent now: it will be obvious when we see him 
as God. 

God makes us to know him, and his knowing is his being, and 
his making me know is the same as my knowing, so his knowing 
is mine: just as, in the master, what he teaches is the same as, 
in the pupil, the thing that he is taught. And because his knowing 
is mine, and his knowing is his substance and his nature and his 
essence, it follows that his substance and his nature and his essence 
are mine. And his substance, his nature and his essence being 
mine, therefore I am the Son of God. Behold, brethren, what 
manner of love God hath bestowed upon us that we should be called 
and should be the Son of God ! 

Mark whereby we are sons of God : by having the same nature 
as the Son of God.—How can one be the Son of God, or know it, 
seeing that God is not like anybody ?—True, Isaias says, ‘ To 
whom will ye liken God or what likeness will ye compare unto him ?’ 
Since it is God’s nature to be not like anyone, we must needs not 

* be so to be the same as he is. When I contrive to see myself in 
- naught and to see naught in me ; when I succeed in rooting up and 
casting out everything in me, then I am free to pass into the 
naked being of the soul. Likes must be ousted ere I can be trans- 
planted into God and be the same as he is: same substance, same 
essence, same nature and the Son of God. Once this happens, there 
‚is nothing hid in God that is not revealed, that is not mine. I am 
_ wise and mighty just as he is, and one and the same with him. 
Then Sion is a true beholder, true Israel, a seer: God, since nothing: 
in the Godhead is concealed from him. Man is turned into God. 
But that nothing may be concealed from me, everything revealed, 
there must appear in me no like, no image, for no image can show 
us God’s nature nor his essence. While there abideth in thee any 
image or like thou art never the same as God. To be the same as 
"God there must be nothing in thee, latent or defined, nothing 
covered in thee that is not discovered and cast out. 2 

34 MEISTER ECKHART 

Mark what sin is. It is born of negation. Negation’s brood 
must be exterminated in the soul; while there is not in thee thou 
art not the Son of God. We weep and lament for want of some- 
thing. The minus quantity must go, be cancelled out, if man is 
to become the Son of God and weep and wail no more. Manisnot 
wood nor stone: imperfection and naught. We shall not be like 
him until this minus is made good and we are all in all as God is 
all in all. 

There are two births of man: one in the world, the other one 
out of the world and ghostly, in God. Wouldst know if thy child 
is born and if he is naked ? Whether, that is to say, thou hast 
been made God’s Son? If thy heart is heavy, except for sin, 
thy child is not born. In thine anguish thou art not yet mother: 
thou art in labour and thine hour is nigh. Doubt not, if thou art 
travailing for thyself or for thy friend no birth has taken place 
though birth be close at hand. The birth is not over till thy heart 
is free from care: then man has the essence and nature and 
substance and wisdom and joy and all that God has.. Then the 
very being of the Son of God is ours and in us and we attain to 
actual Deity. 

Christ says: ‘If any will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me.’ That is: cast away care 
and let perpetual joy reign in your heart. Thus the child is born. 
And when the child is born in me, the sight of friends, of father, 
dead there before my eyes will leave my heart untouched. Were 
my heart moved thereby the child would not be born in me, 
though peradventure its nativity is nigh. I maintain that God 
and his angels take such keen delight in every act a good man does, 
that there is no joy like it. And accordingly, I say, the birth of 
this child in thee brings thee most keen delight in all good deeds 
done in this world, thy joy being so continuous as to be never- 
ending. Hence the words: ‘ Your joy no man taketh from you.’ 
When I am transported into God, then God is’mine and all he has. 
‘I am the Lord thy God,’ he says. Then I have real delight 
which neither pain nor sorrow can take from me, for then I am 
installed in God where sorrow has no place. We shall see that in 
God is no anger nor sadness, but only love and joy. Though he seem 
sometimes to be wrathful with sinners it is not really wrath, it is 
his kindness, the effect of his great love: ‘ Whom he loveth he 
chasteneth,’ for he is love, the Holy Ghost. God’s anger springs 
from love; he chides us with dispassion. When nothing is 
grievous or hard, when all is pure joy, then verily thy child is 
born. Strive that this child shall be not nascent merely but be born 
in thee, even as in God his Son is ever being born and is ever 
born. May this betide, So help us God. Amen. _ 

~~ SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 35 

VOII 
THE CASTLE OF THE SOUL 

Intravit Jesus in quoddam castellum et mulier quedam excepit 
illum etc. (Luc. 10,,). I quote first in Latin this text from the 
gospel. The translation reads: ‘Our Lord Jesus Christ went up 
into a certain fastness and was received by a certain virgin who 
was a wife.’ 

Mark the term. Needs must it-be a virgin by whom Jesus is 
received. Virgin is, in other words, a person void of alien images, 
free as he was when he existed not. It may be questioned: 
Man born and launched on rational life, how can he be as free from 
images as he was when he was not, he knowing a variety of things, 
images all of them: how can he possibly be void thereof ? 

I answer that, were I sufficiently intelligent to have within me 
intellectually the sum of all the forms conceived by man and which 
subsist in God himself, I having no property in them and no idea 
of ownership, positive or negative, past or to come, but standing 
in the present now perfectly free in the will of God and doing it 
perpetually : then verily I were a virgin, unhandicapped by forms, 
just as I was when I was not. 

Further, I hold that the fact of being virgin does not deprive a 
man at all of works that he has done: he is untrammelled, virgin- 
free of them in the sovran truth, even as Jesus is absolutely free 
and virgin in himself. According to the masters, likeness, likeness 
only, is the cause of union, so man must be maiden, virgin, to receive 
the virgin Jesus. 

Now lay this fact to heart: the ever virgin is never fruitful. 

To be fruitful the soul must be wife. Spouse is the noblest title _ 

_ of the soul, nobler than virgin. For a man to receive God within 
him is good and in receiving he is virgin. But for God to be 
fruitful in him is still better : the fruits of his gift being gratitude 
therefor, and in this newborn thankfulness the spirit is the spouse 
bearing Jesus back into his Father’s heart. 

Many good gifts received in maidenhood are not brought forth 
in wifely fruitfulness, reborn in praise and thanks to God. Such 
gifts corrupt and come to naught, man being no better and no. 
happier for them. In this case his virginity is useless because to 
his virginity he does not add the perfect fruitfulness of wife. 
That is the mischief. Hence my text, ‘Jesus ascended. to a 
certain fastness and was received by a certain maid who was a 
wife,’ It must be so, as I have said. Dar 

Wedded folks yield little more than one fruit yearly. But it is 
other wedded ones that I have now in mind: those whose hearts 

4 

36 MEISTER ECKHART 

are wedded to praying, fasting, vigils or other outward discipline 
and mortifications of the fiesh. A predilection for this sort of 
thing, involving loss of freedom to wait instantly on God in the. 
here and now, and follow him alone in the light wherein he would 
fain show thee what to do and what to leave undone, moment by 
moment, fresh and clearly, as though thou hadst naught else, nor 
would nor could not: any such proclivity or preoccupation which 
constantly deprives thee of this freedom I call here a year, and thy 
soul yields no fruit till she is done with this work of thy affection 
nor hast thou any trust in God or in thyself till thou hast finished 
with thy predilection ; in other words, thou hast no peace. There 
is no fruit till thy own work is done. I reckon this a year and one 
whose yield is poor; the proceeds of affection not of freedom. 
And these folks I call wedded, yo!ked to their affections. Their 
crop is small and undersized at that, so I say, in God’s sight. 

The virgin wife, free and unbound in her affections is ever as near 
God as to herself. She abounds in fruit and big withal, no more 
nor less than God is himself. This fruit, his birth, does that 
virgin bear who is a wife; daily she yields her hundred and her 
thousandfold, nay, numberless her labours and her fruits in that 
most noble ground, the very ground, to speak more plainly, 
wherein the Father is begetting his eternal Word: there she is 
big with fruit. For Jesus, light and shine of the paternal heart 
(according to St Paul he is the ‘ light and splendour ’ of the Father’s 
heart), this Jesus is atoned with her and she with him, she is 
radiant with him and shining as the one alone, as one pure brilliant 
light in the paternal heart. 

Elsewhere I have declared, there is a power in the soul untouched 
by time and flesh, flowing from the Spirit, remaining in the Spirit, 
altogether spiritual. In this power is God, ever verdant, flowering in 
ail the joy and glory of his actual self. Such dear delight, such incon- 
ceivable deep joy as none can fully tell, for in this power the eternal 
Father is procreating his eternal Son without a pause, the power 
being big with child, the Father’s Son and its own self this self- 
same Son withal, in the unique power of the Father. Suppose 
a man absolute monarch, the sole possessor of all earthly goods ; 
suppose he gave up all for God and was the poorest of the poor ; 

. and that God laid on him to boot a burden big as ever he did lay 
on mortal man, all which he bare down to his death and then God 
granted him one fleeting vision of his being in this power: so 
vehement would be his joy that poverty and suffering would be 
wiped out. Aye, though God gave him never any taste of heaven 
but this, yet would he have the guerdon of his passion, for God 
himself is in this power as in the eternal now. If a man’s spirit 
were always joined to God in this same power, he could not age 

> 

- SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 37 

For the now wherein God made the first man and the now wherein 
the last man disappears and the now I speak in, all are the same in 
God where there is but the now. Behold this man in the same light 
as God having in him no past nor yet to come, only one level of 
eternity. This man in truth has motion taken from him and all 
things stand intrinsic in him. Nothing new comes to him from 
future things nor yet by accident for he dwells in the now, ever new 
and unceasingly renewed. So dominant is God in this same power. 

There is another power, immortal too: proceeding from the 
Spirit, remaining in the Spirit, altogether spiritual. In this power 
God is fiery, aglow with all his riches, with all his sweetness and 
with all his bliss. Aye, in this power is such poignant joy, such 
vehement, immoderate delight as none can tell nor yet in truth 
reveal. I say, moreover, if once a man in intellectual vision 
did really glimpse the bliss and joy therein, then all his sufferings, 
all God intends that he should suffer, would be a trifle, a mere 
nothing to him; nay, I say more, it would be pure joy and 
pleasure. 

Wouldst thou know for certain whether thy sufferings are thine. 
own or God’s? Tell by these tokens. Suffering for thyself, in 
whatever way, the suffering hurts thee and is hard to bear. But 
suffering for God and God alone thy suffering hurts thee not nor 
does it burden thee, for God bears the load. Believe me, if there 
were a man willing to suffer on account of God and of God alone, 
then though he fell a sudden prey to the collective sufferings of 
all the world it would not trouble him nor bow him down, for God 
would be the bearer of his burden. If the burden they put upon 
my neck is ‘forthwith shouldered by another I would as lief a 
hundred pounds as one, for not to me is it heavy and distressful. 
‘In brief: man’s sufferings for God and God alone he makes both 
light and pleasant. 

I prefaced this sermon with the words: ‘Jesus went up into 
a fastness and was received by a virgin who was wife.’ Why? 
She must needs be virgin and wife too. How Jesus was received 
I have explained. I have not told the meaning of this fastness 
and that I will now proceed to do. : 

From time to time I tell of the one power in the soul which alone 
is free. Sometimes I have called it the tabernacle of the soul ; 
sometimes a spiritual light, anon I say it is a spark. But now 
I say : it is neither this nor that. Yet it is somewhat : somewhat 
more exalted over this and that than the heavens are above the 
earth. So now I name it in a nobler fashion than before as regard- 
ing rank and mode which it transcends. It is of all names free, of all 
forms void: exempt and free as God is in himself. It is one and 
simple as God is one and simple, and no man can in any wise 

38 MEISTER ECKHART 

behold it. This same power I am speaking of, herein God 
blooms and thrives in all his Godhood and the spirit in God; in 
this very power the Father bears his only Son no less than. 
in himself, for verily he liveth in this power, the spirit with the 
Father giving birth therein to his very Son, itself this selfsame Son, 
for in this light which is the light of truth, it is the Son himself. 
Could ye see with my heart ye would understand my words, but 
it is true, for truth itself has said it. 

So one and simple is this fastness, frowning above all ways, of 
which I mind me and am telling you, within the soul, that this 
high faculty I speak of is not worthy even of a fleeting glance 
therein; nor’is that other power God glows and burns in, it durst 
not peer in either; so one and indivisible this refuge is, so way- 
and power-transcending this solitary one that never mode nor 
faculty has any insight there, not even God himself. Never 
for an instant, as God lives, does God see into this, nor did he ever 
look in his conditioned nature, in his guise of Person. Note well, 
this one alone is lacking in every mode and quality. It follows that 
for God to see therein would cost him all his divine names and 
personal properties: all these he must forgo to look therein: only 
as one and indivisible, having no jot of mode or quality, not 
Father nor Son nor Holy Ghost as such, can he do this; as some- 
what, yes, but not as this or that. 

As one and impartible behold him entering this one that here 
I call the fastness of the soul, but in no different guise can he get 
in: thus only does he enter and subsist in it. In part the soul is 
the same as God but not altogether.—This that I tell you is true: 
truth is my witness and my soul the pledge. May we be as this 
fastness whereinto on ascending Jesus is received to abide eternally 
as I have said. So help us God. Amen. 

IX 
THE ETERNAL BIRTH! 

To return to the subject of the eternalbirth. There is the ques- 
tion whether the soul brings forth the eternal Word in images 
or imageless? Remember this. When the soul resigns herself to 
God and is atoned with him and God undertakes her work, she is 
receptive merely and leaves God to act. Here the soul is pregnant 
without form or image, for anything conceived in form or image 
trenches upon time and place and is akin to creatures; whence it 
follows that the more the work is of the soul the less it is of God. 

1 See Pfeiffer, Deut. Myst., vol. i, p. 26 

~~ SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 39 

The soul conceives more truly without images than in them, for 
this birth is more by way of Godhood than of selfhood. But we 
may still enquire, in which image does the soul best succeed in 
giving birth to the eternal Word? There are three kinds of 
images. The first the soul takes in from without through the 
senses. The second the soul conjures up from within by thinking 
on the childhood of our Lord or on his martyrdom ; but all images 
so gotten are called divine births in the soul. The third kind of 
images is given to the soul by God direct. It is in these last 
that the soul conceives the best. According to another gloss : 
this happens when the mind engenders, feels and knows the eternal 
_ Word in its proper image as gotten by the Father in himself, 

supposing the soul able to attain thereto; or, intellect failing her 
for this, when, faring forth in faith and love, he reaches out to 
this same image: for in this final image the eternal Word is born 
most perfectly of all. 

Another question is, whether the birth of the eternal Word is 
fleeting or essential ? Now you must understand that it is this 
birth which unifies the soul, and in this respect it is intrinsic and 
passes not away unless a man should fall into mortal sin. But as 
happening in the sensible perceptions and in the discursive mind 
this birth is fugitive. 

Further, it is asked, in what particular place does the soul bring 
forth or seek the eternal Word? Mark. It is in the Father as the 
intellectual image of his divine essence and is the reflection of his 
divine nature, so that it embodies both his essence and his nature. 
It is with the Father as the filial Person. It is in the Holy Ghost 
as the exuberance of their eternal satisfaction. It is in the soul 
as the likeness of God’s equal forms (or Persons). It is in all 
creatures as the preserver of their being. It is here the soul 
must seek the eternal Word, here in these places, and Christ says : 
‘Seek and ye shall find.’ May we so seek as to find eternally. 
So help us almighty God. I will say no more at this collation. 
Pray God to fit me for this blessed moment. Amen. 

x 

MAN HAS TO SEEK GOD IN ERROR AND 
FORGETFULNESS ! 

Man has to seek God in error and forgetfulness and foolishness. 
For deity has in it the power of all things and no thing has the like. 
The sovran light of the impartible essence illumines all things. 

1 Jostes, No. 3. 

40 £6 MEISTER ECKHART 

St Dionysius says that beauty is good order with pre-eminent 
lucidity. Thus God is an arrangement of three Persons. And the 
soul’s lower powers should be ordered to her higher and her higher 
ones to God; her outward senses to her inward and her inward 
ones to reason; thought to intuition and intuition to the will 
and all to unity, so that the soul may be alone with nothing flowing 
into her but sheer divinity, flowing here into itself. As St Dionysius 
says, By purity she has discovered her capacity and only her 
superior powers are in operation. 

It has been said by one philosopher that as soon as the chief 
power takes command the others all run into it, leaving their own 
work. Then the soul is in order and in her pure nature, 7.e. in her 
supernal light-nature wherein all things are potential. A heathen 
doctor says, If the soul knew herself she would know all things. 
Deity flowed into the Father and into the Son and into the Holy 
Ghost: in eternity into itself and in time into creatures, to each 
as much as it can hold: to the stone its being, to the tree its 
growth, to beasts sensation, to the angels reason and to mankind 
all these four natures. When God was made man he took upon 
himself by grace, in time, the nature of all things, which in eternity 
was his by nature. As St Paul says, ‘ To me Christ is all things.’ 
Here it was a matter of the light and reflection of his own nature. 
God’s being is fontal: flowing and fixed, final as well as the first. 
From being power flows out into work. In this sense the three 
Persons are the storehouse of divinity and the three Persons are 
poured forth into the essence of the soul as grace. God’s being 
in the essence of the soul is the imitation of the Persons and one 
being permeates the other. Her chief power flows from the essence 
of the soul just as the three Persons issue from the Godhead. 
And when God pours his grace into the soul it is into her essence 
that he pours it. For into the soul’s essence no speck can ever fall, 
do her powers what they may. The chief power of the soul 
draws its virtue from the grace existing in the essence of the soul 
and this highest power goes out into the lower ones, into their 
essence. The crescent soul, the spirit receptive of God’s nature, 
is the imitation of Christ’s Person and man’s nature. The 
soul when she reaches divine nature is deprived of all deficiency 
and imperfection; she suffers death in divine nature, getting 
God’s nature in herself as the Father does in him. She takes it 
not from her own nature, she receives it from God’s nature into 
her nature; she receives perfection and power according to the 
words of St Paul, ‘I can do all things in him that strengtheneth 
me.’ The wisdom thence arising in her mind begins in under- 
standing and is perfected in will and it has neither heart nor 
thought. St Dionysius says, As the soul takes the outgoing tide 

 SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 41 

to Journey in eternity and time and in her own intelligence, so on 
the ebb does she return ; as God the soul flows back again, without 
exertion. God returns to himself as little mindful of his own as 
though they were not. And the soul shall do the same. She shall 
grasp with her manhood the Person of the Son, and with the Person 
of the Son she shall apprehend the Father and the Holy Ghost in 
both, and them both in the Holy Ghost ; and with the Person of 
the Father she shall apprehend his simple essence, and with the 
essence the abyss, and shall sink into the void without matter 
and without form. Matter and form, being and knowledge, she 
loses in this unity, for she herself has come to naught. God does 
all her work, he preserves her in his being and leads her in his power 
into his very Godhead where she flows with deity itself into all 
God flows into. She is all things’ place and has herself no place. 
This is the most eternal wisdom, which has neither heart nor 
thought. So nigh soul flows to God that many are deceived ; 
but what she is she is by grace, and where she is she is by another’s 
power. Yet she approaches near enough to God to be, in the 
power of the Father, invested with divinity by grace the same as 
the Father is by nature. St Paul says: ‘In the same image we 
shall go from one glory to another,’ meaning, we shall receive 
divinity in its perfection and all that is consequent thereon. 
Therein she shall conceive divinity as it conceives itself and her 
will and God’s will shall be one : whatever God may be we shall be 
with God. No one can attain it in this body, but when God gives 
the soul his final gift, the vision of his Godhead, the soul is raised 
up inthe Trinity. May we attain to this, SohelpusGod. Amen. 

XI 
THE HOUR COMETH AND NOW IS 

Mulier, venit hora et nunc est, quando veri adoratores adorabunt 
patrem in spiritu et veritate (Joh. 4,3). This comes from St 
John’s Gospel. I take one sentence from a long discourse. Our 
Lord said: ‘Woman, the hour cometh and now is, when true 
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth and 

the Father seeketh such.’ 

Taking the opening words: ‘The hour cometh and now is.’ 
He who would worship the Father must betake himself into 
eternity in his desires and hopes. There is one, the loftiest, part 
of the soul which stands above time and knows nothing of time or 
of body. The happenings of a thousand years ago, days spent 
‘millenniums since, are in eternity no further off than is this moment 
I am passing now ; the day to come a thousand years ahead or in 

42 MEISTER ECKHART 

as many years as you can count, is no more distant in eternity 
than this very instant I am in. 

He says, “true worshippers worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth.’ What is truth? The truth is a most noble thing. 
If God were able to backslide from truth I would fain cling to 
truth and let God go. But God is truth, and things in time, the 
things that God created, are not truth. 

He says, ‘they worship the Father.’ Alas, how many worship 
creatures and saddle themselves with them, fools that they are. 
As sure as thou dost pray to God for creatures thou prayest for 
thine own undoing, for no sooner is creature creature than hey 
for trouble and bitterness, wrong and distress. They get their 
deserts, do these folk, with their wrongs and their bitterness. For 
why ? They prayed for it. 

I have sometimes said, whoso goes seeking God and seeking 
aught with God does not find God; but he who seeks God by 
himself in truth does not find God alone: all God affords he finds 
as well as God. Art thou looking for God, seeking God with 
a view to thy personal good, thy personal profit ? Then in truth 
thou art not seeking God. ‘True worshippers worship the 
Father,’ he says, and he says right well. If a virtuous man is 
asked, ‘Why dost thou seek God?’ he answers: ‘ Because he 
is God.’-—‘* Why dost thou seek truth ? ’—* Because it is truth.’ 
— Why dost thou seek right ? ’—* Because it is right,’ and with 
such all is well. Things here in time have each their cause. Ask 
a man why he eats? ‘For strength,’ he says. Why he sleeps ? 
‘For the very same reason.’ And so with everything in time. 
But ask a good man, ‘Why dost thou love God ? ’—He says: 
‘I know not ; for God’s sake.‘ Why dost thou love the truth ?’ 

—‘For the truth’s sake.—‘ Why dost thou love right ? — 
‘For righteousness’ sake.’—' Why dost thou love good ? ’— 
‘For good’s sake.’—* Why dost thou live? ’—‘I faith, I 
know not! I like living.’ 

A philosopher says: ‘He who has once been touched by truth, 
by right, by good, though it entailed the pangs of hell, that man 
could never turn therefrom, not for an instant.? The man, 
whoe’er he be, moved by these three—truth, righteousness and 
goodness—can no more quit these three than God can quit his 
Godhood. 

A philosopher says that goodness has three branches. The first 
is use, the second is enjoyment and the third is seemliness. Con- 
cerning his words, ‘ they worship the Father.’ Why does he say 
“the Father’? Seek God alone and thou shalt find with God 
all that he gives. It is the positive truth, true of necessity, a 
written axiom though no less true unwritten, that if God had more 

- SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 48 

he could not keep it from thee, he would have to show it thee, to 
give it thee, and, as I sometimes say, he gives it to thee as a birth. 

Philosophers say the soul is double-faced, her upper face gazes 
at God all the time and her lower face looks somewhat down, 
informing the senses ; and the upper face, which is the summit of 
the soul, is in eternity and has nothing to do with time : it knows 
nothing of time or of body. Elsewhere I have explained how in 
this lies hid the fount as it were of all good, as a shining light that 
is always shining, a burning brand that is always burning, which 
brand is none other than the Holy Ghost. 

Philosophers say that out of the summit of the soul there flow 
twin powers. The one is will, the other intellect, and her powers’ 
perfection lies in the sovran power of intellect. This never rests. 
It wants God not as Holy Ghost nor yet as Son; it flees the Son. 
It wants God not as God. And why? Because thus he has 
name ; were there a thousand Gods yet would it penetrate them 
all in the desire to get to where he has no name at all: it wants a 
nobler, better thing than God as having name. What would it, 
then ? It does not know: it would have him Father. ‘ Lord, 
show us the Father,’ Philip’ cries, ‘and we shall be content.’ 
It wants him as the quick of kindness ; it wants him as the marrow 
dripping fatness ; it wants him as the root, the main of goodness : 
thus he is simply Father. 

Our Lord says: ‘No man knoweth the Father but the Son, 
nor the Son but the Father.’ In truth, to know the Father we 
must be the Son. I have laid down these three maxims which 
take like three bad grapes and drink thereafter. First, if we are 
Son, we must have the Father: none can say he is a son unless he 
has a father, nor father unless he has a son. His father dead, 
he says; ‘he was my father.’ His son being dead, he says, 
‘he was my son.’ The son’s life hangs upon the father, and the 
father’s on the son, and therefore none can say: ‘I am the Son’ 
unless he have the Father and he is in truth Son whose every work 
is wrought for love therein.—Secondly, that which most makes 
man Son is equability. Being sick he would as soon be sick as 
sane, as sane as sick. His friend dies, ‘In God’s name!’ He has 
an eye out, ‘In God’s name! ’—Thirdly, it beseems the Son to 
bow the head to no one save the Father. Truly, a royal power 
‘this, transcending time and without place! And by the fact of its 
transcending time it both contains all time and is the whole of 
time, and the least jot of that which transcends time makes a man 
rich indeed, for things at the antipodes are no more distant to this 
power than those present here. It is of these he says, ‘ the Father 
seeketh such.’ 

Look you, God loves us so, God importunes us so, because God 

44 MEISTER ECKHART 

cannot work till the soul is shelled and trimmed of ereatures, and 
the plain truth is that of necessity God is bound to cherish us just 
as though his Godhood were at stake, as in fact it is. God can no 
more do without us than we can without him, nay, even if we 
turned from God it would be impossible for God to turn his back 
on us. I vow I will not pray to God for gifts nor worship him 
because of gifts bestowed, but I will entreat him to make me 
worthy to receive and worship him for being of the essence and of 
the nature that must give. He who would spoil God of this 
would spoil him of his very life, of his very being. That we may 
thus in truth be Son, help us the truth of which I speak. Amen. 

XII 
CONTEMPLATION, HINTS AND PROMISES? 

When a man delights to read or hear tell about God, that comes 
of divine grace and is lordly entertainment for the soul. To 
entertain God in one’s thoughts is sweeter than honey, but to be 
sensible of God is teeming consolation to the noble soul, and 
union with God in love is everlasting joy which we relish here as 
we are fitted for it. 

They are all too few who are fully ripe for gazing in God’s 
magic mirror. Precious few succeed in living the contemplative 
life at all here upon earth. Many begin, but fail to consummate 
it. Because they have not rightly lived the life of Martha. As 
the eagle spurns its young that cannot gaze at the sun, even so 
fares it with the spiritual child. 

He who would build high must lay firm and strong foundations. 
“ The true foundation is the very way and pattern of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who himself declared : ‘I am the way, the truth and the life.’ 

Dionysius says, ‘The soul shall follow God into the desert of 
his Godhead, so far as here the body follows Christ in outward 
willing poverty.’—‘ But that soul is idle.’ To which St Bernard 
answers: ‘ Waiting upon God is not idleness but work which 
beats all other work to one unskilled in it.” In order to find God, 
we must seek him in his Godhead. Christ says, ‘ If father and 
mother or anything else be a hindrance, quit them for good and 
serve God unhindered.’ The philosopher says, ‘ The soul which 
is moved by the power of the Prime Cause need seek no counsel 
from any human wisdom ; he is obeying what transcends wisdom, 
for he is moved by the latent primitive truth.’ 

Though we meditate upon the blessed works of our Lord’s 
poverty and his humility, yet coveting them not ourselves, the 

1 See Proger, Zeitschr. f. hist. Theol., Bd. 36. 1866. (Two versions.) 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 45 

thoughts are useless. And to covet them is useless too, unless 
we diligently seek how we may acquire them. 

We would fain be humble ;, but not despised. To be despised 
and rejected is the heritage of virtue. We would be poor too, 
but without privation. And doubtless we are patient, except with 
hardships and with disagreeables. And so with all the virtues. 

The willing poor, unsolaced by corruptibles, descend into the 
valley of humility. They are pursued by insult and adversity, 
the best school of self-knowledge. And self-knowledge gets God- 
knowledge. 

My children, ye who suffer insult, if the world reject you, do 
ye therewith likewise assail yourselves, helping to reject yourselves. 
Our Lord Jesus Christ said, ‘ The servant is not greater than his 
lord. Ifthe world hate you, know ye it hated me before it hated 
you.’ 

We ought to recompense our Lord for all that he has done. — 
There are plenty to follow our Lord half-way, but not the other 
half. They will give up possessions, friends and honours, but 
it touches them too closely to disown themselves. 

Some there be, neither wanting nor looking for honours, yet, 
chancing to come their way, honours affect them. 

St Bernard says: ‘When a soul comes to wanting what few 
desire: to be nameless, outcast and disgraced, and makes all 
welcome equally, then she attains to peace and the true freedom 
needed for real vision in the mirror of divinity.’ 

Perfect rest is absolute freedom from motion. Our Lord says, 
‘Continue in my word and the truth shall make you free.’ 
Freedom of soul consists in this : in finding in herself no sin ; in 
tolerating in herself no spiritual imperfection. She is more free 
lacking all hold on what possesses name and it on her. Freest-of 
all when she transcends her selfhood and flows with all she is into 
the bottomless abyss of her primordial mould, into God himself. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ exhorts us to renounce all things that we 
may be less hindered. St Bernard declares: ‘ All the time thou 
occupiest not with God is accounted unto thee for lost.’ And 
again, ‘The most subtle temptation that can beset us is to 
occupy ourselves too much in outward works.’ Further he says, 
‘The best preparation I know for heaven is having no home 
among externals.’ 

Our least interior act is higher and nobler than our grandest 
outward one, and yet our loftiest interior act halts in God’s 
unveiled presence in the soul. 

The very best work that we can do is to prepare for union with 
- the present God and wait for this with fixed intention. 

St Paul says, Optimum esse unire deo: Best of all is to be one 

’ 

46 MEISTER ECKHART 

with God. In this union the soul is dead, not only to all outward 
but also to all inward ghostly acts. God operates unhindered, 
and the soul bears his godly operation to which she yields obediently 
enough for God to bring to birth his only Son in her no less than 
in himself. This is the atonement wherein, in the twinkling of 
an eye, the soul is made more one with God than by her doing any 
act, bodily or ghostly. The oftener this birth happens in the soul 
the closer grows her union with God. 

God is born in the empty soul by discovering himself to her in a 
new guise without guise, without light in divine light. 

St Augustine says, ‘ The soul being aflame with divine love, God 
is born in the soul, the Holy Ghost being the enkindler of love.’ 

God has vouchsafed divine light to the soul that he may blithely 
work in his own image. 

Now no creature can do what is not in its power. Hence the 
soul cannot act above herself, not even with the bridal gift that 
God has given her in the shape of her most exalted faculty. This 
light, albeit divine, is still created. The creator is one and the 
light another. So God comes to the soul in love, purposing that 
love shall raise her to a higher power, to a function superior to her 
own. But love fails to tell unless she meets or makes her match. 
As far as God finds his likeness in the soul, so far is God in operation. 
If her love is boundless, God acts as boundless love. 

A man might live a thousand years and go on growing all the 
time in love, just as fire will burn so long as there is wood. The 
bigger the fire and the stronger the wind, the more fiercely it 
burns. Now put love for the fire and the Holy Ghost for the 
wind : the greater the love and the stronger the inspiration of the 
Holy Ghost in grace, the quicker the work of perfection is achieved. 
Yet not suddenly, but by the gradual growth of the soul. It 
would not be well for the whole man to be consumed at once. 

The soul becomes so one with God that grace confines her; 
she is not satisfied with grace, for grace is creaturely. The soul 
is so curiously glamoured, she does not realise that she exists : 
she fancies herself God, so utterly she has escaped from self. But 
be she never so far gone from self, she goes on being creature. 
Pouring a drop of water into a vat of wine does not destroy it. 
Seeing herself the soul sees spirit; seeing the angels she again 
sees spirit; but God is such pure spirit that soul and angel are 
nigh bodily compared with him. A portrait of the highest seraph 
limned in black would be a better likeness far than God portrayed 
as highest seraph : that were a pre-eminent unlikeness. 

Now in the contemplative state we are consumed by fiery love 
in the Holy Ghost. Sooner than knowingly commit a sin, venial 
or mortal, we shall prefer to suffer every imaginable martyrdom. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 47 

If by one venial sin we were enabled to release from hell souls 
without number, we would not ransom them. Such love to God 
must a man have to be familiar with him in contemplation. 
Moreover, he must have a mind at ease; and in preparing for it, 
an undisturbed retired spot is necessary. The body should be 
rested from bodily labour, not only of the hands but of the tongue 
as well and all five senses. The soul keeps clear best in the 
quiet, but in jaded body is often overpowered by inertia. Then 
by strenuous effort we travail in divine love for intellectual vision 
till, clearing a way through recollected senses, we rise past our own 
mind to the wonderful wisdom of God, though this is quite beyond 
the grasp of any creature. We rise to divine heights. David 
says: Accedat homo ad cor altum et exaltabitur deus, that is, Man 
rising to the summit of his mind is exalted God. From this divine 
eminence we see the lowness and insignificance of creatures. We 
feel an inkling of the perfection and stability of eternity, for there 
is neither time nor space, neither before nor after, but everything 
present in one new, fresh-springing now where millenniums last no 
longer than the twinkling of an eye. And we win participation 
in the manifold delights of the heavenly host. So great the joy 
of Mary Queen in heaven, that having but a thousandth part of 
it, each member of the heavenly company would taste far more 
than ever they have earned. There every spirit rejoices in the joy 
of every other, relishing it each in his degree. Every celestial 
habitant is, knows and loves in God, in his own self and in every 
other spirit whether soul or angel. And the distinctive conscious- 
ness of one God in three Persons and the Three one God gives 
such ineffable, amazing satisfaction that all their passionate longing 
is fulfilled. And just what they are full of they crave unceasingly, 
and what they crave is all their own in new, fresh-springing joyful 
ecstasy, theirs to enjoy in all security from everlasting unto 
everlasting. 

Thereafter we press on into the truth, into the simplicity God is 
himself, not seeking what is his. So we fall into peculiar wonder. 
In this wonder let us remain, for human wit is powerless to fathom 
it. Plumbing the deeps of divine wonder but stirs facile doubt. 

XIII? 
IN THIS WAS MANIFESTED THE LOVE OF GOD 

In hoc apparuit charitas dei in nobis etc. “In this was mani- 
fested the love of God toward us that he sent his only-begotten 
Son into the world that we might live with the Son,’ that is, 

1 See also Wackernagel, No. lxv, p. 172. 

48 MEISTER ECKHART 

‘in and through the Son.’ Those that live not through the Son, 
verily they err. 

If a mighty king had a beautiful daughter and gave her to a poor 
man’s son, every member of his family would rise in rank and 
become ennobled. Thus one learned doctor says: ‘By God 
becoming man the whole human race has been ennobled and 
exalted ; wherefore it behoves us to rejoice greatly that Christ 
our brother has with peculiar power ascended up above the choir 
of angels and sitteth on the right hand of the Father.’ This is 
well said, though I set but little store by it. What profit to me 
that my brother is rich if I am poor, or wise and I a fool ? 

I say something more and more significant: God not only 
became man, he assumed human nature. Doctors agree that all 
men are of equal rank by nature. But I make bold to say that 
every good thing possessed by the saints and by Mary, God’s 
mother, and Christin his human nature, is also mine in this same 
nature. Haply thou wilt ask me: ‘If already I possess in this 
nature all that Christ does in his humanity, how come we to set 
Christ so high and honour him as our Lord and God ? ’—Because 
he was a messenger from God to us, bringing us our happiness. 
The happiness he brought us was our own. When the Father 
begets his Son in the innermost ground, what moves there has 
this nature. This same nature is one and indivisible. Anything 
distinct in it or connected with it is not this one. 

Another thing I say, still harder. To subsist immediately in 
this pure nature a man must be so wholly dead to person that he 
wills as well to one across the seas whom his eyes have never seen 
as to his own present and familiar friend. While thou still wishest 
better to thine own person than to that man whom thou hast never 
seen thou art beside the mark, nor hast thou even for an instant 
seen into this simple ground. Haply in some far-fetched symbol 
thou hast beheld the truth as in an image, but it was not the best. 
—Secondly, thou must be pure in heart ; and only that heart is 
pure which has exterminated creaturehood. And thirdly, thou 
must be free from not. 

It is a question, what burns in hell ? Doctors reply with one 
accord: ‘self-will.2 But I maintain: not burns in hell. A 
simile! Suppose I take a burning coal and put it on my hand; 
then if I say the coal is burning me, I do it great injustice. To 
define precisely what it is that burns me: not does ; because the 
coal has in it something my hand has not. Observe, it is this 
very not that burns me. Did my hand contain what the coal is 
and can afford, it would possess the fire-nature altogether. In 
which case all the fire that ever burned might be taken and heaped 
upon my hand without its burning me. Likewise, I aver that 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 49 

because God and those who are in sight of God, have in them 
something pertaining to real happiness which those who are apart 
from God have not, therefore this not alone torments the souls in 
hell more than the personal will or any fire soever. In sooth I 
hold : as far as not inheres in thee, so far thou art imperfect. To be 
perfect, then, thou must be free from not. 

Further, my text says: ‘God sent his only-begotten Son into 
the world,’ by which ye are to understand not the external world: 
it must be taken of the inner world. As surely as the Father by 
his simple nature begets the Son innately, so surely he begets him 
in the innermost recesses of the mind, which is the inner world. 
Here God’s ground is my ground and my ground God’s ground. 
Here I live in my own as God lives in his own. To one who even 
for an instant has seen into this ground, a thousand ducats of 
red beaten gold are worth no more than a false farthing. Out of 
this innermost ground thy works should be wrought without why. 
Indeed, I hold that as long as thou doest thy works because of the 
kingdom of heaven, or God, or thine own eternal happiness, from 
without (that is to say), all is not well with thee. It may be 
tolerable but it is not the best. He who fondly imagines to get 
more of God in thoughts, prayers, pious offices and so forth, than 
by the fireside or in the stall: in sooth he does but take God, 
as it were, and swaddle his head in a cloak and hide him under the 
table. For he who seeks God under settled forms lays hold of the 
form while missing the God concealed in it. But he who seeks God 
in no special guise lays hold of him as he is in himself, and such 
an one ‘lives with the Son’ and is the life itself. We might 
question life for a thousand years: ‘Why dost thou live!’ 
' It would only say, if it replied at all, ‘ I live because I live.’ For 
life lives in.a ground of its own, wells up out of its own. It lives 
without a cause for it lives itself. And if anyone asked a proper 
man, one who works his own ground, ‘ Why dost thou work ?’ 
he too would say, if he told the truth: ‘I work because I work.’ 

Where creature stops, there God begins. All God wants of thee 
is for thee to go out of thyself in respect of thy creatureliness and 
let God be God in thee. The smallest of creaturely images that 
ever takes shape in thee is as big as God.—‘ How so?’ 

—lIt shuts out the whole of God. As soon as this image appears 
God disappears with all his Godhood. As this image fades out 
God comes in. [No temporal image is so godly but thrice harms 
the soul. First, it vexes spirituality ; next, it tarnishes her 
purity ; and thirdly, it disturbs detachment. 

—‘ What does God do to my mind ?’ 

— Transcend thyself and repress creatures: God does that to 
thy mind.] 4 

50 MEISTER ECKHART 

God longs as urgently for thee to go out of thyself in respect of 
thy creaturely nature as though his whole felicity depended on it. - 
Why, man, what is the harm of letting God be God in thee ? Go 
clean out of thy self for God’s sake, and God will go clean out of his 
for thy sake. Both being gone out, what remains is simply the 
- one. In this one the Father gives birth to his Son, in his inner- 
most source. Thence blossoms forth the Holy Ghost and thence 
originates in God the will belonging to the soul. The while this 
will remains unmoved by creatures and by creaturehood, the will 
is free. Christ says: ‘ None goes to heaven but he who came from 
heaven.’ Things are all made from nothing ; hence their true 
source is nothing. This noble will, as far as it inclines to creatures, 
with them elapses into nothing. 

The question is, Does the will lapse so far that it is never able to 
return ? Doctors reply with one accord that it does not return 
so far as it has lapsed with time.. But I maintain that if this 
will turns back, even for an instant, from its own self and things 
created and rallies to its source, there in its own free origin the will 
is free and in this instant time lost is all recovered. 

People often say to me: ‘Pray for me.’ And I think to my- 
self: Why ever do ye go out? Why not stop at home and mine 
your own treasure ? For indeed the whole truth is native in you. 

May we be apt to stay thus in ourselves and to possess the 
entire truth immediately, impartibly, in real happiness. So help 
us God! Amen. 

XIV 
LIKE A VASE OF GOLD 

Quasi vas auri solidum ornatum omni lapide pretioso (Eccl. 50,9). 
My quotation will apply to St Augustine or to any virtuous soul, 
such being likened to ‘ a golden vessel, massive and firm, adorned 
with every precious stone.’ Because of the perfection of the saints 
we have no likeness to express them, and we therefore symbolise 
them by the trees, the sun, or moon. So here St Augustine is 
compared with a chalice of gold, solid and firm, all set with precious 
stones. Indeed the same thing may be said of any saintly virtuous 
soul who, leaving all things here, enjoys them yonder where they 
are eternal. Whoso renounces things in their contingent sense 
possesses them as absolute and eternal. 

Every cup has two things : it receives and holds. The spiritual 
vessel differs from the physical. The wine is in the cup, not the 
cup in the wine, though the wine is not in the cup as it is in the 
body ; if it were in the cup as it is in the body we should not be 
able to drink it. It is different with the spiritual vessel. Every- 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 51 

thing received in this is in the cup and the cup in it and is the cup 
itself. All this ghostly cup receives is its own nature. It is God’s 
nature to give himself to every virtuous soul, and it is the soul’s 
nature to receive God, and this we say referring to the soul in her 
loftiest capacity. There the soul bears the image of God and is 
godlike. No image can be without likeness, but likeness can be 
without image. Two eggs may be both alike white, but one is 
not the image of the other: for one to be the image of the other 
it must proceed out of its nature and be born of it and be like it. 

An image has two properties. First, it receives its being from 
the thing whose image it is, immediately and above will, for it is 
a natural product, sprouting out of its nature as a branch does 
out of a tree. Any face thrown on a mirror is, willy-nilly, imaged 
therein. But its nature does not appear in its looking-glass 
image : only the mouth, nose and eyes, just the features, are seen 
in the mirror. God reserves it to himself to display in his reflec- 
tions, at once his nature, all he is and all he can, and this above 
his will. His image is prior to his will, will following the image, 
for out of his nature there leaps first his image, focussing into 
itself the whole promise of his nature and his essence, all his nature 
pouring out into his image the while it abides intact within itself. 
“Now the masters locate this image not in the Holy Ghost but in 
the middle Person, for the Son, being the earliest issue of his nature, 
is therefore called his Father’s express image, and not the Holy 
Ghost : he is simply the flowering of the Father and the Son, and 
has one nature with them both. Will is not a mean between the 
nature and the image, nor, for that matter, can knowledge or per- 
ception, nay, nor wisdom, come between, for this image of God is 
the immediate product of his fecund nature. If there is means of 
. wisdom here it is the image itself. Thus the Son in the Godhead is 
called the Wisdom of the Father. 

Know, this impartible image of God which is stamped in the 
soul is sealed direct in her innermost nature ; this most funda- 
mental, most noble part of her nature, is really what takes this 
soul-pattern, and that not by means either of will or of wisdom. As 
I remarked just now, if wisdom comes in here at all it is (as) the | 
pattern itself. God exists in this image without any means and 
the image subsists without means in God. But God is much more 
noble in the image than the image is in God. The image receives 
God not as being the creator; it conceives him in the guise of 
understanding, the summit of her nature actually taking on his form. 
This is the innate divine image which God has stamped in every 
soul by nature. I durst not give more to this image: to give it 
more would make it God himself, which it is not, or God would 

not be God. 

52 MEISTER ECKHART 

The second characteristic of an image we note in its likeness to 
its object. And here observe especially two things. First: an 
image is not itself, neither is it its own. So an image received into 
the eye is not the eye itself nor has it any real existence in the eye 
but is merely suspended from and tethered to the thing it is the 
image of, whereto it entirely belongs and wherefrom it gets its 
being and is being that same being. Note well my definition of 
an image. There are four points to bear in mind, and haply others 
will occur to you. An image is not itself, neither is it its own: 
it is solely that thing’s whose reflection it is, and it is due to this 
alone that it exists at all. Things apart from the thing whose 
image it is, it is not and does not belong to. The image takes its 
being direct from the thing whose image it is, having one nature 
therewith and being the very same being. This is not a subjeet 
for discussion in the schools, though one may well propound it 
from the professorial chair. ; 

Ye are always asking how ye ought to live. Lay then to heart 
this answer: Just as the image is here said to do, even so it 
behoves thee to live. Be his and belonging to him, not thine own 
and belonging to thyself nor withal to anyone. Whoever has a 
well-beloved friend holds his belongings dear and anything against 
his friend he will object to. Take, for example, the dog, an 
irrational beast. So faithful is he to his.master that he resents 
the things his master hates, while to his master’s friends he is 
most friendly. No count takes he of poverty or wealth; were 
some blind beggar his master’s bosom friend, he would be more 
affectionate to him than to the king or emperor who was his 
master’s enemy. I trow if it were possible the dog should be half 
faithless to his master, its other half were bound to hate itself. 
But. then some folks complain of having no interior life, no 
devotion, no sweetness nor any suchlike godly consolation. Marry, 
these fulk are all unrighteous still, and though they suffer it is not 
the best. Verily I say, as long as any image forms in thee which is 
not the eternal Word nor any shadowing forth of the eternal Word, 
be it never so good, in sooth it is wrong. That man alone is 
righteous who, having naughted all created things, stands facing 
straight along the unswerving line into the eternal Word, where, in 
the right, he is idealised and transformed. That man is gotten 
where the Son is gotten and is the Son himself. 

According to the scriptures, ‘No man knoweth the Father but 
the Son,’ and hence, if ye desire to know God, ye have to be not 
merely like the Son, ye have to be the very Son himself. Some 
people think to see God with their eyes as they would see a cow, 
and they expect to love him as they would love a cow. This 
thou lovest for its milk and for its cheese : for its profit to thyself. 

_ 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 58 

Even so do they who love God with an eye to outward riches or 
interior consolation, not rightly loving God but their own personal 
advantage. Itrow that any object thou shalt set before thy mind, 
except God in himself, how good soever it may be, is nothing but 
a barrier to the absolute truth. As I said just now that St 
_ Augustine is compared to a golden cup, closed on the underside 
and open to the sky, even so it behoves thee to be: if thou wouldst 
stand with St Augustine and in the communion of saints, then 
close thy heart to everything created and be open to God as he is 
in himself. 

Men are compared with the higher faculties because they always 
go bareheaded, and women with the lower because the head is 
always veiled. The superior powers transcend time and space, 
springing straight out of the essence of the soul, and they resemble 
men in always going uncovered. Accordingly, their working is 
eternal. The philosopher says that all the powers of the soul, 
inasmuch as time and space affect them, have lost their virgin 
purity and can never be so thoroughly abstracted nor so finely 
sifted as to pass into the higher faculties. Albeit they are stamped 
with the same image. 

Do thou be ‘ firm and steady,’ the same, that is to say, in weal 
and woe, in fortune and misfortune ; and ‘ set with all the precious 
stones,’ a treasury, to wit, of all the virtues which come naturally 
pouring out of thee. Traverse all the virtues and, transcending 
them, tap virtue only at its source, where it is one with the divine 
nature. And in so far as thou art more atoned than are the angels 
with God’s nature, to that extent they must receive through thee. 
May we be one, So help us God. Amen. 

XV 
THE DIVINE BEING! 

No man can tell of God exactly what he is. According to 
St Dionysius, God is not anything we can say or think. St 
Augustine cries: ‘I who have ever been in God and ever more shall 
be, would sooner I had never been and never more should be than 
that we found a single word that we could say of God. Were we 
compelled to speak of God, in that case I should say : Verily, in 
no sense is God comprehensible nor yet attainable. God is what 
thought cannot better.’ Nay, I declare God beggars human 
thought ; he transcends all human conception. No man knows 
what God is. Aught that a man could or would think of God, God 
is not at all. It is the nature of the soul not to be satisfied except 

1 See Spamer’s Tezte, B. 1. 

54 MEISTER ECKHART 

with God. But all that heart can desire is small, is insignificant 
compared with God. Yet man’s thought may be never so rich 
or so rare but his desire outstrips it. So he transcends man’s 
desire as well as transcending human thought. 

St Dionysius says, God is naught. Meaning that God is as 
incomprehensible as naught. St Bernard says, I know not what 
God is ; but what I know not that he is that same is he. A heathen 
philosopher maintains that what we know of the First Cause is 
rather what we are ourselves than what the First Cause is. For 
that passes understanding. And in this strain the heathen doctor 
argues in his book, The Light of Lights, that God is super-essential, 
super-rational, super-intelligible, 7.e. beyond the natural under- 
standing. I speak not of gracious understanding. By grace 
man may be carried to the length of understanding as St Paul 
understood who was caught up into the third heaven and saw 
unspeakable things. He saw, but was not able to express them. 
For what a man knows he knows in its cause or in its mode or in 
its effect. But in these respects God remains unknown, for he is 
the first. Further, he is modeless, 7.e. undetermined. And he is 
without effect, that is, in his mysterious stillness. Here he abides 
apart from the names that are given him. Moses asked his name. 
God answered, He-who-is hath sent thee. Otherwise he could not 
tell it. God as simply being, in that sense he could never give 
himself to be known to creatures. Not that he could not do it, 
but creature could not understand it.—I have often laid it down 
that God’s lordship does not lie merely in his lordship over creature ; 
his lordship consists in his power to create a thousand worlds and 
dominate them all in his abstract essence. Therein lies his lord- 
ship. Dionysius and Gregory both teach that the divine being is 
not comprehensible in any sense: not to any wit nor any under- 
standing, not even to angelic understanding. Its simplicity and 
triplicity is a thing not to be grasped by the human mind even at 
its best, nor by the angelic mind even at its clearest. It was said 
by a philosopher that whoso knows of God that he is unknown, 
that man knows God. For it is the height of gnosis and perception 
to know and understand in agnosia and a-perception. To know 
him really is to know him as unknowable. As the master puts it: 
If I must speak of God, then I will say, God is something 
which is in no sense to be reached or grasped; and I know 
nothing else about him. According to St Augustine, what we say 
about God is not true; what we say that God is he is not ; what 
we say he is not that he is rather than what we say that he is. 
Nothing we can say of God is true. God’s worth and God’s 
perfection cannot be put into words. When I say man, I have in 
my mind human nature. When I say grey, I have in my mind 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 55 

the greyness of grey. When I say God, I have in my mind neither 
God’s majesty nor his perfection. Dionysius insists that the more 
we can abstract from God the better we shall see him. God is 
such that we,apprehend him better by negation than by affirma- 
tion. Hence the dictum of one master that to argue about God 
from likeness is to argue falsely about him, but to argue by denials 
is to argue about him correctly. Dionysius says, writing about 
God, He is super-essential, he is super-luminous ; he attributes to 
him neither this nor that. For whatever he conceives, God far 
transcends it. There is no knowing him by likeness. Rather by 
attributing unlikeness may we make some approach to under-, 
standing him. Take an illustration. Supposing I describe a ship 
to someone who has never seen one, then on looking at a stone he 
will plainly see that it is not a ship. And the plainer he sees that 
it is not ship-like, the more he will know about a ship. It is the 
same with God. The more we can impute to him not-likeness, 
the nearer do we get to understanding him. Holy Scripture yields 
us merely privatives. That we should credit God with matter, 
form and work is due to our gross senses. We fail to find God one 
because we try to come at him by likeness. Dionysius cries, 
‘Friend Timothy, if thou wouldst catch the spirit of truth pursue 
it not with the human senses. It is so swift, it comes rushing.’ 
God is to be sought in opposites ; in unknowing knowing shall we 
know God ; in forgetfulness of ourselves and all things even to the 
naked essence of the Godhead. Dionysius was exhorting one of 
his disciples. Friend,’ quoth he, ‘cease from all activity and 
empty thyself of self that thou. mayst commune with the Sovran 
Good, God namely.’ Pray God we may seek him so that we shall 
find him nevermore to lose him. \ Amen. 

XVI 
THE SIXTH BEATITUDE 

Beati qui esuriunt et sitiunt justitiam (Matt. 5). Jesus went up 
a mountain to a valley, into a field, and power went out of him 
preaching to the multitude: ‘ Blessed are they which do hunger and 
thirst after righteousness for they shall be filled.’ 

Methinks this text is apt to my discourse. Blessed are they 
that hunger for righteousness and endure work and poverty here, 
for this is but a moment and will surely pass. They are blessed 
though not most blessed. Blessed are they that hunger not to 
be deprived of God, albeit the wonder is that man can be without 
him without whom he cannot be. St Augustine says it is amazing 
that anyone should live apart from him apart from whom he cannot; 

56 MEISTER ECKHART 

live at all. They are blessed and yet not most blessed. More 
blessed those who so hunger that they cannot live without God ; 
that is a fiery affection which transforms their nature. The while 
a man yet finds in his desire or in his hope or his affection anything 
impermanent, he is not most blessed. He is blessed but not most 
blessed. Blessed, supremely blessed, are they who are installed in 
the eternal now, transcending time and place and form and matter, 
unmoved by weal or woe or wealth or want, for in so far as things 
are motionless they are like eternity. 

[The heaven adjoining the eternal now, wherein the angels are, 
is motionless, immoveable. But the heaven next to that which 
touches the eternal now, wherein the angels are, and betwixt 
(that and) the heaven where the sun is, is set in motion by angelic 
force, revolving once in every hundred years. The heaven the sun 
is in, moved by angelic force, goes round once a year. The heaven 
the moon is in, again, is driven by angelic force and goes round 
once amonth. The nearer the eternal now the more immoveable 
they are, and the further off and more unlike to the eternal now the 
easier to move. The heaven of the sun and moon and stars is 
moved by the impulse of their angel, so that they are spinning in 
this temporal now ; and the eternal now imparts their motion, that 
being so energetic that from the motion the eternal now imparts, 
all things derive their life and being. Now the lowest powers of 
the soul are nobler than the highest part of heaven, where it adjoins 
the angels and the eternal now. Moreover, all things get their 
life and being from the motion there imparted by the eternal now; 
and if that is so noble, then what would ye expect where the soul 
in her superior powers contacts the ground of God? How exalted, 
think ‘ye, that must be ?—Follow then after this now, and reach 
this now and possess this eternal now. May we stand next the 
eternal now and so be in possession of it. So help us O divine 

' power. | 

[One master says : Grace springs from the heart of the Father 
and flows into his Son and in the oneness of them twain it proceeds 
from the Wisdom of the Son into the Gift of the Holy Ghost and 
in the Holy Ghost is sent into the soul. Grace is the face of God 
which is clearly stamped in the soul without any means by the 
Spirit of God, giving the soul the form of God. St Dionysius 
says: The angels are the divine mind. Moreover St Paul declares 
concerning those who live the angelic life here in the flesh, that 
into them there flows the mind of God as it does into the angels. 
He also says the intellectual light, God namely, has given likeness 
to the rational soul. Quoth St Paul: He who cleaves unto God 
with his whole being becomes one spirit with God. So help us 
God. Amen.] 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 57 

XVII 
IN PRINCIPIO ERAT VERBUM 

In principio erat verbum (Joh. 1,). Theologians talk of the 
eternal Word. God never spoke but one word, and that is still 
unspoken. The explanation is this. The eternal Word is the 
logos of the Father which is his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus 
Christ. In him he pronounces all creatures without beginning 
and without end. This accounts for the Word remaining unborn, 
for it never came out of the Father. This Word is to be known in 
fourfold guise. 

First, on the altar in the priest’s hands. There it is ours to 
know and love the eternal Word as we, in his eternal Word, 
appear to the heavenly Father. Secondly, we know the eternal 
Word as expounded by doctors from the chair. We receive it in 
their person ; like water flowing in a channel, so does the eternal 
Word flow through its teachers. We should pay no heed to any 
shortcomings in the doctor: we must fix our gaze on the eternal 

“Word in him, as it comes pouring eternally out of the ground of 
itself. Thirdly, we can recognise the eternal Word in our Lord’s 
friends who, having followed this eternal Word, have gotten proof 
of it in life eternal, and also those that follow it in time, such, 
namely, as are quick in our Lord Jesus Christ. Fourthly, we have 
the eternal Word as spoken in the virgin soul by God himself ; 
wordlessly, to wit, since the soul is not able to express him. 

I would have you know that the eternal Word is being born 
within the soul, its very self, no less, unceasingly. I tell you, the 
soul knows the eternal Word better than all the doctors can ex- 
pound it. What we can express is all too little, so for the nonce 
she is bearing the eternal Word in mind. According to the masters 
we ought by rights to go to school where the Holy Ghost is teacher ; 
and know, where he is teacher and is bound to be, there he finds 
students properly equipped to profit by his lofty teaching which 
issues from out the Father’s heart. So the soul has, if she will, the 
Father and the Son and Holy Ghost : she goes flowing into the one 
where naked in naked is revealed to her. Our masters say that 
no one can attain to this so long as he retains of nether things as 
much as a needle-point can carry. Into the naked Godhead none 
may get except he be as naked as he was when he was spilt from 
God. 

The masters say, giving us wise counsel, that leaving God his 
glory we ought to get all things direct from him and not from 
creatures. We shall leave God his glory by leaving him to work 
just how he will and when he will, we staying idle and free. For 

58 MEISTER ECKHART 

we must see that God does all for the best. And so I trow it lies 
with us, so far as it is in us, to help God to preserve his glory. 

A master says, Little recks the king of those of his retainers 
who perform the drudgery. He notices the ones about his privy 
chambers and gratifies their every want. God does the same with 
his chosen friends, the intimates of his mysterious privacy : he 
never turns a deaf ear to their prayer. Withal the masters do 
affirm that numbers go to heaven who know no more of God on 
earth than, as it were, of sun in forest gloom. Desiring this 
supremely it rests with us to compass it by practice and by strength 
of will. Amen. 

XVIII 
I KNOW A MAN IN CHRIST 

Scio hominem in Christo ante annos quatuordecim etc. (2 Cor. 12,). 
St Paul declares: ‘I know a man who fourteen years ago was 
caught up into the third heaven ; whether in the body or no 
I cannot tell: God knoweth.’ Now granting Paul was there at, 
any time, then either body and soul both turned to spirit or else 
his soul took wing out of his body. It is certain that his soul 
left not his body, for she was giving life unto his body; she must 
then have seen God in her and herself in him. 

The soul has three powers: mind, will and rage. These three 
powers are in league with deity. Will cleaving unto God can do 
all things. God seized of his divinity bestows upon her power and 
fecundity. Mind cleaving to the Son knows with the Son; it 
knows with the Son when it is void of knowledge. The third 
power is the power of attack, which is connected with the Holy 
Ghost. This power is ever making for the source whence it 
proceeded forth and the Holy Ghost is its initiator into the eternal 
nature: it floods the secret chamber of the soul, and lo! she loses 
time and place in the eternal, in time transcending time. But for 
the soul this is not enough: had she enough she would have time 
in lieu of her eternity. Let us not flag. Not ours the blame if, 
being ready and atoned in will, God hides himself so that we 
cannot do all things with him although he plays his part just as 
the sun gives out its light and fire gives out its heat. Woodapples 
cannot check the letting of their gall, but God contrives from time 
to time to reach out to the longing soul if he is very near to her. 
So let her, never doubting, with hearty longing, hail God frequently : 
‘O Friend of me, how long am I to wait for thee ie 

He says, to Christ was given a new name: one by the angel, 
another by St Paul, a third by his heavenly Father. The angel 
gave him the name Jesus Christ. Joseph and Mary called him by 

\ 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 59 

this name which signifies Weal of the World. The name is given 
to the wounded soul. Alas, we are too frail! We should be well 
of our infirmities being raised up and gotten in; we should be 
raised if we were destitute and unattached. For the exalted 
spark wherein we see the light divine, that never parts from God 
nor is there anything between. What matter then if good and ill 
and pain betide, they do but touch the lower faculties. 

St Paul gave him three names and called him the reflection of 
the Father. He says, the wounded soul is given the mystic 
heavenly bread. Whence comes her wound ?—From longing. 
What is longing ?—It is love. What is nobler than longing ? 
What we pray God for humbly and with longing he durst not 
refuse: desire ablush with modesty he leads into the triple 
chamber of the Holy Trinity. 

Paul called him also the fecundity of the Father and the image 
in the Father, working with the Father to bring forth his Person. 
Verily I say, the soul will bring forth Person if God laughs into 
her and she laughs back to him. To speak in parable, the Father 
laughs into the Son and the Son laughs back to the Father; and 
this laughter breeds liking, and liking breeds joy, and joy begets 
love, and love begets Person, and Person begets the Holy Ghost. 
In this wise does he travail with his Father. 

The third name he gave was, The Majesty of the Substance of 
God. Majesty is the essence of his divine substance, this substance 
being the elemental matter of the three Persons. The soul is 
called majesty when she gives up mode: then she knows the 
Father and paternity, the Son and filiation, and the Persons of 
them twain she comprehends in unity. The Father gave him five 
names, ineffable. God keep us every whit in him. So help us 
God. Amen. 

XIX 
PAUL ROSE FROM THE GROUND 

Surrexit autem Saulus de terra apertisque occulis nihil videbat 
(Act. 9,). This statement which I quote in Latin is made in 
St Luke’s narrative about St Paul. It records that ‘ Paul rose from 
the ground with open eyes and seeing nothing.’ The words are 
open to four interpretations. One is, that when he rose up from the 
ground he was gazing wide-eyed at naught, that naught being God, 
for the vision of God he would describe as the naught. Another 
explanation is that when he got up he saw nothing but God. 
- The third, he saw naught but God in all things. The fourth, 
that in the divine vision he beheld all things as a naught. He 
previously tells how light came suddenly from heaven and felled 

60 MEISTER ECKHART 

him to the ground. Mark you, he says that the light came from 
heaven. According to our doctors, though heaven is fraught with | 
light it does not shine. The sun is full of light and shines withal.. 
Our doctors teach that fire does not give any light in the simple, 
natural perfection of its highest state. Its nature is too pure for 
eye in any wise to see. So subtle is it, so unlike the eye, that were 
it here below within our view it could not stimulate our eyes to 
sight. And yet, forsooth, we see it is absorbed by different 
things, such as a lump of coal, a piece of wood. 

By the light of heaven we see the light that is God whereto no 
mind of man is able to attain. As St Paul hath it: ‘God dwells 
in a light that no man can approach unto.’ He says, * God is 
light inaccessible.’ There is no admittance to God. No man 
still on the ascent, still on the increase in grace and in light, has 
ever yet got into God. God is no crescent light: we get to him 
by growing. In the growing process God is unseen. When God 
is seen it is in the light that is God himself. A master says, 
In God there is no more nor less nor this nor that. Whiles we 
are on the way we are not there. 

He says, ‘A light from heaven shone round about him.’ 
Implying the capture of his entire soul. A master says that in 
this light all the soul-powers are exalted and raised to a higher 
power, the outward senses we see and hear with as well as the 
inner senses we call thoughts: the reach of these and their pro- 
fundity are most amazing. I can think as easily about things 
overseas as close at hand. Above thought comes the intellect, 
as seeker. She goes about looking, casting her net here and there, 
gaining and losing. Above intellect the seeker there is another 
intellect which does not seek but rests in its pure and simple 
essence in the realm of light. And I say it is in this light that 
all the soul-powers are exalted. Senses rise to thoughts. How 
high, how fathomless these are, that no one knows except God 
and the soul. 

Our theologians teach, and it is a knotty question, that angels 
know nothing about thoughts unless the thoughts take wing and 
rise up into intellect—intellect the seeker; and this intellect, the 
seeker, soars up into the intellect which does not seek, which is 
the pure light in itself. This light embraces all the powers of the 
soul. Accordingly he says, ‘The heavenly light encircled him.’ 

One master lays it down that anything which has an emanation 
is exempt from these lower things. God emanates into all creatures 
without being affected by any. He does not need them. God 
energises nature and her first work is the heart. Wherefore 
some doctors would pretend the soul is altogether in the heart 
and flows thereout as life into the other members. Notso. The 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 61 

soul is in each member, whole. True, her chief work is in the 
heart. The heart being in the middle gets protection on all sides, 
just as heaven is protected from outside influence and intrusion. 
It contains all things. It moves all things and itself remains 
unmoved. Not even fire, exalted though it be in its most 
high estate, can lick the heavens. 

“In the encircling light he fell to earth, and his eyes being 
unsealed he, open-eyed, beheld all things as naught.’ And 
beholding all things as naught he was beholding God. Mark 
here what the soul says in the Book of Love: ‘ By night in my 
bed I sought him my soul loveth : I sought him and I found him 
not.’ She sought him in her bed: meaning to convey that any- 
one cleaving to aught below God has too narrow a lie. God’s 
entire creation is all too confined. Quoth she, ‘I sought him all 
night through.’ There is no night without the light: only, it is 
veiled. The sun is shining in the night albeit screened from view. 
By day it shines, eclipsing all the other lights. So does the light 
of God ; it blinds and puts out any light. Our creaturely expecta- 
tions, all these are night. What I mean to say is, that nothing 
we find in a creature is more than a shadow and dark. Even the 
highest angel’s light, exalted though it be, illumines not the soul. 
All but the first light is darkness, is night. By it she cannot 
find God. ‘I rose and sought him all about, I scoured the 
broadways and the alleys. The watchmen (angels) found me, 
and I questioned them, ‘‘ Saw ye not him whom my soul loveth ?”’’ 
But they answered not ; peradventure they could not apprehend 
him. ‘It was but a little that I passed and I found him my soul 
loveth.’ The little, the trifle, that she missed him by has often 
been the burden of my teaching. He to whom mortal things are 
not all trivial and as naught withal, that man shall not find God. 
‘Having passed by a little,’ she says, ‘I found him whom I 
sought.’ When God pours into and informs the soul and thou 
takest him as a light or a state or a boon, whatsoever thou knowest 
about him, that God is not. We have to transcend the little, 
discard the adventitious and perceive God one. She says, ‘ When 
I had passed by a little I found him my soul loveth.’ 

We are very fond of saying, ‘him my soul loveth.’ But he 
is far away above the soul, nor does she name her love. There are 
five reasons why she names him not. One is that God is nameless. 
Any name she gave him would have to be well chosen. God is 
beyond all name, none can express him. A second reason is that 
on swooning away into God for love, the soul is conscious of 
nothing but love. She fondly imagines that everyone knows him 
like that. She is amazed that any wight should find him aught 
but love alone. Thirdly, she has no time to name him. Love 

62 MEISTER ECKHART 

does not leave her any time to use another word. Fourthly, 

perchance she weens he has no other name than love. Inloveshe. 
pronounces allnames. Quoth she, ‘I rose up, I went through the 
broad streets and the alleys. And when I had passed a little I 

found him my soul loveth.’ 

‘Paul rose from the ground wide-eyed, beholding nothing.’ 
I cannot see what is one. He saw nothing, to wit, God. God is 
naught and God is one. What aught is is naught as well. What 
God is is he altogether. As Dionysius says about the light: 
speaking of God he says, He is supernatural, supervital, super- 
luminous ; he will allow him neither this nor that, but makes him 
out to be I know not what that far transcends them. Aught seen, 
aught that may come within thy ken, that God is not; for why, 
God is not this nor that. Whoever says that God is here or there, 
credit him not. The light which God is shines in darkness. 
God is the true light : to see it one has to be blind and strip God 
naked of things. A master says, To argue about God from any 
sort of likeness is to argue falsely about him. But to argue about 
God from naught is to argue soundly withal. When the soul is 
reduced to one and is gotten therein by discarding herself altogether, 
there she finds God, as it were, in a naught. It appeared to one 
soul as in a dream (it was a waking dream), to be big with naught 
like a woman with child, and in this naught God was born, the 
fruits of the naught. God was born in the naught. Therefore 
he says, ‘He arose from the earth wide-eyed, gazing at naught.’ 
He had a vision of God where there are no creatures. He beheld 
all creatures as naught for he had the whole essence of creatures 
in him. He is the all-containing essence. 

Another thing he means by saying, ‘he saw naught.’ Accord- 
ing to our masters, any perception of externals entails some inroad 
by them, an impression at the least. ‚To get some idea of a thing, 
a stone, for instance, I do (not) take into my mind the grossest 
part of it; that I leave outside. As it exists in the ground of my 
soul where it is at its noblest and best, it is merely a type (or idea). 
Things perceived by my soul from without contain an outside 
element : my perception of creature in God contains nothing but 
God alone, for in God there is nothing but God. When I see all 
creatures I see not. He saw God where creatures are not. 

In the third place, why he saw naught. Naught was God. A 
master says, Creatures in God are as naught for he has in him the 
whole essence of creatures. He is the being that contains all 
beings. The master says, Nothing inferior to God, however nigh 
it might be to him, but has some alien taint. The master says an 
angel knows himself and God without means. Into other things 
he knows there comes an outside element, some interference still, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 63 

however slight. If we are to know God it must be without means, 
nothing foreign can come in between. When we do see God in 
his light it happens in private, safe from the slightest intrusion 
‘of creaturely things. Then we have immediate knowledge of 
eternal life. 
“ Seeing nothing, he saw God.’ The light which is God is flowing 
_ and darkening every light. Concerning it Job says, ‘He com- 
manded the sun not to shine and sealeth up the stars as it were 
with a seal.’ Enveloped in this light he could see naught beside ; 
his whole soul was distraught, intent upon the light that is God 
. to the exclusion of all else; and this is a lesson to us, for what time 
we are busy with God we mind little what goes on without. 
Fourthly, he saw naught since the light which is God is un- 
mingled, free from admixture. It shows it was the true light he 
beheld for there was nothing there. By light he simply means 
that he saw nothing with his open eyes. In that he saw not, he 
saw the divine naught. St Augustine says, When he saw nothing, 
he saw God. According to St Paul, ‘ Whoso only seeth being 
blind, he seeth God.’ As St Augustine hath it, ‘ God is the true 
light, preserver of the soul, more nigh to her than she is to herself, 
and by the same token, when the soul turns her back on things 
becoming, then God must needs shine into her. This soul knows 
neither love nor care, she is unmindful of them. The soul that 
fares not forth to outside things comes home to stay in her im- 
partible pure light. She does not love nor does she fear nor care 
withal. Knowledge is the basis, the foundation of all being. 
Love has no hold except in knowledge. When the soul is blind 
and can see naught beside, then she sees God, it is inevitable. A 
master says, the eye at its clearest, without any colour, sees every 
colour; not just as a colourless thing in itself, but in place in the 
body it has to be void of all colour for us to see colours. In 
colourless things all colours are seen, aye, though it be down in 
one’s feet. God is something all-embracing. For God to be seen 
by the soul she has to be blind. Accordingly he says, ‘ He saw 
the naught whose light all lights are, whose being all beings are.’ 
The bride says in the Book of Love: ‘When I had passed by a little 
I found him my soul loveth.’ The little she had passed all 
creatures were. Whoso putteth not these behind him shall not 
find God. And eke she would imply that however small, however 
pure a thing I know God by, yet it must go. Even the light that 
verily is God, if I take it where it plays upon my soul is foreign to 
him. I must take it at the source. I cannot really see the light 
that shines upon the wall unless I turn my gaze to where it comes 
from. But if I take it in its cause I am robbed of its effect. I 
ought to take it neither where it falls nor in its eruption nor yet 

64 MEISTER ECKHART 

as brooding in itself; these are all mere modes. We must take 
God in modeless mode and unconditioned essence, for he is free 
from mode. St Bernard says: He who would know thee, God, 
must mete thee with no measure. Please God we may attain 
that understanding which is wholly without mode and without 
measure. So help us God. Amen. 

xX 
AND BEHOLD THERE WAS A MAN... SIMEON 

Et ecce, homo erat in Jerusalem, cui nomen Simeon ete. (Luc. 235). 
St Luke relates in his gospel that ‘ when the days were accom- 
plished Christ was brought to the temple. And behold there was 
a man in Jerusalem, Simeon by name, who was just and God- 
fearing, waiting for the consolation of the people of one and the 
Holy Ghost was in him.’ 

‘And behold.’ This particle et in Latin sh joining, 
binding or locking together. , Things fast bound or locked together 
are described as in union. Here I refer to the soul being bound, 
knit, united to God. According to our doctors, union postulates 
likeness. There is no union without likeness. Binding or knitting 
together, that is the meaning of union. Nearness to me does not 
constitute likeness : my sitting by someone or in the same place, 
for example. As St Augustine says, Lord, when I found myself 
afar from thee it was not from the remoteness of the place, it came 
of thy unlikeness wherein I found myself. One master says, 
people living and working wholly in time never agree, they never 
come together. According to our doctors, a thing whose life and 
work is in eternity and a thing whose life and work is here in time 
require a go-between. Where there is knitting and binding together | 
there must be some likeness. The union of God and the soul is 
a matter of likeness. Where no difference exists there must be 
identity; not merely union in mutual embrace, but one; not 
merely likeness, but the same. Wherefore we say that the Son 
is not like the Father but he is his image, he is one with the Father. 

One of our best doctors says that an image in stone or on the 
wall, with no foundation to it, taken simply as a form, is the same 
form as his whose form itis. For the soul passing into her exemplar 
wherein is no alien thing, only her form wherewith it is one, this 
doctrine holds good. Having gotten the form that is divine we 
behold God, we find God. In separation God is not found. On 
passing into her exemplar and finding herself in that image alone, 
in that same image the soul finds God and the finding of herself and 
God, which is all the same act and is timeless, is the finding of God. 
So far as she is therein so far she is one with God. He means: 

I" 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 65 

as far as a man is at the stage where his soul is the divine image. 
Then so far as he is he is divine. So far therein so far in God, not 
annexed, not united but one and the same. 

One master says, likeness means birth. Further he states that 
like is not met with in nature unless it is born. Doctors declare 
that fire, however fierce, would never burn had it no hope of 
propagation. However dry the wood supplied it would never 
catch (if fire) lacked power to generate its kind. What fire wants 
is to be born in wood, for all to be one fire, living and lasting. 
Extinguished and dead it were fire no more, so it wants to keep in. 
The nature of the soul would never have gotten its kind were it 
not for her wanting to have God begotten in her ; she would not 
have proceeded into her nature, would never have wanted to enter 
therein, except in the hope of this birth; nor would God ever 
have brought it to pass had he not meant the soul to be born into 
him. God does and the soul desires. God has the energy and the 
soul has the will and the power to have God born into her and her- 
self into God. This God contrives with intent that the soul shall 
be like him. She must needs wait for God to be gotten in her and 
for her treasure to grow into God, desiring union and the safe- 
keeping of God. God’s nature pours into the light of the soul and 
therein she is preserved. God purposes thus to be born into her, 
united with her, contained in her.—How can that be? Do we * 
not say that God contains himself ?—When he draws in the soul 
she finds that God is self-contained and there she stays abiding 
nowhere else. Augustine says: ‘As thou lovest so thou art :) 
loving earth thou art earthly, loving God thou shalt be divine.” | 
If I love God then, shall [be God? It is not I who say so ; search; — ‘i 
the scriptures. In the Prophets God says: ‘ Ye are gods and the: 
children of the Most High.’ I say that it is in his likes that God 
gives this birth. Had she no expectation of this the soul would not 
want to attain it. She wants to be preserved in him, he is her 
life. God has a preserve, a safe place in himself, which man can 
know nothing about until he pares off and is rid of all that belongs 
to the soul—her life, her powers, her nature, all must go. And 
that means standing in that perfect light where she and God are 
one form, where she finds herself God. It is characteristic of God 
to have nothing alien in him, nor on him nor added to him. And 
likewise it behoves the soul to have no outside impressions, 
nothing put on, nothing annexed. So much for the first (word). 

‘And behold’: ecce. This word ecce has all the meaning of 
logos (or word) and it could be given no greater. Word, i.e. God. 
God is a word, God’s Son is a word. It conveys the idea of our life 
and all our desire being centred in and dependent upon and 
oriented to God. As St Paul says, ‘ By the grace of out I am 

66 MEISTER ECKHART 

that Iam.’ And again, ‘I live, yet not I but God liveth in me.’ 
What more ? 
Homo erat. He says, ‘ Behold, a man.” We use the word 
homo for women as well as for men, but the Latins refused it to 
' woman because of her weakness. Homo denotes something whole, 
nothing lacking. Homo, a man, a mortal, means one pertaining 
to earth, implying humility. Earth is the basest of the elements 
and placed in the midst with the heavens all round, it lies open to 
every celestial emanation. All the work and waste of heaven Is 
caught midway in the sink of earth. Homo in yet another sense 
means moisture; as much as to say, one who is watered with 
grace ; referring to those humble souls who receive the immediate 
influx of grace. In this inflowing grace there forthwith arises 
that light of the mind into which God is sending a ray of his 
unclouded splendour. In this powerful light a mortal is as far 
above his fellows as a live man is above his shadow on the wall. 
This light is vastly potent, not merely being in itself exempt from 
_ time and place, but anything it falls upon it robs of time and place 
and bodily semblance and everything extraneous thereto. As I 
have often said before, were there no time nor place nor aught 
\S beside it would be all one being. The man who is in this sense 
“i one and casts himself into the ground of humility, there will be 
watered with grace. 

Concerning the third point: this light deprives of time and 
place. ‘There was a man.’ Who gave him this light? The 
light did. This word erat belongs expressly to God. In the 

_.,- Latin tongue there is no word so proper to God as erat. John in 
rv .wvhis gospel comes to using erat as a synonym for pure being. Things 
} are all extras: but addition is possible only in thought ; not by 
mental addition but by mental abstraction. Goodness and truth 

Hine: additions, in theory at least, but the abstract essence without 
anything to it is what is meant by erat. Again, erat implies birth, 

|an end of becoming. I was coming to-day, now I have come; 

) and if we eliminate time from my coming and having arrived, then 

| coming and come close up into one. Where coming and come 
indde, there we are born and re-made and re-formed into his 

| primitive form./ I have often said that all the while a thing’s 
\äught is a matter of concrete existence it never will be re-created ; 
_refurbished it may be.and coloured. afresh, ‚even as a seal that is 
old: that is restamped and renewed. A heathen doctor says, 
Things yonder no time can stale; there is the blessed life in the 
evermore: faultless, care-free, unalloyed being. Solomon says: 
‘There is nothing new under the sun,’ though this is seldom taken 

in its proper sense. Everything under the sun grows old and dies, 

but yonder is nothing but new. Time brings two things : age and 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 67 

decay. What the sun shines on is present in time. Creatures are 
here and are from God, but yonder where they are in God they are 
not at all the same as they are here ; they are as different as the 
sun is from the moon, far more so. Erat in eo, he says: ‘the 
Holy Ghost was in him,’ wherein is being ‚and.becoming. ‘There 
was a man.’ Where was he? In Jerusalem. Jerusalem 
meaning vision of peace ; it stands, in short, for man’s peace and 
prosperity. It possibly signifies more. Paul says, ‘The peace 
that passeth all understanding keep your hearts and minds.’ 
Pray God we may be such as to enter into this peace, which is 
himself. So help us God. Amen. 

XXI! 
HE THAT HATETH HIS SOUL 

Qui odit animam suam in hoc mundo in vitam eternum custodiat 
eam (Joh. 12,,). I quote in Latin the gospel saying of our Lord, 
* He that hateth his soul in this world shall keep it in eternal life.’ 
Now mark what it is our Lord means when he speaks of a man 
hating his soul. He that loveth his soul in this mortal life and as 
she exists in this world shall lose her in eternal life ; but he that 
hateth her mortal guise shall keep her unto life eternal. 

There are two reasons for his using here the word soul. Accord- 
ing to one authority soul is a name for the ground (or soil) and has 
nothing to do with the nature (or ground) of the soul. As a master 
has said, Whoso discourses of moveable things trenches not on the 
nature or ground of the soul. Try to name the soul as she is in 
herself, in her pure and abstract nature, and not a name can we 
find. They call her soul as they call a carpenter, neither a human 
being nor after any being at all but after his work. What our 
Lord means is this: he that loveth his soul in her nakedness, 

_her impartible soul-nature, to wit, will hate and despise her in this 
dress. She hates and detests and rues being so far from the pure 
light she is in herself. 
Our doctors say the soul is called fire because of the force and 
because of the heat and because of the light that is in her. Others 
declare she is a spark of the celestial nature. A third school calls 
her a light. A fourth calls her a breath. A fifth dubs her a 
number. They are trying to describe the soul by something pure 
and luminous. Number exists in the angels and in light there 
is number as well, but to name her after the highest and after 
the brightest is still to fall short of the ground of the soul. God 
who is nameless is ineffable and in her ground the soul too is 

1 See also Spamer’s Texte, etc., A.5. One Latin and two German versions. 
Nu 

need ye 

f 

4 
f Ox 

68 MEISTER ECKHART 

ineffable as he is ineffable. There is another reason for his saying 
that she hates. This term we apply to the soul is the name of the 
soul as she is in the prison of the body, so he means the soul in 
her individual state, still at the stage of taking thought, still in 
her prison-house. By taking thought for these nether things, by 
taking them in by her senses at all, she is confined : words cannot 
name any higher nature within her. 

There are three reasons why my soul should hate herself. The 
first, that in so far as she is mine she is not God’s. The second, 
because my soul is not wholly imbedded and set and re-cast into 
God. Augustine says, To have God for one’s own one must needs 
first be God’s. The third reason is: the soul’s enjoying herself as 
the soul while enjoying God with the soul, which is wrong. She 
should be enjoying God in herself since he is entirely hers. As 
Christ says, ‘ he that loveth his soul shall lose it.’ What the soul 
is in this world or beholds in this world: things comprehended, 
apparent at all, she shall hate. A master declares that the soul at 
her highest and purest transcends the whole world, nothing attach- 
ing the soul to the world but affection. Sometimes she has a 
natural love of the body. Sometimes she has a will inclined towards 
creatures. Another says the soul has no natural concern with the 
‘things of this world any more than the ear has with colour or the 
eye has with song. Our natural philosophers teach that the body 
‘is much rather in the soul than the soul isin the body. Even as the 
cask contains the wine and not the wine the cask, so does the soul 
keep the body in her rather than the body the soul. What the 
soul loves in this world she is pure from by nature. According to 
one philosopher, it is the soul’s nature and her natural end to 
achieve within herself a feat of understanding, God informing her 
with the general idea. He that can say he has attained his nature 
finds all things within himself, fashioned in light as they are in 
God ; not as they are in nature but as they are in God. Neither 
spirit nor angel touches the ground or nature of the soul. In it 
she comes into the first, into the beginning, whence God breaks out 
in goodness into all creatures. There she loves all things in God, 
not pure as they are in her uncompounded nature, but merely 
impartible as they are in God. God has made this whole world 
as it were out of coal. Its pattern in gold is more lasting than this 
one in coal. Likewise the things in the soul are purer and nobler 
than they are in this world. The material which God made things 
out of is (to its exemplar in God) baser than coal is to gold. For 
the purpose of making a crock a man takes a handful of clay ; 
that is the medium he works in. He gives it a form he has in 
him, nobler than his material. And the moral of this is that the 
things in the intelligible world, the soul, to wit, are infinitely nobler 

2 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 69 

than they are in this; even as the image hewn and graven in gold 
_ so the types of all things are onefold in the soul. A master says, 
The soul has a natural gift for being impressed with the forms of 
all things. Another one says, Never did soul get to her virgin 
nature without finding all things imaged therein in the intelligible 
world which is incomprehensible, unthinkable. Gregory says: All 
reasoning in words about divine things is but a stammering. 

One word more about the soul and Ihave done. ‘O ye daughters 
of Jerusalem, look not upon me because I am brown! The sun 
hath coloured me and the children of my mother have striven 
against me’ (Cant. 1,). She refers to the children of this world, 
to them the soul speaks. The sun is the lust of this world: the 
visible, tangible things thereof do turn me swarthy and brown. 
Brown is not a pure colour: it is part light and part darkness. 
When the soul thinks or acts with her powers how enlightened 
soever these be, still, there is confusion. And therefore she says, 
* My mother’s children have striven against me.’ These children 
being the lower powers of the soul, all clashing and at strife with 
her. The heavenly Father is our father and christendom is our 
mother. What though she be fair and well-favoured and good at 
her work, yet this is not perfect. Wherefore he cries, ‘O thou 
fairest among women go forth and depart.’ This world is like a 
woman, weak. But why does he address her, ‘O fairest among 
women?’ The angels are fair and are far above the soul. He 
says, ‘fairest’: in her light-nature. ‘Go forth and depart’: 
go forth from this world and depart from such things as thy soul 
is still prone to. And anything grasped let her hate. 

XXII 
THE LORD PUT FORTH HIS HAND 

Misit dominus manum suam et teligit os meum et diwit mihi etc. 
(Jer.1,). ‘The Lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth 
and said unto me.’ Dharshcidenhete 

When I preach it is my wont to speak about detachment, of the 
duty of ridding ourselves of self and of things. Or again, of return 
to the impartible good, God to wit. And thirdly, on the duty of 
remembering the high and noble nature God has put into the 
soul so that mortals may wonder about God. Fourthly, about 
the pure nature of God, the ineffable splendour of God. God is a 
word, an unspoken word. Augustine says: ‘ All scripture is vain.’ 
We say that God is unspoken, but he is unspeakable. Grant he is 
somewhat: who can pronounce this word? None but the Word. 
God is the Word which pronounces itself. Where God exists he 

/ 

a> aA 

Y 

My 

70 MEISTER ECKHART 

is saying this Word; where he does not exist he says nothing. 
God is spoken and unspoken. The Father is the speaking energy 

and the Sun is the speech energising. What is in me goes forth 

“of me; I have but to think and my word goes forth, at the same 

time abiding within. Even so does the Father speak forth his 
Son who meanwhile remains in him unspoken. I have repeatedly 

‚said, God’s exit is his entrance. In proportion to my nearness to 

God does he speak himself into me. In the case of rational’ 

‘\ereatures ‘the more they go out of themselves in their_works the 

more they get into themselves. Not so with.corporal things : 

_»rthe more active these are the further they get from themselves. 

en 

All creatures desire to speak God in their works: they all of them 
speak him as well as they can but they cannot really pronounce 
him. Willy-nilly, in weal or in woe they are all trying to utter 
God who yet remains unspoken. 

David said, ‘The Lord is his name.’ Lord means one set in 
authority ; knave means an underling. Some names are proper 
to God and forbidden to aught beside God. God is the name 
peculiar to God just as man is the name for mankind. A man is 
a man be he foolish or wise. Seneca says, ‘’Tis a vile man that 
excels not humanity.’ Another name we associate with God is 
paternity. When we call a man father, we take for granted a son. 
No father can be without having a son. True, they merge, beyond 
time, into eternal nature. The third name in its higher sense 
relates to God and in its lower one to time. God is called by many 
names in scripture. Now I say, anything we can think of in 
God or put any name to, that God is not. God transcends name, 
transcends nature. We hear of one good man who in prayers 
besought God for his name. Then, ‘ Peace!’ quoth a brother, 
‘thou art abasing God.’ We can find no name to give to God; 
but we are permitted to use the names his saints have called him 
by, those whose hearts inspired by God were flooded with his 
divine light. Hence we learn, first, how to pray to God. We 
ought to say, Lord, in those very names which thou didst instil 
into the hearts of saints, suffusing them with thy light, we praise 
thee and adore thee. And secondly we learn that in giving God 
no name at all we praise and honour him sufficiently since God is 
above name and ineffable. 

Out of the fullness of his power the Father speaks the Son and 

_in him all things. _All creatures are the utterance of God. Like 

as my lips proclaim and tell forth God so does a stone’s existence, 
and we can glean more from the fact than from the telling of it. 
Work wrought by highest nature in its sovran power a lower 
nature cannot comprehend. If it did the selfsame work then 

would it not be lower, but the same. Creatures all want to copy 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 71 

»God in all they do. But it is precious little they are able to reveal. 
Even the highest angels, inasmuch as they ascend and come in 
touch with God, are no more like than black and white to that 
which is in God. It is altogether different, what creatures have 
received, yet they all desire to speak as nearly as possible the same. 
The prophet says : ‘ Lord, thou sayest one and I understand two.’ 
When God speaks into the soul, as it falls it divides. The higher 
we soar in our understanding the more we are in him. In eternity, 
the Father is speaking his Son all the time and pouring forth all 
creatures in him. They all have a call to return whence they 
came forth. Their whole life and nature is a vocation, a flight 
back to what they came out of. 

The prophet says: ‘The Lord sent forth his hand,’ meaning 
the Holy Ghost. He says, ‘he touched my mouth,’ and 
straightway there follow the words, ‘he spake unto me.’ The 
mouth of the soul is the highest part of the soul and she has this 
in mind when she says, ‘ he hath put his Word into my mouth,’ 

. this being the kiss of the soul ; mouth to mouth the Father conveys 
his Son into the soul, then he speaks to her, saying, ‘ Lo, this day 
I have chosen thee to set thee over nations and over kingdoms.’ 
God says he will choose us to-day. Yonder in eternity, where 
time is not, there is ever to-day. ‘And I have set thee over 
nations,’ i.e. above this world which thou must be rid of; “and 
over kingdoms,’ meaning, that more than one thing is too much ; 
it behoves thee to die to.all things.and-get- back to the height where 
we dwell in the Holy-Ghost. Amen. Lak Wot ehem 

2 

XXIII 
THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD 

Spiritus domini replevit orbem terrarum etc. (Sap. 1,). * The 
spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole world.’ 

A philosopher says, All creatures bear witness to the divine nature 
whence they proceeded forth, in their will to emulate the Deity they 
came from. 

Creatures proceed forth in two ways. The first is a radical 
process, like roots coming out of a tree. The second emanation 
is by mode of will. Behold the twofold emanation of divinity. 
One the descent of the Son from the Father, this after the manner 
of a birth. The other, the outpouring of the love of Father and 
Son, the Holy Ghost, to wit, for in him they love one another. 
All creatures proclaim their origin, their divine descent betrays 
itself in their works. According to a Greek philosopher, God 

N 

wb 

72 MEISTER ECKHART 

keeps all creatures in leash, as it were, and they must follow 
where he leads. Hence nature is aye making for the highest. 

The second emanation is the Holy Ghost, by mode of will. 
Nature would fain make nothing but the Son; were she allowed 
she would do father’s work, so nature would be ever giving sons 
did she not suffer accidental lapses. When nature is working in 
time and space then father and son are different. One master 
explains that a carpenter building a house will erect it first in his 
mind and, were the house subject enough to his will, then, materials 
apart, the only difference between them would be that of begetter 
and suddenly begotten. Lo, thus it is in God, for since there is 
no time nor place in him, therefore they are one God, there being 
no distinction save outpouring and outpoured. 

According to the scriptures, ‘ The spirit of the Lord hath filled 
the whole world.’ Why is he called Lord? Because he fills us. 
Why is he called spirit ? Because he unites us with himself. A 
lord is known by three signs. First, he is rich. Rich means 
possessing all things without stint. Hence none is really rich but 
God in whom all things are harboured indivisibly. So he can 
give all things and this is the second sign of riches. A philosopher 
says, God hawks himself to all creatures and each takes as much 
as it wants. I trow God offers himself to me as he does to the 
highest angel and were I as apt as he is I should receive as he does. 
As I have often observed, God always behaves as though he was 
trying to please the soul. The third sign of riches is, giving for 
love; whoso giveth for aught is not really rich. God’s richness 
is shown by his giving all his gifts gratis. As saith the prophet, 
‘ Thou art my God, thou needest not my possessions.’ He 
alone is the Lord and the spirit. I say, he is spirit; our happiness 
lies in union with him. 

The most excellent work of God in creature is being. My 
father gives me my, nature but he does not give me my being: 
God does that, none beside. That is why everything that exists 
takes such a shrewd delight in being. The being of the soul 
receives the influx of God’s light ; not pure and limpid as God 
sends it forth but in ambient undulations. We can see the sunlight 
where it falls upon a tree or any other object, but we fail to appre- 
hend the sun itself. And so with any gift of God: these are all 
meted out according to the taker not according to the giver. 

A philosopher says, ‘God is the standard of measure,’ and so far 

‘as one mortal contains more God than another, to that extent he 

lis wiser and nobler and better than the other. To have more of 
God simply means being more like him : the more God’s likeness 

" ‘exists in us the more spiritual we are. A philosopher says, ‘ Where 

the lowest spirit ends the highest bodily thing begins.’ All of 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 73 

which goes to prove that God being spirit, the least of spiritual 
things excels the best of corporal things. Soul is more excellent 
than anything bodily. Soul is contained in a place, as it were, 
betwixt time and eternity, touching them both. With her higher 
powers she is in touch with eternity; in her inferior powers she is 
in contact with time. Thus, mark you, in time she does not 
function according to time but in her eternal nature which she has 
in common with the angels. Spirit is a subtle thing, bringing life 
to all the limbs in virtue of the close accord of soul with body. 
Albeit spirit is rational, and does the entire work, yet we do not 
say, my soul does so and so, for both of them together are a man. 
This fact I may make bold to state: because of the intimate union 
of the body and the soul the soul is in the smallest member as much 
as in the body as a whole. St Augustine says, ‘ The union of body 
and soul may be close, but closer still is the union that spirit has 
with spirit.’ Lo, he is Lord and spirit, may he beatify us by uniting 
us with him. ER 

It is a puzzling question how the soul survives when God 
imprints himself in her. Consider. Were God to give her any) 

outward being she would scorn it; but when he gives her himself \_ 
in himself she receives and suffers in his and not in her own, his / 

being hers: he has fetched her out of her own so his is now hers \ 

and hers really is his. So she suffers in union with God. This is 

the:spirit of the Lord which has filled the whole world. Amen. 

XXIV 
ST JOHN SAW IN A VISION 

St John saw in a vision a lamb standing on Mount Sion and with 
him stood forty and four who were not of this world nor had they 
wifely names. These were all virgins who stood next the lamb, and 
when the lamb inclined they inclined with him, singing with the 
lamb a new song and having their names and the name of their 
Father written in their foreheads. 

John says, ‘I looked and lo, a lamb stood on the mountain.’ 
I say, John himself was that mountain whereon he saw the lamb, 
and whoso sees the Lamb of God must himself be the mountain, 
ascending to his highest, purest part. 

Again. He says he saw a lamb standing upon a mountain: 

when one thing stands upon another its lowest point touches the 
other’s highest. God touches all things and remains untouched. 
God is above all things standing in himself and his instance sus- 
tains all creatures. Creatures have an uppermost and undermost. 

God has not. God is over everything and is not touched by - 

74 MEISTER ECKHART 

anything. All creatures seek outside themselves, in one another, 
what they lack. God does not. God does not look outside him- 
self: everything that creatures have God has entire in him; he 
is the floor, the roof of creatures. True, one is prior to another 
down to the very last, one being born before another: though 
creature gives not of her being to him, yet she keeps some of his. 
God is a simple presence, a stay-at-home in himself. With any 
creature, as regards her noble nature, the more she sits at home 
the more of herself she gives out. A common stone, like limestone, 
for example, gives itself out a stone and nothing more. But a 
precious stone, this has great power because of something in it, 
some interior fastness wherein it rears its head and, so to speak, 
peers out. According to the masters, no ‘creature is so stay-at- 
home as body and soul, nor goes so far afield as the soul’s highest 
art. 

i He says, ‘I saw a lamb standing.’ From which we learn four 
things. First, the lamb is fed and clothed and that in goodly 
fashion, which to our mind looks as though we, having gotten so 
much from God and that so goodly, are bound to seek in all we do 
only his honour and his glory. Again, the lamb stood. . It is good 
for friend to stand by friend. God stands by us, is standing by us, 
steady and unmoved. He says: ‘ There stood with him a multi- 
tude, each having written in his forehead his name and the name of 
his Father.’ Let at least God’s name be written in us. We must 
bear God’s image in us and his light must lighten us, if we would 
be John. 

; XXV 
THE LORD HATH SENT HIS ANGEL 

Nunc scio vere, quia misit dominus angelum suum (Act. 12,,)- 
Freed from his prison bonds by the power of the supreme God, 
Peter exclaims, ‘ Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent 
his angel and hath delivered me out of the power of Herod, out of 
the hand of the enemy.’ * 

We will reverse the words and say, ‘ The Lord hath sent his 
angel, therefore I know of a surety.’ Peter symbolises intuition. 
As I have often said, intuition and intellect do not unify the soul 
in God. Intellect is a matter of pure being. Intuition, its fore- 
runner, goes ahead and penetrates to what is born there: God’s 
one-begotten Son. Our Lord declares, in Matthew, that no one 
knows the Father but the Son. Now, philosophers say under- 
standing lies in likeness. Some of them say the soul is made of all 
things since she is capable of understanding all things. That sounds 
ridiculous, but it is true. They say that anything I know must 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 75 

be wholly present to me in the likeness of my understanding. 

But according to the saints, power is in the Father, likeness in 

the Son and union in the Holy Ghost. Hence, if the Father is all 

present to the Son and the Son is all-to like him, therefore no one 
- knows the Father but the Son. 

Peter says, ‘ Now I know of a surety.’ Why does he know of 
a surety? Because it is divine light which does not deceive. 
And because we see in it quite clearly without anything to hide 
the view. Paul says concerning it: ‘God dwells in light inacces- 
sible.’ Doctors declare that the wisdom we learn here stays with 
us yonder. St Paul says it will go. A philosopher once said, 
* Real knowledge, even in this body, is intrinsically so delightful 
that the sum-total of created things is nothing to the joys of pure 
perception.’ Yet noble though it be, it is but contingent; as 
one small word to all the world even thus insignificant is all the 
wisdom we learn here compared with the whole and perfect truth. 
Look you. Paul says it goes. And even if it stayed it would turn 
to foolishness and be as nothing to the actual truth we see. 
Thirdly, we surely know, for things seen here as changing we see 
_as changeless there where we get them as.a-whole.and indivisible, 

_ approximately one, things.widely.sundered. here being close together 
there where all things are at hand : both the first day-and-the last % 
_are._happening-at‘the-present instant-yonder. Gh 
»‘ Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent his angel.’ 
When the Lord sends his angel to the soul she becomes sure- 
knowing. Not unjustly God ordained Peter should keep the 
.key. For Peter stands for intuition, and it is intuition with the 
key that unlocks and goes in and finds God face to face, whereupon 
she notifies her find to her partner, will, she having had the will 
before, for what I will I seek. Perception leads the way. It is 
the princess seeking the prince upon the mountain-top, in virgin 
realms ; she proclaims him to the soul and soul to nature and nature 
to the passions of the body. So noble is the soul at her highest 
and her best, the doctors cannot find her any name. They call 
her anima because she animates the body. 

Theologians say that next to the first emanation of the Godhead, 
when the Son breaks out of the Father, his angel is most like to 
God. True, soul is like to God in her highest part, but this angel 
is even more like God. All that belongs to this angel is godlike. 
The angel was sent to the soul to bring her back to the very same 
form wherein he is formed, for knowledge comes by likeness. The 
soul is capable of knowing all things and she never rests till she 
attains her original form wherein all things are one ; it is there she 
rests, in God. In God one creature is no better than another. 
According to the masters, being and knowing.are-the.same, Soba 

\! 

\A oy 

76 MEISTER ECKHART 

things that are not are not known and things that are most are 

most known. God has transcendent being, so he transcends all 

knowing, as I said in my first sermon two days back. The soul, 

informed with primitive light, sealed with the seal of pure being, 

smacking of God prior to truth and gnosis, with every named nature, 
sloughed away : the soul (I say) at this stage of all-perfect know- 

ledge has gotten being to match. As St Paul says, ‘ God dwells 

in light inaccessible.’ He hangs suspended in his own pure being 

whereto naught is attached. He is merely a presence in himself, 

where neither this nor that exists, for what is in God is God. 

A heathen says, They that hang under God are hanging in God, 
and while having real subsistence in themselves do yet impend in 
him who has neither end nor beginning, for in God nothing alien 
betides. Heaven affords us an example. It never takes in aliens 
as aliens. And by the same token, what gets to God is changed : 
however vile it be, on bringing it to God it sheds its self. For in- 
stance, I may have wisdom but not be it. I can gain wisdom and 
can also lose it. But what is God’s is God; it cannot leave him. 
It is implanted in God’s nature; God’s nature being so stable 
that anything to do with it is settled in it once for all or always 
stops outside. Now reflect and marvel! If God converts vile 
things into himself, how ween ye he will treat the soul, which he 
has dignified with his own image ? 

XXVI 
wi THE FEAST OF THE VIRGIN 

x“ Aimulor enim vos dei emulatione etc. (2 Cor. 11,). In the name 

‘So of our Lord. We read on the Feast of the Virgin the words of St 

i) 

NY Paul, ‘I have espoused you to one husband, Christ, rejuvenant.’ 

The masters ask, ‘Has the Son been born?’ We say, no! 
he masters ask, ‘Is the Son going to be born?’ We say, no! 
he masters are answered : the Son is fully born, he is being born 
new unceasingly. St Paul says, ‘ Christ is the power of God and 

the wisdom of God.’ His power is his wisdom and his wisdom is his 

power. Christ is the man whose youth is perennially renewed. 
‘Now St Paul says, ‘To this man I have espoused you.’ For 
as marriage between man and wife is binding, so there is eternal 
marriage between your souls and God. A maid is given to a man 
hoping to bear his child. And God did make the soul intending 
__ her to bear in her his one-begotten Son. The happening of this 
birth in Mary ghostly was to God better pleasing than his being 
- born of her in flesh. And this same birth to-day in the God-loving 
soul delights God more than his creation of the heavens and earth. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 77 

The philosophers say the soul is bigger than the heavens. St 
John says: ‘He who sat upon the throne declared, ‘ Behold, 
I make all things new.”’’ Now, according to St Augustine, ‘ God’s 
speaking is his child-bearing and his child-birth is his Word.” God 
spake never a word but one and that he holds so dear that he will 
never say another. If God stopped saying his Word, but for an 
instant even, heaven and earth would disappear. Augustine says : 
“ As the marriage of man and woman is for good and all, so is the 
_ marriage of the soul.’ The highest power of the soul, the one for 
ever straining up to God, is called the man. The lower power, the 
one that is condemned to wander among mortals, is the maid. 
The higher power, the man, goes all uncovered. But the lower 
power, the maid, is closely veiled and this lower power is taken 
to the higher. To this nature it belongs to be always active. It tries 
all the time, father-like, to beget ; and were it not prevented, a son 
would be always being born as with the heavenly Father. But 
what God does of his free gift (man’s) nature hinders and a girl is 
born ; but were there neither time nor place nor matter, man would 
rejuvenate himself as the Son does the Father, always. 

God said: ‘ Behold I make all things fruitful.” Then why am 
I myself not fruitful ? God first bears his image in the God-loving 
‘soul and afterwards himself. If God gave himself to the soul here 
in time she would be vexed. So he gives her himself in eternity, 
in the perennial now, up-springing freshly without ceasing. She 
is too curious to rest until she finds her source. This is quite 
plain from Philip’s words: ‘Show us the Father and we shall be 
satisfied.’ As the eternal Son of God comes welling up in his 
paternal heart, so he wells up in the God-loving soul. Mortal 
things work outwardly, ghostly things work inwardly. The soul 
this birth once happens in, that soul is nigh let into God; if it 
happens twice she gets still more into God. The more frequent 
this birth the deeper in God and the closer knit into the Father’s 
heart. This birth transcends here and now. Here, that is, place ; 
now, that is, time. It befalls in eternity. May we, being born in 
him, enable him to bear himself in us. So help us Father, Son and 
Holy Ghost. Amen. ee 

XXVO 

REJOICE IN THE LORD 

Gaudete in domini, iterum gaudete ete. (Philip. 4,). St Paul says: 
‘ Rejoice in the Lord and have no more care: the Lord is present 
with yourthoughts which are known unto God in prayer and thanks- 
giving.’ ‘ Rejoice in the Lord alway,’ he says. Jerome declares 
that none receives knowledge nor wisdom nor honour from God 

= 

78 MEISTER ECKHART 

except he be a virtuous man. No virtuous man is he who, changing 
not his ways, does not receive from God knowledge and wisdom 
and joy. He says again: ‘ Rejoice in the Lord.’ Not in our 
Lord but in the Lord. I have repeatedly explained that God’s 
lordship consists not alone in his being lord of all creatures : his 
lordship consists in having the power to create a thousand worlds 
and to transcend them every one in his pure essence: therein lies 
his lordship. 

‘ Rejoice in the Lord (alway),’ he says. And here we note two 
precepts. First, that we must remain all within in the Lord, not 
looking for him outside whether in knowledge or in love: simply 
rejoice within in the Lord. The other precept is: rejoice in his 
innermost in his first, whence all things get their joy and take their 
being. That is the meaning of ‘ Rejoice alway.’ As St Augustine 
hath it, ‘ He rejoices all the time who is rejoicing above time and 
timelessly.’ Then he goes on to say: ‘Have no more care. The 
Lord is present, is at hand.’ The soul must needs cast off all 
care what time she is rejoicing in the Lord, leastwise on her union 
with God. And hence his words, ‘ Have no more care : the Lord 
is present, he is nigh.’ In other words, God is with us in our 
inmost soul, provided he find us within and not gone out on business 
with our five senses. The soul must stop at home in her innermost, 
purest self; be ever within and not flying out : there God is present, 
God is nigh. 

Another meaning of the particle by which he employs. He is in 
himself, not going far out but remaining all by himself. Quoth 
David: ‘ Rejoice, my soul, O Lord, for unto thee have I lifted her 
up.’ The soul must put forth all her strength to lift herself above 
herself and be translated beyond time and place into the void 
where God is in and by himself, not going out nor eke in touch with 
any outside thing. Jerome remarks that ‘God can no more have 
recourse to time and temporal things than stones can have angelic 
wisdom.’ He says: ‘The Lord is nigh.’ Quoth David: ‘God 
is nigh unto all them that call upon him, that call upon him in 
truth and invoke him.’ How to call upon him, to call upon him 
in truth, to invoke him, that I leave aside. But he uses the words 
‘in truth.’ The Son alone is the truth and not the Father, save 
in the sense that they are one truth in their essence. That is 
truth which reveals what I have in my heart without likeness. 
This revelation is truth. The Son alone is the truth. The whole 
content of the Father’s love he speaks at once in his Son. This 
utterance, this act, is the truth. 

He goes on to say: ‘ Your thoughts are known unto him in the 
-Lord,’ 7.e. in this truth with the Father. Faith inheres in in- 
tellectual light and sight in the combative faculty which is always 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 79 

aspiring to the highest and the purest : to the truth, where God is 
in himself. I have sometimes said, watch me these souls: their ı 
power is too free, too passionate to bear restraint of any kind. 

XXVII 
THE ANGEL GABRIEL WAS SENT! 

Missus est Gabriel angelus etc. (Luc. 1,,). St Luke says in his 
gospel, ‘the angel was sent from God into a land called Galilee, 
into a town called Nazareth, to a virgin called Mary, who was of 
the house of David.’ According to Bede, the theologian, this was 
the beginning of our salvation. I have said before and say again 
that everything our Lord has ever done he did simply to the end 
that God might be with us and that we might be one with him, 
and that is the reason why God was made man. The masters say 
that God was ever being born in our Lady ghostly ere ever he 
was born of her in flesh, and from the overflow of that begetting 
wherein the heavenly Father begat his one-begotten Son within 
her soul the eternal Word received its human nature in her and she 
became with carnal child. 

He says, “the angel was sent from God.’ The soul would scorn 
to have the angelic light were it not sent to her from God; if 
there were not concealed in it the light of God to make the angel’s 
light detectable, she would have none of it. 

He says, ‘the angel.’ What is an angel? Three doctors give 
three different definitions of what an angel is. Dionysius says, 
An angel is a mirror without flaw and passing clear containing the 
reflection of God’s light. Augustine says, An angel is nigh unto 
God and matter is nigh unto him. John Damascene says, An 
angel is a reflection of God and through all that is his there is 
shining the image of God. The soul has this image in her summit 
whereon the light of God for ever shines. This is his first definition 
of an angel. Later on he calls him a dividing sword, aflame with 
divine desire, and, he adds, ‘ angels are free and inimical to matter.’ 

He says, ‘the angel was sent from God.’ What for? Accord- 
ing to Dionysius, an angel has three functions. First, he purifies, 
next he enlightens, and lastly he perfects. He purifies the soul 
from stain, i.e. he purges her from matter and gathers her together 
to herself, cleansing her from foulness as one angel does another. 
Then he ‘enlightens her in twofold fashion. Divine ‚light is so 
overwhelming that the soul is unable to bear it unless it is tempered 
in the angel’s light and so conveyed into the soul. He enlightens 

1 See also Sievers’ No. 2. 

80 MEISTER ECKHART 

her therefore by reflection. The angel conveys his own knowledge 
to the soul and strengthens her in this way to bear the light of God. 

If I were in a wilderness alone and was afraid, the presence of a 
child would dissipate my dread and give me courage, so noble, 
so blithe a thing is life. Failing a child, a beast would comfort me. 
Hence necromancers use an animal, a dog (for instance), the 
animal’s vitality invigorating them. Knowledge is power. The 
angel conveyed it to the soul in preparation for the light of God. 

He says, ‘ the angel was sent from God.’ The soul must be like 
an angel in the ways that I have named if the Son is to be sent to 
her and born in her. But there remains the question of how the 
angel perfects her. May God send his angel to us, So help us God. 
Amen. 

XXIX 
THE ANGEL GABRIEL WAS SENT 

Missus est Gabriel angelus (Luc. 1,,). ‘In time the angel 
Gabriel was sent from God.’ Inwhattime? Inthe sixth month, 
John being then quick within his mother’s womb. When anyone 
asks me, Why do we pray or why do we fast or do our work 
withal, I say, So that God may be born in our souls. What were 
the scriptures written for and why did God create the world and the 
angelic nature? Simply that God might be born in the soul. 
All cereal nature means wheat, all treasure nature means gold, 
all generation means man. As the philosopher says, No animal 
exists but has somewhat in common with mankind in time. First 
of all when a word is conceived in my mind it is a subtle, intangible 
thing ; it is true word when it takes shape in my thought. Later, 
as spoken aloud by my mouth, it is but an outward expression of the 
interior word. Even so the eternal Word is spoken in the inner- 
most and purest recesses of the soul, in the summit of her rational 
nature, and there befalls this birth. Whoso has nothing more than 
a firm belief in and lively conviction of this will be glad to know 
how this birth comes to pass and what conduces to it. 

St Paul says: ‘In the fullness of time God sent his Son.’ 
St Augustine was asked what it meant, this fullness of time. It is 
the fullness (or end) of the day when the day is done: then the 
day is over. Certain it is that there is no time where this birth 
befalls, for nothing hinders this birth so much as time and creature. 
It is an obvious fact that time affects neither God nor the soul. 
Did time touch the soul she would not be soul. If God were 
affected by time he would not be God. Further, if time could 
touch the soul, then God could not be born in her. The soul 
wherein God is born must have escaped from time, and time must 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS Bl 

have dropped away from her; she must be absolutely one in will 
and desire. 

Another fullness of time. Ifsomeone had the knowledge and the 
power to gather up the time and all the happenings of these six 
thousand years and all that is to come ere the world ends to boot, 
all this, summed up into one present now, would be the fullness of 
time. This is the now of eternity, when the soul knows all things 
in God, as new and fresh and lovely as I find them now at present. 
The narrowest of the powers of my soul is more than heaven wide. 
To say nothing of the intellect wherein there is measureless space, 
wherein I amas near a place a thousand miles away as the spot I 
am standing on this moment. Theologians teach that the angel 
hosts are countless, the number of them cannot be conceived. 
But to one who sees distinctions apart from multiplicity and \ 
number, to him, I say, a hundred is as one. Were there a | 
hundred Persons in the Godhead he would still perceive them} 
as one God. 

As regards the angels. The angels, of whatever rank, abet and 
assist at God’s birth in the soul; that is to say, they have satisfac- 
tion, they delight and rejoice in this birth. Nothing is wrought 
by the angels: the birth is due to God alone and anything that 
ministers thereto is work of service. May God be born in us, So 
help us God. Amen. 

XXX 
‘VISION IS THE WHOLE REWARD’ 

Beatus es, Simon Bariona, quia caro et sanguis non revelavit tibi, 
sed pater meus, qui in ceelis est (Matt. 16,7). * Blessed art thou, 
Simon Peter,’ says our Lord, ‘for flesh and blood have not 
revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in heaven.“ St Peter 
has four names: Peter and Barjona and Simon and Cephas. 
Our Lord says, ‘ Blessed (6r happy) art thou.’ Everyone desires 
happiness. As the philosopher hath it, All men desire to be. 
Hence St Augustine’s dictum, The good man wants no praise, 
he wants to be praiseworthy. And our own doctors teach withal 
that virtue is so pure, so wholly abstract and detached from corporal 
things in the ground and summit of its nature that nothing what- 
ever can occur therein without defiling virtue and introducing 
vice. The least thought or suggestion of self-seeking and it is not 
virtue : it is turned to vice. Such is virtue by nature. ae} 

A heathen philosopher says, Virtue, except for virtue’s sake, is in 
no wise a virtue. If its object is praise or aught fe is 

82 MEISTER ECKHART 

bartering virtue. Genuine virtue is not to be sold for anything 
on earth. Wherefore the good man seeks no praise: he seeks to 
be praiseworthy. It is not the chiding that we ought to mind 
but the fact of deserving to be chidden. 
‘Blessed art thou,’ quoth our Lord. Beatitude lies in four 
‚things. To have all that has being and is lustily to be desired and 
brings delight ; to have it all at once and whole in the undivided 
soul and that in God, revealed in its perfection, in its flower, where 
it first burgeons forth in the ground of its existence, and all con- 
ceived where God is conceiving himself—that is happiness. The 
name Peter means seer of God. Now, theologians question whether 
the kernel of external life lies more in intellect or will. Will has 
two operations: desire and love. Intellect, with its simple 
function, is therefore better; its work is understanding, and it 
never stops till it gets a naked hold on what it sees. Withal it 
runs ahead of will and tells it what to love. We desire a thing 
while as yet we do not possess it. When we have it we love it: 
desire then falling away. 
What must a man be to see God? He must be dead. ‘No 
man can see me and live,’ said our Lord. Now St Gregory says, 
q ‘That man is dead who is dead to the world.’ Ye can judge for 
"yourselves how dead one may be and how little can touch us the 
things of this world. _By dying to this world we do not die to God. 
St Augustine prayed a variety of prayers. ‘ Grant me, Lord,’ 
yo & he said, ‘to know both thee and me.’ ‘O Lord, have mercy 
E upon me and show me thy face and grant me that I die not until 
I eternally behold thee.’ This is the first point: one must be 
_dead to see God. So much for the first name, Peter. 

One philosopher says, were there no means we should see the 
beloved in heaven. But another one says, were there no means 
we should see nothing. Both of them are right. The colour on 
the wall which is carried to my eye is filtered and refined in the 
air and in the light and transmitted in a pure state to my eye. 

ae „ Even so the soul must be strained by light and grace before it can 
6, see God. So rather is that master right who said that without 
wor means we should not see at all. But the other one is also right 
who said that without means we should see the beloved in heaven. 
For the soul would see God naked if there were nothing between. 

The second name, Barjona, signifies a son of grace, in whom the 
soul, clarified and sublimed, is meet for the vision of God. 

The third name is Simon. That is to say, one who listens, one 
who cbeys. To hear God one must be divorced from the world. 
David says, ‘I will be still and listen to what God is saying in me.’ 
He pronounces peace in his Word, on his saints, on his people, 
on all such as commune with their heart. Happy the man who is 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 88 

busy attending to what God is saying in him. He is directly 
subject to the divine light-ray. The soul that stands with all her 
powers under the light of God is fired and inflamed with divine love. 

The divine light shines straight in from above, and a perpendicular 7“. 

_sun on one’s head is a thing that few can survive. Yet the highest , 
power of the soul, her head, is held erect beneath this shaft of godly 

light so that there can shine in this light divine which I have oft 
described as being so bright, so overwhelming, so transcendent, 
that all lights are but darkness in comparison with this light. All 
creatures, as so being, are as naught ; dowsed in the light wherein 
they get their being they are aught. How noble soever the natural 
mind yet to reach, to grasp God without means the soul must 
possess these six qualifications I speak of. 

First, she.is dead-to-ehanging-things. Next, she is well clarified 
in light and grace. Thirdly, she is without means. Fourthly, 
she hears God’s Word in her heart. Fifth, she is under the 

divine light. The sixth is the heathen philosopher’s definition 

of happiness: one perpetual ascension and vision of beatitude 
in God. Where the Son himself is understanding, in his first 
leaping forth, there in God’s highest we too shall understand. 
Wherefore it behoves us to keep our head turned steadfastly 
that way. er 

Cephas means a head. Understanding is the head of the soul. 
The superficial notion is that love stands first. But the soundest 
arguments expressly state (what is the truth) that the kernel of 
‘eternal life lies rather in knowledge than in love. This mark, for 
our best masters say, will no special thing, and lo ! intellect, under- 
standing, this flies straight up to God. Love turns to the loved : 
she finds there what is good. Intellect seizes the cause of the good. 
Honey is sweeter in itself than anything we make from it. Love 
takes God as-being-sweet, but intellect goes.deeper-and-conceives 
God as being. ‘ Blessed art thou, Simon Peter,’ quoth our Lord, 
To the righteous man God gives divine being, and calls him by the 
name which is appropriate to that being. Thus he goes on to 
speak of ‘my Father which is in heaven.” Among names none 
is more appropriate than He-who-is. That one should recognise a 
thing and simply say, it is, would seem absurd ; call it a stone, a 
bit of wood, and we know what that means. But suppose every- 
thing detached, abstracted, pared away, and nothing left except 

2.08 : 
Reusor, 

the is; that is the characteristic nature of his name. Our Lord | 

promised his disciples, ‘ My followers shall sit at my table in my 
Father’s kingdom, and shall eat my meat and drink my drink 
which my Father hath prepared for me.’ Happy is the wight 
who has attained to receiving with the Son just where the Son 
receives. Right there we too shall find our happiness, and there in 

84 MEISTER ECKHART 

his felicity, there where he has his being, in that same ground his 
friends shall all behold and thence shall draw their happiness. 
That is the table in God’s kingdom. May we approach that table, 
So help us God. Amen. 

XXXI 
THE MAN IN THE SOUL 

Vir meus servus tuus mortuus est (4 Reg..4,-,). The woman 
said to the prophet, ‘My husband thy servant is dead and the 
creditors are come to take my two sons as bondsmen for the debt, 
for I have nothing but a drop of oil.’ Then said the prophet, * Go 
borrow empty vessels and pour a little in: it will increase and 
multiply and will pay thy debt and release thy sons. Thou and 
thy children can live on the rest.’ 

The spark (i.e. the intellect, the head of the soul), the so-called 

> husband of the soul, is none _other-than-a-spark the divine 
/ nature, a divine light, a ray{ an imprint .of divinity. / A woman 
begged our Lord for the water which he gives. Whoso drinks 

of this shall never thirst. Theologians say, the best gift of God 
is the Holy Ghost wherein God bestows all his grace and favour, 
his living water, namely. ‘ Whom I give this to shall never thirst.’ 
This water is grace and light upspringing in the soul to everlasting 
life. © 

The woman said, ‘ Sir, give me of this water’ And our Lord 
replied, ‘Bring me thine husband.’ She said, ‘I have no 
husband.’ Quoth our Lord, ‘ Thou hast well said: thou hast not 
one, thou hast had five, and he whom now thou hast is not thine 
husband.’ St Augustine asks: ‘Why does our Lord reply, 
“ Thou hast well said’? ?’ What he means is this: thy five senses, 
these are the five husbands thou hadst in thy youth, after thine 
own heart; now in thine age thou hast one, not thine own: 
intellect, namely, and this thou dost not obey. When the man 
in the soul, the intellect, is dead, unchecked evil prevails. To 
separate soul and body is bad enough, but for the soul to be divorced 
from God, that is a far worse matter. As the soul is the life of the 
body so God is the life of the soul. As the soul suffuses our 
members so God suffuses the powers of the soul and is passed on by 
them in goodness and love to everything round that they may be 
aware of him as flowing all the time, i.e. above time, in eternity 
and in the life they live. 

The woman said, ‘Sir, my husband thy servant is dead.’ 
Servus means one who receives, receiving another’s; one who 
keeps and keeps for another. To keep for himself would make 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 85 

him a thief. Intellect is a servant, more so than will is or love. 
Will and love fall on God as being good : were he not good they, 

would ignore him. But intellect pierces right through into | yo : 

essence, reckless of goodness, of power, of wisdom, of bbings | 

accidental whatever they be and added to God. Not looking for 
these she gets them in him when, merged into his essence, she knows 
God simply as existence. What though he be not good nor just, 

N 
0) 

yet she enjoys him as|pure being. ) Here intellect is like the highest © 

rank of angels of which there ‘are three choirs. The Thrones 
receive God into them and preserve God in themselves. In the 
Cherubim God rests; they see God continually. The Seraphim 
are ardent (burning): like to these is the God-bearing intellect. 
With these angels the intellect spies God, in his vestibule, naked, 
as one without difference. 

Quoth the woman, ‘Sir, my husband thy servant is dead, and 
the creditors have come for my two sons.’ What are the two 

sons of the soul? St Augustine, and with him a heathen doctor, | \" 

speaks of the two faces of the soul. One is turned towards this‘ 
world and towards the body, in this she works virtue and wisdom. | 
The other face gazes straight into God ; the divine light is always 
in it, and this tells upon it unless, through being from home, she 
has it unawares. When the spark of the intellect carries right into 
God, then the man is alive. The birth takes place. Not once a 
year it happens nor yet once a month nor once a day but all the 
time, beyond time, in the open, where there is neither here nor now 
nor thought nor nature. That is why we speak of sons, not 
daughters. 

Now, to speak of the two sons in another sense. As under- 
standing and will. Understanding leaps out of the intellect first 
and is afterwards followed by will, from them both. But no more 

of this.—These, imnagps of intellect may be taken in yet another (\ fi) 
wer, the other as actuality. One heathen doctor |“ bod 

way. One as} power, 
says that it is in this power the soul becomes all things, ideally. 
In her actuality she is, like the Father, making all things new. 
It pleased God to seal her in the nature of all creatures: before 
the world when she existed not. God wrought this whole world 
ghostly in every single angel before he made the world itself. An 
angel has two understandings. The one is morning light, the other 
is the evening light. In the morning light he sees everything in 
God. In the evening light he sees things in the light of his own 
nature. When he goes out into things it grows night. So long 
as he remains within he has the evening light. We say that the 
angels rejoice when a man becomes good... But, our best doctors 
ask, do the angels also repine when a man commits sin? We say : 
No; they see into the justice of God and enjoy all things therein 

pe? Y 

Y N 

An 
\qw) 

\ IL 

Lanth 

86 MEISTER ECKHART 

as they are in God. Therefore they do not repine. Intellect in 
its potential power is like the angel’s natural light, ö.e. the evening 
light. With her actual power she raises all things up into God, 
where all things are bathed in the morning light. 

Quoth the woman, ‘ The creditors are come to seize my two sons 
for their slaves.’ Then said the prophet, ‘Go borrow empty 
vessels from thy neighbours.’ These neighbours mean all 
creatures and the five senses and the powers of the soul with her 
interior faculties which work in secret and are angels. From all 
these neighbours borrow empty vessels. Let us borrow empty 
vessels; these filled with heavenly wisdom will give us means to 
pay our debt and, on the rest, to live eternally, So help us God. 
Amen. 

XXXII? 
THE SOUL SPARK 

Homo quidam fecit cenam magnum (Luc. 14,,). St Luke relates 
in his gospel how ‘a certain man gave a great supper or evening 
entertainment.’ Who makes it? A certain man. What does 
he mean by calling it a supper? One master says this betokens 
great affection, seeing none are bidden save the intimates of God. 
* When we give a morning party all and sundry are invited but 
to an evening meal we invite important people, the people that we 
like and our own familiar friends.* Secondly, he has in mind how 
perfect are those souls who enjoy this evening meal. The evening 
never comes without a whole day having gone before. Were there 
no sun there were no day. Sunrise, that is morning light which 
goes on getting brighter up to middle-day. Just as the divine 
light rising in the soul gradually eclipses the powers of the soul 
until the advent of the noon. No day, no spiritual day, at all 

‚ can dawn within the soul except she receive divine light. * Divine 
light breaks into the soul and makes her morning, and the soul 
mounts up in this light into space, to the zenith at high noon.* 
Thirdly, he implies that to take this supper worthily we have to 
come at evening. When the light of this world fails it is the 
evening. As King David sings, ‘ He riseth in the evening and 
His name it is the Lord!’ So Jacob at eventide did lay him 
down to sleep. This betokens peace of mind. Fourthly, he 
remembers, as St Gregory points out, that after supper there comes 
no other meal. * When the spark in the soul takes in divine light ; 
it needs no other sustenance but keeps ever to this divine light.* A 

1 See also Jostes, Nos. 1 and 6; and Spamer’s Texte, A. i 
which the starred passages are added. h SE Wie ao 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 87 

To whom God grants this provender, so fragrant, so delicious, that 
soul shall never relish any other fare. 

‚St Augustine says, ‘ God is of such a nature that once embracing 
him we can never rest elsewhere.’ St Augustine says, ‘ Lord, so 
thou take from us thyself, grant us then another thee or we shall 
have no rest; we have no mind for aught but thee.’ One holy 
man says of the God-loving soul, that she gets out of God whatsoever 
she will, befooling him so thoroughly he can deny her not a thing 
there is. He took himself in one way and gave himself another 
way :.he took himself God-and-man and gave himself God-and-. 
Man, another self in a mystic vessel. Very precious hallows are 
not wantonly exposed to public gaze and touch. So he clad him- 
Self in the frock of the appearance of bread, even as my bodily 
food is altered in my soul, which is not in my nature for an instant 
without combining with it. For there is a power in nature which 
Separates the base and throws it out, and the high invades the 
low to the last needle-point and is embodied in it. The things I 
ate a fortnight. since are every bit as much united with my soul as 
what I did receive within my mother’s womb. Whoso takes this 
food fasting becomes as truly one therewith as flesh and blood 

. are with my soul. 

/ There was a certain man; the man had not a name because \ ___ > 

} 

\ this man is God. | / 
The philosopher affırms concerning the first cause that it 
transcends speech. All words fail. Because of the surpassing 
pureness of its nature. We have but three ways of speaking about © 
things : first, in terms of things above them; second, of their likes ; 
and thirdly, of the works of the things. To give you an example. 
The power of the sun draws up the precious sap out of the roots 
into the shoots and brings it out in flower, here the solar power 
being above it. *As we say of the tree, so we say of the things 
above the tree; of the sun, for example, which is working in the 
tree.* Likewise I say the divine light is working in the soul. 
* The spark in the soul being drawn up in this: light and in the 
Holy Ghost and borne aloft to its first source. But nothing true 
can be spoken of God, because there is nothing above him.* 
That the soul expresses God does not in anywise affect his real 
intrinsic being: no one can express what he actually is. Some- 
times we say one thing is like another. * We can say nothing of 
‘God because nothing is like him.* Creatures enclose a mere 
nothing of God wherefore they cannot disclose him. The painter 
who has painted a good portrait therein shows his art: it is not 
himself that it reveals to us. Creatures can no more give out God 
than they can take in exactly what he is. 2 
The God-and-Man a prepared this supper, the ineffable man . 

_ 

88 MEISTER ECKHART 

who is wordless. According to St Augustine, what we say about 
God is not true and the things that we say not are true. Things 
we say that God is he is not; what we say he is not that he N 
rather than what we say that Bas is. 

Who has prepared this repast ? A man, the man who is God 
King David says, ‘O Lord, how great and manifold is thy enter- 
tainment, the sweets that are laid up for them that love thee!’ 
(Not ‘them that fear thee.’) St Augustine meditating on this 
food, regarded it with loathing and distaste, when lo! he heard 
- voice from within, ‘I am the food of the great, wax and grow 
great * eating me; nor ween not that I shall be turned into thee: 
thou shalt be turned into me.* When God works in the fiery heat 
‘the diverse things within the soul sublime and burn away. By 

- the absolute truth ! soul enters more into God than any food into 

us; nay, the soul is changed into God. There is a power in 
the soul which splits off what is base and is absorbed into God. 

_ To wit, the spark of the soul. My soul becomes more one with God 

‚than food does with my soul. 
, Who has prepared this evening meal? A man. Dost know 
‘his name? *Not I. His name is not spoken. He is more 
‘silence than speech. He is above name. What food has 
he prepared for this feast? Himself, no less than himselt.*/ 
(What does the servant mean ?) According to St Gregory the 
servant means preachers. And in another sense the servant 
means the angels, *the angels ever calling us with interior 
voice.* Thirdly, methinks this servant, is the spark of the soul, 
which is sent there by God and is his light striking down from 
above, the reflection (or image) of his divine nature and ever opposed 
‘to anything ungodly: not a power of the soul, as some theologians 
‚make it, but a permanent tendency to good ; aye, even in hell it is 
‘inclined to good. According to the masters, this light is of the 
nature of unceasing effort ; it is called synderesis, that is to say, 
a joining to and turning from. It has two works. One is remorse 
for imperfection. The other work consists in ever more invoking 
good and bringing it direct into the soul, even though she be in 
|hell. It is a great supper. He said to the servant, ‘Go out and 
|compel them to come in, those that are bidden, for all things are 
ınow ready.’ All that he is the soul receives. What the soul 
desires is now prepared. The things God gives have always 
| been. Behold them new and fresh and all at once in the eternal 
“now. 
A great philosopher declares that anything I see comes into my 
eyes purified and ghostly, and the light that comes into my eyes 

_ would never get into my soul but for a power above it. * There 

is a power in sight which is superior to the eyes set in the head 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 89 

and more far-reaching than the heavens and earth. This power 
seizes all the things that come into the eyes and bears them up 
into the soul.* St Augustine says the spark comes nigher to 
the truth than any human knowledge. Light burns. They say 
that one is lighted from another. If so, the light is higher than the 
thing that burns. For instance, take a taper, extinguished but 
still glimmering and smoking, and hold it to the light; this will 
glance down and light the other. They say one fire burns another. 
But Itraversethat. Fire, I ween, does burn itself. For one thing 
‚to burn another it must needs be above it, like heaven, for example, 
which burns not and is cold ; natheless it sets on fire and that by 
dint of contact with the angels. For this the soul prepares by 
practice. Then she is fired from above. By the angelic light. 
He says to the servant, ‘Go out and say to them that were 
bidden, Come, for all things are now ready.’ Then one said, 
‘I have bought a piece of ground, I cannot come.’ These are 
they who still have worldly cares; they never taste this supper. 
A second said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen.’ These 
five yoke, I fancy, stand for the five senses, for each sense is self 

and other and the very tongue is double. So in my story yesterday, 

when God said to the woman, * Bring me thy husband,’ she replied, 
“I have none.” Whereupon quoth he, ‘Thou sayest truly: 
thou hast had five, and him whom now thou hast is not thine 
husband.’ The moral is that those who live the life of the five 
senses never taste this food. The third one said, ‘I have married 
a ehe LT oonnot come.’ The soul is all-to single when she 
turns to God. As glancing down in this direction she is woman ; 
but as seeing God in himself and visiting God at home she is the 
man. Of old it was forbidden to men to dress in woman’s clothes 
or women man’s. She is man when she penetrates into God, 
impartibly and without means. But when she peers forth at all 
she is woman. * As I have repeatedly said, the man in the soul 
is the intellect. When the soul looks straight. up to God with her 
mind then the soul is the man, she is one and not two. But 
thinking and glancing down she dons female dress.* Quoth 
our Lord, ‘ Verily, these shall not taste of my supper’; and he 
commanded the servant, ‘Go out into the streets and the lanes, 
into the highways and hedges—the narrower the wider and hedged 
about.’ *For the more recollected the soul the less scattered 
she is and the more concentrated the wider her ken.* And 
some of her powers are hedged into one sense. The power I 
see with I do not hear with, nor with my power of hearing can I 
see. So with the rest (of the five senses). But on the other hand, 
the soul exists entire in every member; there is some power, 

therefore, not confined to place at all. ur 

$ 
ef we « 
ie A 

he 
% 

¢ 

f Ä x 
ei‘ 

N 

90 MEISTER ECKHART 

What is the servant ? Angels and preachers (so says St Gregory). 
But, as it seems to me, the servant is a symbol of the spark. He 
says to the servant, ‘Go out into the hedges and drive in thither 
these four kinds of folk: the poor and the maimed and the halt 
and the blind: Verily, none other shall taste of my supper.’ 
Let us throw off those three/and rise up_man, So help us God. 

Amen. 

APPENDIX! 

SYNDERESIS 

Oxrorp MS. 

The meat and drink I took 
a fortnight since has turned 
into my blood, my flesh, my 
nature. That is due to the 
power of the soul which brings 
it into my nature ; it is as truly 
one with me as what was born 
with me. 

So does the power of the 
Holy Ghost take the purest and 
lightest and highest and the 
spark of the soul and carry it 
up in the fire of love. Just like 
the sun’s power : this lays hold 
in the roots of the tree of what 
is most pure and essential, 
drawing it up into the branches 
where it flowers. Even so is 
the spark of the soul being 
always drawn up in the light 
and in the Holy Ghost and 
conveyed into its source, 
becoming all-to one with God 
and searching him so throughly 
that it is more the same as 
God than food is with my 
life. 

I say it is the light up in the 
soul where the soul nature 

Mark first in St Andrew his 
singleness of life and spiritual 

' attainments whereby his soul 

was enabled, in her intellect, 
to ascend in the grace of God 
above all creatures into God. 

For the power of the Holy 
Ghost seizes the very highest 
and purest, the spark of the 
soul, and carries it up in the 
flame of love. Just as the 
power of the sun takes what is 
purest and subtlest out of the 
roots of the tree and draws it 
into the branches where it is in 
flower. Likewise the soul-spark 
is conveyed aloft into its source 
and is absorbed into God and is 
identified, with God and is the 
spiritual light of God. 

1 

There are two lights in the 
soul, one is a light up in the 

1 See Zuchhold, No. 25. Parallel passages from an Oxford MS. of Eckhart’s 

Nos. 1 and 69. 

. Sermons (Sievers’ copy), and a sermon on St Andrew, evidently by the same 
hand, but bearing the name of Nikolaus von Landau. 

See also Jostes, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 91 

touches angelic nature and 
passes into the angelic nature ; 
it is from God and is pouring 
into the soul above nature. 

Some say it is a power. It 
isnot. A servant is mentioned, 
that is the intellect. There 
soul attains angelic nature and 
is the image of God. 

In this light the soul has 
intercourse with angels and eke 
with those angels that are 
fallen into hell. There the 
spark subsists without any kind 
of suffering, turning straight up 
into God. 

And withal she is like the 
good angels in this power, who 
work unceasingly in God, be- 
holding God in God and return- 
ing all work into God. 

This light the soul carries 
within her. The masters call 
it a power in the soul, this 
synderesis. Itisnot. Itmeans 
something hanging to God and 
is ever averse from evil. 

In hell it tends to God. It is 

soul at the point where the 
soul is by nature in contact 
with the angels’ nature. The 
other light is what I speak of. 
This light pours into the soul 
from on high, above nature. 

Some call it a power of the 
soul. But it is not. It is 
called synderesis. To wit, the 
intellect which is a spark (or 
ray) of God the Father given by 
God out of his Godhead’s God- 
nature, and is the form of God 
without any difference at all. 
In it she is in touch with the 
angelic nature. 

In this light the soul has 
community with angels also 
those cast into hell. There the 
spark is free from all suffering. 
and faces straight up into God 
and has precisely his nature. 

And withal she has’ a some- 
what, mind, in common with 
good angels who are constantly 
working in God and emanat- 
ing from God and bearing back 
all their work into God and 
receiving God from God in 
God. . 

The intellect is like to these 
good angels, drinking God in 
his eternal savour, his living 
sweetness and in his own ground. 
She is sent away from God and 
is a light that (re)turns: the 
reflection of the divine nature, 
which the soul has cast into her. 
The masters call it synderesis 
which is as much as to say) 
something suspended from God! 
all the time and which never 
does wrong. 

In hell, says St Augustine, it 

92 MEISTER ECKHART 

ever at war in the soul with the isturned to God. In the soul it 

impure and the ungodly. wages constant war with things 
that are not pure and are not 
godly. 

It looks neither to God’s 
glory nor possessions. It 
presses up into the goal of 
divine essence and is the true 
God’s messenger which leads 
and draws mankind to the 
celestial feast : et misit servum 
suum hora cene. 

XXXIIT 
IF YE THEN BE RISEN WITH CHRIST 

Si consurrexistis cum Christo, que sursum sunt, querite, ubi 
Christus est in dextera dei sedens etc. (Col. 3,). St Paul says: ‘If 
ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above and 
set not your affections on the things on earth.’ Then he goes on 
to say, ‘ ye are dead, and your life is hid in Christ with God in 
heaven.’ Thirdly, there are the women seeking our Lord at the 
sepulchre. There they found an angel ‘ whose countenance was 
like lightning and his raiment white as snow,’ and he asked the 
women, ‘Whom seek ye? If ye seek Jesus who was crucified, 
he is not here.” For God is not in any place. Of God’s lowest 
all creatures are full and his highest is nowhere. They answered 
him not, for they were disappointed at finding the angel and not 
God. God is not here or there, not in time or place. 

St Paul says: ‘If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that 
are above.’ His first word expresses doubt. Some people rise 
by practising one virtue not another. Some, ignoble by nature, 
covet riches. Others, of a noble kind, care nothing for possessions 
but are bent on honour. One master says the virtues all hang 
upon each other. Though a person lean to the uses of one virtue 
rather than another they stand and fall together. Some people 
rise up all at once and yet rise not with Christ. That which is his 
rises once for all. On the other hand, we do find some who rise 
with Christ for good and all, but it will need a man of many parts 
to know in Christ the true resurrection. The masters say that with 
true resurrection there is no more death. Now there was never 
virtue so outstanding but someone might be found to have acquired 
it, and that by natural means, for natural powers work many signs 
and wonders, all the outward works found in the saints being found 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 98 

too in the heathen. And that is why he speaks of being ‘ risen with 
Christ,’ because he is on high, above the reach of any creature. 
What we have to do is to make the whole ascent. ' 

There are three signs of our having risen altogether. The first : 
we. seek those things that are above. The second : our affections 
are set on the things above. The third: we set not our affections 
on the things that are on earth. St Paul says: ‘Seek those things 
that are above.’ But where and in what way? King David 
tells us to ‘seek the face of God.’ What is common to a number 
must needs come from above. Above the fire itself there are the 
fire-givers like the heavens and the sun. Our best doctors teach 
that heaven is the locus of all things, and though it has itself no 
place, no natural place, yet it makes room for all things. My 
soul is undivided ; also, it is entire in each member. Where my 
eye sees my ear does not hear; where my ear hears my eye sees 
not. My bodily hearing and sight are engineered in the mind. 
Light gives my eye a sense of colour which is lacking to the soul 
by reason of its being a defect. All the outward senses are alive 
to, if the spirit is to take it in, must be raised up by the angel : 
he imprints it in the upper portion of the soul. 

The above designs and produces the below, so our doctors say. 
Even so St James asserts that ‘Every good gift and every perfect 
gift comes down from above.’ One who is risen to the full with 

Christ is known by his seeking for God above time. He seeks God _ 

above time who seeks him timeless. ‘Seek those things that are, 

above,’ he says. Where shall we look? ‘ Where Christ is sitting RN Woy, 

on the right hand of his Father.’ Where is Christ sitting? He 
is sitting nowhere; he is nowhere. If ye seek him anywhere ye 
shall not find him. A master has said that he Who sees anything 
does not see God. Now Christ means anointed: the anointed 
of the Holy Ghost. Sitting, theologians say, symbolises rest and 
implies timelessness. Turning and changing lead nowhere: stop- 
ping we progress. 

‘I am God, I change not,’ saith the Lord. ‘ Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of his Father.’ The best gift of God, that is his 
right hand. With natural man, he starts his work with his right 
hand. Christ says, ‘I am the door.’ The first outburst and the 
first effusion God runs out in is his fusion into his Son, a process 
which in turn reduces him to Father. I said on one occasion that 
the door was the Holy Ghost : there he is poured out in blessings 
into all creatures. According to one master, the heavens receive 
from God direct. Another one says, No; God is spirit, pure light, 
and anything receiving straight from God must itself be spirit and 
pure light. The master denies that it is possible, in the first 
eruption, the first escape of God, that any corporal thing should 

Cope, 

. N 

94 MEISTER ECKHART 

take it in: it must be either light or abstract mind. The heavens 
transcend time and are the cause of time. One philosopher 
maintains that the heavens are too lofty in their nature to stoop 
to be the cause of time. It is not in their nature that they are 
the cause of time : it is in their revolution that, timeless, they give 
rise to time, i.e. in the defection of the heavens. My looks are not 
my nature, they are accidents of nature : our soul is far above them, 
out of sight in God. And hence I say, not only above time but 
hid in God. That is what heaven means. Everything mortal 
spells deficieney : rise and fall, growth and decay. King David 
sings, ‘A thousand years in God’s sight are as a day that is past’: 
for all the future and the past yonder are in the now. May we 
find this now, So help us God. Amen. 

XXXIV! 
ST DIONYSIUS SPEAKS OF THREE KINDS OF LIGHT 

St Dionysius speaks of three kinds of light the soul has who 
attains to pure knowledge of God. The first is natural, the 
second ghostly and the third divine. 

Now consider what this natural light is and how far it helps 
her to know God. , The soul innately knows that existing things 
are not of themselves. But there must be one thing that is of 
itself and from none but itself: whatever that is it created all 
things. / 

Further, the soul innately understands that the good which is 
scattered among things is as a whole in the one cause of things. 
Also, it is natural to the soul to love each thing so far as it is good. 
And when her natural intellect stumbles on the cause of things, 
whose good, broadcast in things, is as a whole in their common 
cause, then this natural perception provokes in her a natural 
love towards this cause of all things. 

All creatures are infirm and changeful, not in reality (which is 
exempt) but in the first stages of perfection. St Augustine says, 
The soul cannot dwell for long upon one thought but lapses from 
it into others.. Neither can she entertain several thoughts at once ; 
she must leave one and die to it to quicken in another. But 
God has no community with creatures, wherefore it is evident 
that there is no deficiency in him. He has no community with 
creatures ; but this applies alone to God, and in so far as the soul 
is like him she is without defect. By nature the soul knows 
and loves God above all things. ; 

The second light is ghostly ; it originates in faith. But the 

1 Jostes, No. 69. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 95 

whole content of faith is beyond the scope of the nature of the 
soul. The faith is, that three Persons are in the same nature 
and the same nature in three Persons. No natural light or 
intellect is adequate for this, for no natural light dffords a likeness 
of it. What the three Persons do, or are capable of doing, is the 
product of their unity ; for though there are three Persons they 
do not act as three but they function as one God. That is a 
ghostly light whereby the soul in faith can actually see that this 
is so, (a light) such as her natural mind could never.give her. <=. 

The third light is the light of glory, divine light. This the soul 

receives into the chief power of the soul. In this light we see 
God with nothing between. So far as this light sinks into her 
chief power so far is God immediately perceived. In this light 
the soul divines the noble nature of all things in God, for all that 
ever issued forth or is issuing forth or ever shall, has in God 
eternal life and being; not defective as it is in creatures but as 
his very being for it is his nature. God has his own being not 
from naught, he has it of his proper nature which in itself is 
truly aught though naught to the intelligence of creature. 

This nature is causeless, therefore it is unfathomable except 
to causeless understanding. Creaturely intelligence is finite, 
so it has a cause; hence it cannot fathom causeless mind, not 
Christ nor his humanity. Where God is beholding his own 
nature, which is groundless, it is incomprehensible except to 
groundless understanding. This understanding is none other than 
his nature is itself: only God in his own nature can conceive 
himself. This conception is the understanding wherein, self- 
revealed, God manifests in light that no man can attain to. As 
St Paul says, ‘ God dwells in light unapproachable.’ 

XXXV 
STAND IN THE GATE 

Dominus dicit: sta in porta domus domini ‘et predica verbum 
istud (Jer. 7,). The Lord says, ‘Stand. in the gate of God’s 
house and proclaim his word, extol his word.’ The heavenly 
Father speaks one Word and that he speaks eternally and in 
this Word expends he all his might: his entire God-nature he 
utters in this Word and the whole of creatures. This Word 
lies hidden in the soul unnoticed and beyond our ken, and were 
it not for rumours in the ground of hearing we should never heed 
it; but all sounds and voices have to cease and silence, perfect 
stillness, reign. This is a meaning I will not pursue. 

Stand in the gate. Who stands there, his limbs are orderly 

yf 

\ 

X 

96 MEISTER ECKHART 

disposed. He is about to speak; the head of the soul is held 
stiffly up. The ordered is subject to an order which is higher 
than itself. Creatures are not of the order of God till the soul’s 
natural light, wherein they get their being, overshadows them, 
and the angelic light overshadows the light of the soul preparing 
and adapting it for divine light to work in; for God works not 
in corporal things, he works in the eternal. That is why the 
soul must be recollected and integrated to the spirit. It is there 
God works and there all works are agreeable to God. Never a 
thing is to God’s liking unless it is wrought there. 

Stand in the gate in the house of God, that is, his unity of 
essence. One is best kept by itself. So the unity stands by God 
and keeps God together, adding nothing. There he sits in his 
own presence, in his is-ness, all in himself, nowhere out of himself. 
But as he melts he runs out. He melts and runs out in his good- 

‚2 mess which, as I have explained, consists of knowledge and love. 

a 

Knowledge is the flux, for knowledge is hotter than love. But 

"two are better than one. And this knowledge is laden with love. 
% Love is fooled and caught by kindness: in love I hang about 
.” «the gate turning a blind eye to the authentic vision. Even 

J : “stones _ have love, a love that seeks the ground. If I insist on 

goodness in the first effusion and seize this at the point where it 
is good, then I shall seize the gate, not God himself. Knowledge 
_is the better, as being the head and front of love. Love is the 
will to, the intention. No single thought attaches to this know- 
ledge: wholly detached and self-forsaken it runs all bare into 
the arms of God and grasps him in himself. 

Lord it is meet that thy house be holy and a house of prayer. 
What is prayer? It is the practice of pure being and glorying 
therein. What is the glory? The arraying of man in the likeness 
of God in him. But while any image exists in the soul there is 
no glorifying God therein, as in a prayer-house, in the length of 
days. I do not mean days here: when I say length without 
length that means the length; breadth without breadth means 
the breadth. When I speak of all time I mean above time and 
above it, as I have explained, there is no here or now. 

The woman asked our Lord when we ought to pray. Our 
Lord replied, ‘The hour cometh but not yet, when true 
worshippers shall worship in spirit and in truth.” For God is 
a spirit and they must worship in spirit and in truth that which 
is truth itself. Which we are not: true we may be, but there is 
false mixed with it. For ye do not exist in God in that first 
eruption where truth comes spouting from its source. In the 

. gate of God’s house the soul has to stand and trumpet forth his 

Word. Everything which is in the soul has to utter praise, standing, 

heat une bre Se 
SERMONS AND COLLATIONS eid gr 

deaf to all the world, in silence and in peace, as I described the 
angels as sitting there with God. In that choir of wisdom and of 
burning God on a sudden declares himself to the soul plighting 
her his troth for good and all. It is the Father begetting his 
Son and in his Word he takes such huge delight, so fond he is of 
it, that he néver stops but goes on pledging his Word the whole 

time : timelessly, that is to.say. And here we must observe that 
plig 

a PT nn ae 

time. Meet for thine house are holiness and praise, there must 
be nothing there that does not praise thee. 

Our theologians ask, what praises God? Likeness does. Any 
likeness to God that lives in the soul redounds to the glory of God. 
Things at all different from God do not glorify God. A portrait, 
for example, reflects credit on the painter who embodies in it his 
dearest conception of his art and makes it the image of himself. 
The likeness of the portrait praises the author without words. 
Of little worth is spoken praise or praying with the lips. Our 
Lord said on one occasion, ‘ Ye pray, not knowing what prayer is. 
There shall come again true prayers, praying to my Father not in 
words but in spirit and in truth.” What is prayer? Dionysius. 
says, ‘The mind’s ascent to God, that is what prayer means.’ 
It is a heathen who observes that where spirit is and unity and 
eternity there God will be at work. Where flesh is warring against 
spirit; where disruption is warring against union ; where time is 
warring with eternity, there God works not: he can do nothing 
with it. Further, any pleasure we may have, or contentment or 
comfort, has to go. To worship God she must be holy, summed 
up to a whole, one spirit. naught beside: all wrought up at once 
into the eternal eternity on high, transcending all. Not all 
creatures which have been created, it is not them I mean, but all 
he could do an he would. This soul must transcend. While 
there is anything above the soul ; while there is anything in front 
of and in God, she can never enter his ground in the length of days. 

Now, according to St Augustine, when the light of the soul 
eclipses creatures, it is dawn ; when the angelic light eclipses 
the light of the soul and devours it, then it is broad day. David 
says, ‘The righteous man mounts up and up to the perfect day.’ 
His path is fair and smooth and pleasant and familiar. And 
when the psychic and angelic lights are swallowed up in the 
light divine, he calls that high noon. Now day is at its longest, 
in its prime, when the sun at its zenith pours its light into the 
stars and the stars pour it into the moon. These are members 
of the solar system. And even so the light of God embraces the 
angelic light and that of the soul, an orderly array, an ascending 
scale steadily rising in the day, all praising God in er There 

98 MEISTER ECKHART 

is nothing over that is not praising God : they are all alike, the 
liker the fuller of God, all lauding God together. The Lord said, 
‘I will abide with thee in thine house.” Dear God, we do beseech 
thee abide thou with us here, to the end that we abide with thee 

eternally. Amen. 

XXXVI 
YOUNG MAN, ARISE! 

Adolescens, tibi dico : surge (Luc. 7,,). Our Lord went to a city 
called Naim, and many of his disciples went with him and much 
people. And when they came under the gate there was a dead 
man carried out, a youth, the only son of a widow. And our 
‘Lord came and touched the bier whereon the body lay, and said, 
‘Young man, I say unto thee, Arise!’ The life spake life into the 
dead. The youth arose and straightway took up his parable: 
his resurrection by the eternal Word. 

He went to a city. I say, that means the soul which is well 
ordered and fortified in the Holy Ghost and, having set a watch 
for sin and shut out multiplicity, is safe and sound in Jesus: en- 
compassed and walled round by the light of God. As the prophet 
hath it, ‘ God is the wall round Zion.’ The eternal wisdom says, 
‘In the holy and in the sanctified city I shall have like repose.’ 
Nothing is so restful, so unifying, as like; hence same and in 
and near and by. That soul is holy in whom is God alone and 
wherein no creature finds rest. He says, ‘I shall have like 
repose in the holy and in the sanctified city.’ All sanctity is of 
the Holy Ghost. This nature nothing transcends: beginning 
with-the lowest it works it up into the highest. Philosophers say 
air only turns to fire when it is rarefied and hot. The Holy Ghost 
seizes the soul and clarifying her in its light and grace draws 
her up to the supreme. He says, ‘In the sanctified city I shall 
alike repose.’ As the soul rests in God so God reposes in her. If 
she rests partly in him then he rests partly in her; if she rests 
wholly in him he rests wholly in her. That is why the eternal 
wisdom says, ‘I shall repose alike (or equally).’ 

According to philosophers, the green and yellow colours of the 
rainbow merge into one another too gradually for any eye to follow, 
however keen its sight. And nature works so gradually when it 
resolves itself into the first effusion, this is so homogeneous with 
the angels, that Moses durst not write thereof for fear of the faint- 
hearted, lest they should worship them : so much the same they are 
with the first emanation. One high authority definitely states 
_ that the topmost angel is so nigh the first eruption, he has in him 
so much of God’s likeness and God’s might, that he it is who cares 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 99 

for and looks after this whole world as well as all the angels who 
areunder him. The moral of which is, that God the high, the pure, 
and the impartible is operative in his highest creature who exerts 
his power, as a viceroy rules the land in the name of the king. 
He says, ‘ In the holy and in the sanctified city alike do I repose.’ 

As I was saying lately, the gate or door that, melting, God 
flows out by, is goodness. Essence is self-absorbed: not an 
effusion but an inner fusion. And unity is one and self-contained : 
aloof from everything and free from outside intercourse. But 
goodness is the melting and running out of God : his diffusion to 
the whole of creatures. Essence is the Father, unity the Son, 
and goodness is the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost seizes the soul 
(the sanctified city) at its purest, at its highest, and hales it up 
into its first source, which is the Son, and the Son bears it on into 
his source, his Father namely, into the ground, into the first, 
where the Son has his being ; where the eternal wisdom is in like 
repose in the holy and in the sanctified city, in the innermost. 

He says our Lord ‘ went to a city called Naim.’ Naim means 
son of a dove, which suggests simplicity. The soul shall never 
rest in her potential power (or nature) till she is simplified to God. 
It also signifies a flow of water and implies passivity of soul 
towards sin and imperfection. The disciples symbolise the divine 
light which shall flow in and flood the soul. The ‘ much people’ 
are the virtues whereof I lately spoke. The soul shall ascend in 
fiery aspiration and pass above the manifold merit of the angels 
to the greater virtues. So she comes ‘under the gate’ and 
enters into love and unity: the gate whence they bore out the 
youth, the widow’s son. ‘Our Lord came and touched the bier 
whereon the body lay.’ How he came and how he touched I 
will not dwell upon but upon the words, ‘ Young man, Arise ! ’ 

He was the son of a widow: her man was dead. Hence dead 
too was her son, the only son of the soul, the will and all the 
powers of the soul, for all these are one in the innermost mind, 
and mind (i.e. intellect) is the man in the soul. Her husband was 
dead, therefore her son was dead also. ‘Young man, I say unto 
thee, Arise!’ When the Word addresses the soul and the soul 
replies in the living Word, then the Son is alive in the soul. 

Philosophers ask which is the better, the power of plants or 
the power of words or the power of stones? Let us consider. 
Words derive their power from the original Word. But the abuse 
and multiplication of words impairs their force. Plants possess 
great power. I have heard that a serpent was fighting with a 
weasel when the weasel ran off and fetched a little plant which, 
wrapping in another plant, it launched upon the serpent and, 
breaking asunder, the serpent lay dead. What endowed the 

100 MEISTER ECKHART 

weasel with this wisdom? The virtue of plant-lore. Therein 
lies much wisdom. Words, too, have prodigious power: with 
words we can do wonders. And stones again are very potent in 
virtue of the likeness wrought in them by the starry and celestial 
force. Like works in like most mightily, and that is why the 
soul, by raising herself up in the natural light, can get into angelic 
light and in the angelic light enter the light divine and so stand 
in the three lights, at the cross-ways, at the vertex, where the 
lights run into one. There the eternal Word is saying life in her, 
and there the soul is living and gainsaying in the Word. So 
may we be gainsayers in the eternal Word, God helping us. Amen. 

XXXVII 
YOUNG MAN, ARISE! 

Adolescens, tibi dico: surge (Luc. 7,4). We read in the gospel 
that a woman came to our Lord Jesus Christ. She said, ‘Sir, 
I am a widow, and had an only son who is dead.’ Our Lord said, 
‘Young man, Arise!’ 

The widow, this woman whose husband was dead, and her 
only son. By this woman is meant the understanding, her husband 
is the man of the soul, and the youth the highest intellect, for that 
is the young man. When the soul is dead in imperfection, the 
higher mind awakening into understanding cries to God for grace. 
Then God gives it divine light and it becomes self-knowing. 
Therein it sees God. I said, intellect alone can receive divine 
light. The other powers of the soul are instruments and agents 
for raising the intellect to its maximum lucidity. 

It is a question with the theologians, which ranks higher, under- 
standing or love? One school says understanding, the other 
school, love. It is a lively subject of debate. Understanding 
says: How canst thou love a thing thou dost not know? Love 
says: What avails thee thy knowledge without love? Loveless, 
thou shalt never find eternal happiness. Understanding says : 
I am born in the clear light of self-knowledge. Love says: Great 
knowledge without love is vain. Understanding says: Give 
place, thou are only my slave: thou dost help me to rise and 
remainest. Love says: I am the good that God is himself. 
Knowledge says: High is thy claim: without me thou dost 
fall to the ground. Love says: It would be well for thee to bear 
me more in mind. Understanding says: I can rise higher not 
fettered to thee; my vision is clearer, nay, I want none of thee. 
I have what I will the while I know what hitherto I have descried 
and into which I now have flowed to.sbide for aye in perfect 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 101 

unity. Here, I am above love and transcend all activity. Here 
I have intuition; and my real knowledge of all things, all I believed, 
iS now come true. Faith and hope and all the powers of the 
soul remain, they can go no further. True love says : I must abide 
with thee, for I am eternal. Our sisters stay behind, that is but 
meet : they are our servants who have brought thee to the actual 
enjoyment of thy eternal happiness.—Now comes the highest 
intellect, that which receives all things direct from God, and says: 
I have conceived the sovran good wherein is naught save unity. 
Intuition says: I shall cleave to thee, my place is at thy side. 
Intellect says: Knowledge and love must remain behind. Intui- 
tion says : It is meet I should enjoy what I have divined. Highest 
intellect replies: What you have brought me to and which I 
hitherto have known, now knows itself in me. Wherefore I find 
I need none else. All created things must remain behind with 
all I ever was. I stand before my cause. 

To go back to the widow and our Lord’s command, ‘ Young man, 
Arise!’ we must bear in mind that anything not far from birth 
is young. Thus it is with intellect as standing in the presence of 
its cause ; oblivious of the aids to its ascent it fondly weens it 
has been there for aye and there shall eternally remain. That 
may not be. 

Then take the words: ‘ by the widow is meant the understand- 
ing, by her son the intellect, and by her husband the man of the 
soul.” Now you must know, when the man of the soul begins to 
rise, the masters say it is another man. By which you must not 
understand it is another soul: it is another being of the soul; 
the old mode is done, it is dead. The soul assuming her real 
mode stands in her virgin innocence. The man of the soul; 
transcending his angelic mode and guided by the intellect, pierces 
to the source whence flowed the soul. Intellect itself is left 
outside with all named things. So the soul is merged into pure 
unity. This we calf the man of the soul, and, having reached this 
consummation, he has no need of any help. What he did here- 
tofore God now does in him. God knows him as he knew him, 
God loves him as he loved him. God is doing all the work and 
the man of the soul is absolutely idle. 

When a man has reached this point we may well say, this man 
is God and man. All Christ has by nature he has won by grace.. 
His body is filled with the noble nature of the soul, which she receives 
from God, with divine light, wherefore we may truly cry, Behold, 
a man divine! Pity them, my children, they are from home and 
no one knows them. Let those in quest of God be careful lest 
appearances deceive them in these people who are peculiar and 
hard to place ; no one rightly knows them but those in whom the 

University of Southern California Library 

102 MEISTER ECKHART 

same light shines. Namely, the light of truth. Yet it may well 
be that wayfarers to that same good, but who have not yet reached 
it, will come across these perfect of whom we have been speaking. 
Believe me, did I know one such, and had a convent-full of gold 
and precious stones, I would give the whole of it for a single fowl 
for him to eat. Further I declare, if all the things God ever made 
were mine, I would forwith give them all for the enjoyment of that 
man, and rightly, for they are all his. Nay, more I say: his, too, 
is God in the fullness of his power, and if there stood before me all 
who in imperfection are anhungered, I would not withhold from 
that man’s need a single feather of the fowl, though I might saa 
that multitude. For, you must remember, with one in imperfec- 
tion, anything he eats or drinks will drag him down and make him 
prone to sin. But not the virtuous man: what he eats and drinks 
he raises up in Christ to the Father. So look well to yourselves. 

You are familiar with Christ’s words, ‘ Where two are gathered 
together in my name I will be with them.’ Here Christ is referring 
to the harmonious union of the body and the soul, where body 
wants nothing except what the soul wills. God is with these: they 
are the people we have been speaking of. Here the man of the soul 
is in actual possession of his eternal happiness, and, being docked 
of all her powers, the soul encounters no sort of opposition. I 
warn you, you must keep a sharp look out, for they are difficult 
to tell; thus if they should need it, while other people fast they 
will be eating, while other people watch they will be sleeping, 
while other folks are praying they will hold their peace. In short, 
the things they say and do seem unaccountable, for what God 
makes obvious to persons on the way to their eternal happiness 
is foreign to those that have arrived there. These have no 
wants whatever: they are rich in the possession of a city of their 
own. I call that my own which is mine eternally and no one can 
take from me. These people, you must know, do most valuable 
work. They work within, you understand,*in the man of the 
soul. Blessed is the kingdom wherein dwells one of them; in 
an instant they will do more lasting good than all the outward 
actions ever done. See ye withhold not aught of theirs. May we 
recognise these people and loving God in them, with them possess 
the city they have won. So help us God. Amen. 

XXXVITI 
PEACE 

Stetit Jesus in medio discipulorum et dieit: pax etc. (Luc. 2455, 
Joh. 20,,). St John tells us in his gospel that ‘ on the first day of 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS ~ 103 

the week, at evening, when the doors were shut, came our Lord 
and stood in the midst of the disciples and said : Peace be unto 
you ! 4 and again, ‘Peace be unto you!’ and a third time, 
Receive ye the Holy Ghost!’ Now the evening never comes 
unless morning and midday have gone before. We say that the 
middle of the day is warmer than the evening. But in so far as 
evening takes in middle-day and stores up its heat, it is the warmer, 
when, too, before the evening there goes a whole bright day. 
Late in the year, again, after the summer solstice, when the sun 
is drawing nigh to earth, the evenings will grow warm. But 
‘midday never comes till morning goes nor evening until noon has 
passed away. The moral of which is, that when the divine light 
breaks forth in the soul, getting brighter and brighter unto 
the perfect day, then morning does not vanish before noon nor 
noon ere eventide: they close up to one. So the evening is 
warm. There is perfect day in the soul when all the soul is full 
of light divine. But it is evening in the soul, as I have said before, 
when the light of this world fades and the soul goes in to rest. 

God. said, ‘ Peace!’ and ‘ Peace!’ again, and ‘ Receive ye the 
Holy Ghost!’ Jacob the patriarch cäme to a place, in the 
evening, and putting underneath his head some stones which 
lay about, he sank to rest. In his sleep he saw a ladder reaching 
up to heaven with angels ascending and descending and God 
leaning down over the top of the ladder. This place Jacob 
slept in had no name. Which is as much as to say: the God- 
head alone is the place of the soul, and is nameless. Concerning 
this our doctors say: a thing which is another’s place must be 
above it; as heaven is the place of all things and fire is the place 
of air and air the place of water and water, partially, the place of 
earth and earth is not a place. An angel is a heavenly place, and 
any angel who has got the least drop more of God than any other 
is the place, the habitation, of that other, the most exalted angel 
being the place, the room, the measure of the rest while he himself 
is without measure. But although he is without measure, natheless 
God is his measure. 

Jacob rested in the place which is nameless. By not naming it 
it is named. On getting to this nameless place the soul will rest : 
where all things are being God in God, there shall she rest. The 
abode of the soul, which God is, is unnamed. I say, God is 
unspoken. But St Augustine says that God is not unspoken ; 
were he unspoken, that even would be speech and he is more silence 
than speech. One of our most ancient philosophers who found 
the truth long, long before God’s birth, ere ever there was Christian 
faith at all as it is now, to him (I say) it seemed that what he 
could manage to utter of things only conjured up within nim 

DR 

104 MEISTER ECKHART 

something monstrous and unreal and therefore he refused to 
speak at all. Not even would he say, give me meat or give me 
drink. He declined to mention things because he could not say 
them as perfect as they sprang from their first cause: he chose 
rather to be dumb and to make known his wants by pointing with 
his finger. How much more does it beseem us, if he knew not 
the way to talk of things, to be absolutely mute concerning him 

' who is the origin of all things. 

So 

Ag 

We say that God is a spirit. Not so. If God were really a 
spirit he would be spoken. According to St Gregory, we cannot 
rightly speak of God at all. Anything we say of him is bound 
to be a stammering. This place which is not named, wherein all 
creatures thrive and bloom in orderly array, this habitat of all 
creatures, is gotten suddenly out of the ground of this orderly 
place, the seat of the soul proceeding out of this ground. 

Jacob wanted to rest: mark you, he wanted to rest. Whoso 
resteth in God his rest is will-free. We say that will is without 
habit. Will is free, it takes nothing from matter. In this sense 
it is freer than intellect, and some rash people pouncing upon this 
would put it above knowledge. That is not so. Intellect also is 
free despite that intellect does take from matter and from corporal 
things in the locality of soul, for, as I pointed out on Easter Eve, 
various of the soul-powers are in link with the five senses, for in- 
stance, sight and hearing, which convey to them the things we know. 
A master says: ‘God would never choose that eye or ear should 
sense what crowns the summit of the soul: none other than the 
nameless place, which is the place of all things.’ It gives a fair 
reflection, and is useful in that way, but is marred by colour and 
by sound and corporal things. It is only by the senses that the 
soul is roused and the idea of wisdom naturally imprinted in her. 
Plato says, and with him St Augustine: The soul has all know- 
ledge within, and all we can do from without is but an awakening 
of knowledge.—Jacob rested in the evening. Let us pray ever 
for the now; ’tis but a little thing we ask, just for one evening. 
May it be granted us, So help us God. Amen. 

XXXIX 
EVERY GOOD GIFT 

Omne datum optimum et omne donum perfectum descendit a 
patre luminum (Jac. 1,,). My Latin quotation is from the 
Epistle of St James. He says, ‘Every good gift and every 
perfect gift comes down from above from the Father of lights. 
With him is no variableness nor shadow of time (or, temporal - 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 105 

reflection).’ These two terms he uses, good gift and perfect gift, 
refer to different things, so our masters say. Datum befalls in 
time; donum has no thought of time. Datum is a matter of 
self-seeking, but donum is free and unconditioned and wholly 
without why. A perfect gift is one betokening nothing but good- 
will. The perfect gift is therefore free and unconditional. The 
perfect gift is a friendly offering, essentially a giving albeit not 
bestowed. According to our masters, gifts are perfect in so far 
as they are love-bearers ; but good gifts are like hucksters and 
have ever their price. In the words of one of the saints, ‘ Blood of 
the Holy Ghost and its glow is in one sense eternal and in another 
temporal.’ If my face were eternal and were held before a mirror 
it would be received in the mirror as a temporal thing albeit 
eternal in itself. The Holy Ghost has its glow. The eternal 
glow of his eternal blood is the perfect gift; when the soul is 
worthy and receives the same it turns to the good gift. Meaning 
to say that this gift which is temporal in us is in itself eternal. 
God would give us not only his good gift; he is ready to bestow 
on us his perfect gift as well, to wit, the Holy Ghost itself. Hence 
his words, ‘ Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down 
from above from the Father of lights.’ 

From another point of view he means, so it appears to me, that 
the Holy Ghost is the perfect gift only as working in the intellect. 
As proceeding forth in the practice of good works, albeit godly, 
or withal in thought, it becomes good gift. It is the perfect gift 
so far as the soul is living in God, immanent in the light and 
savour of God, hanging motionless in his perfect light-nature. 
As St Paul says, ‘ Ye shall taste the things that are above.’ The 
Holy Ghost is the Gift wherein ye abide in the perfection of 
light. The soul suspended in pure intellectual light is enjoying 
the things that are above. Our masters teach that corporeal 
things are called matter. We say, the light of intellect shuns 
matter, but albeit in itself wholly devoid of things it still has 
potentiality and that for matter. He says, ‘ Taste the things 
that are above,’ not, that are above the earth. We have a saying, 
So far from matter so far pure intelligence. When in the light 
the grey tint of the cloth assails my eye, I see it. If it were 
intellect I should see nothing. We recognise another power as 
being far removed from matter. How so? Suppose I saw a 
man twenty years ago, he may now be dead, but still I have a 
likeness of his form as though he stood before my eyes. This 
power needs no matter, but it has the imperfection of receiving 
from matter—in forms, that is to say. On the other hand, the 
light, intelligence, transcends what is already matter or is so 
potentially. While the soul abides in God, suspended in his 

106 MEISTER ECKHART 

intellectual light she has no material objectivity nor likeness nor 
potentiality. He says, ‘Every good gift and every perfect gift 
comes down from above from the Father of lights.’ 

What does he mean by calling it ‘ good gift?’ Betwixt those 
things whose being-and-doing is in eternity and the things whose 
being and doing are in time there needs must be some middle 
term. He means that it is God, this thing whose being-and-doing 
is the perfect gift ; so the being-and-doing of the perfect gift is 
in eternity. But the being-and-doing of the good gift are in 
time; which of course must mean that the soul is on the way to 
eternal life. Why does he promise both good and perfect gifts ? 
When God bestows the Holy Ghost itself, whose being-and-activity 
is in eternity, that is his perfect gift which, peering forth in thought, 
is his good gift. 

\ St Augustine says, and the masters too, the soul has some 

\.capacity which is open towards God and into which he alone can 

Hope whereas creature speaks into another. Into this highest 
power, which is addressed by God alone, he utters wisdom, which 
is his perfect gift. But the other one that creature speaks to is 
satisfied with reason. The same gift is perfeet, being timeless, 
and good as perfecting the things of time. What is temporal in 
us is eternal in God. Datum in us is donum in God. What is 
mixed and temporal and good in us becomes, if we follow it up, 
perfect in God. What we are able to receive of him is infinitely 
small compared to what he is. Whatever else one may know one 
does not know God. 

He says, ‘he comes down’ from on high from the Father of 
lights.” :What does he mean? The Son and the Holy Ghost 
have one source in the Father, and the Holy Ghost and the Son are 
one light and they are both of them lights. God is the Father of 
lights. St Augustine tells what the soul is tasting in God. He 
explains that in that food the tongue ‘is savouring the invisible 
light ; he says the soul is not a thing of sensible appetites and 
pleasures ; she has a hidden energy and luminosity. 

According to the masters, the angels are a light: God is the 
entire light, with whom is no-change nor time nor turning. The 
nobler the creature the more akin to God. All creaturely being- 
and-doing is in time. But the angels, who are higher, are in 
essence timeless and without alteration in themselves. Their 
wonted activities in God are free from time, but in that they look 
down they have an aspect (or shadow) of time. But in none of 
his works has God any shadow of time nor of change. So far as 
there is no changing, no shadow in man, so far he compares with 
divinity. Creature has ever this and that, one thing and another ; 
but in God exists neither this nor that, neither one nor tother ; 

; SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 107 

and unless there be in us what two and two are, what is 
one plus other, the happenings within us remain just good 
and ill. There is no one or other with the Father of lights. 
May we be given every good gift and every perfect gift wherein 
we are exalted above time to the Father of lights with whom 
is no variableness nor temporal nature, So help us God. Amen. 

XL 
EVERY GOOD GIFT 

Omne datum optimum et omne donum perfectum de sursum est 
descendens a patre luminum (Jac. 1,,). St James says in his 
epistle, * Every good gift and every perfect gift cometh down from 
above from the Father of lights.’ 

Now ye must know that people who resign themselves to God 
and diligently seek to do his will, to these, I say, whatever God 
may send will be the best. As God lives, be sure it is the very 
best, and there can be no better way. Some other may seem better 
yet is not so good for thee; God wills this way and not that, 
therefore this way is bound to be the best. Sickness or poverty, 
hunger or thirst, what God does give thee or what he does not, 
that is the very best for thee, aye, though it be fervour or the 
interior life which, alas! thou dost lack. Whatever thou hast or 
hast not, accept it all to the glory of God, and then whatever he 
sends thee will be for the best. 

Peradventure thou wilt say, How can I tell whether it is God’s 
will or not? If it were not God’s will it would not be. Neither 
sickness nor anything else dost thou have excepting God wills. 
And therefore knowing it to be God’s will thou oughtest to rejoice 
in it and to be so content therewith that any pain shall lose its 
sting for thee; aye, even in extremity of pain to feel the least 
affliction or distress were altogether wrong: accept it from 
God as the best since it is bound to be the best thing for thee. 
It is of the essence of him to will what is best. Let me then will 
it too; there is nothing that should please me better. Supposing 
there was someone I tried hard to please and whom I knew for 
certain liked me in a grey coat more than any other; doubtless 
that coat would please me too, and I should prefer it to any of 
the rest however nice they were. Given then my wish to please 
a certain person, the things I know he wishes both of word and 
deed are the things that I would do and those alone. Judge for 
yourselves then of your love! If ye do indeed love God ye will 
like nothing better than that which best enables him to work 
his will in us. However great may seem the pain or the privation, 

108 MEISTER ECKHART 

except thou take delight therein as great as in thine ease and 
plenty, it is wrong. 

One thing I am wont to say, and it is the fact, that daily we 
cry in our pater noster, Lord, thy will be done! and when his 
will is done we grumble and are discontented at it. Whatever 
he does let us deem that the best and like that best of all. Those 
who do take it as the best always remain tranquil. Sometimes 
ye will say, Alas! ’twere better something else had happened, 
or, had that not been, things would have turned out better. As 
long as thou dost think so thou wilt never be at peace. Accept 
it all for the best. That is the first moral of our text. 

There is another meaning, mark it well. He says ‘ every gift.’ 
The very best and the very highest, these are innate gifts and in 
him the most innate of all. God gives nothing so gladly as great 
gifts. Once in this very place I said, God likes forgiving big sins 
more than small ones. The bigger they are the gladder he is and 

_the quicker to forgive them. It is the same with graces, gifts. and 
virtues: the greater they are the greater his pleasure in bestowing 
them, for the giving of largesse is his nature. . The bigger the 
things and the better the more shall ye get. [The noblest creatures 
are the angels who are minds and nothing else; they have no 
carnal nature and they are in number infinitely more than all the 
corporal things. ] 

Once upon a time I laid it down that to be properly expressed a 
thing must proceed from within, moved by its form: it must 
come, not in from without but out from within. It really lives 
in the recesses of the soul. There all things are present to thee, 
subjectively alive and active in their zenith, in their prime. Why 
art thou unaware of it? Because thouart notat home. The more 
noble a thing the more common it is. Feeling I have in common 
with the beasts and life in common with the trees. Being is still 
more innate in me and that I have in common with all creatures. 
Heaven exceeds all neighbouring things, and it is nobler also. 
The nobler the thing the bigger it is and the more universal. 
Love is as noble as it is universal. It does indeed seem hard, as 
our Lord commands, to love our evenchristians as ourselves. 
The unenlightened say that we ought to love them just the same 
as they love themselves. Not so. We ought to love them no 
more than our own selves, which is not difficult. If you come to 
consider, it is matter for reward more than a behest. The 
command seems hard but the reward desirable. He who loves 
God as he ought and must (whether he would or not), and as all 
creatures love him, will love his evenchristian as himself, rejoicing 

~ in his joys and hoping for his honour as much as for his own and 

treating the other like himself. By this means he is always happy 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 109 

whether in honour or in need, just as though he were in heaven 
and withal has more enjoyments than the blessings of himself 
alone. 

The plain truth is that it is wrong for thee to hold thine honour 
dearer than another’s. Remember, an thou seekest aught of 
thine thou never shalt find God, for thou art not seeking God 
merely. Thou art seeking for something with God, making a 
candle of God, as it were, with which to find something, and then, 
having found it, throwing the candle away.. Thus shalt thou 
fare: aught that.thou findest with God is naught, whatsoever it 
be, whether profit or wages or the interior life or anything else: 
naught dost thou seek and naught shalt thou find. Thou shalt 
find naught because it is naught thou dost seek; that is all. All 
creatures are a mere naught. I say not they are small, are aught : 
they are absolutely naught. A thing without being is not (or is 
naught). Creatures have no real being, for their being consists 
in the presence of God. If God turned away for an instant they 
would all perish. I have sometimes said, and it is true, that he 
who has gotten the whole world plus God has gotten no more 
than God by himself. Having all creatures without God is no 
more than having one fly without God; just the same, no more 
nor less. 

This is a true saying. The man who gives a thousand marks 
of gold for the making of convents or of churches is doing a great 
deed. But that man gives a great deal more who gives a thousand 
marks for naught: he is doing far more than the other. When 
God created all creatures he could not move in them, they were so 
small and narrow. But the soul he made so like himself, so nearly 
his own peer, on purpose to give himself to her: nothing else 
that he could give her would she care for in the least. God must 
give me himself for my own as he is his own, or I shall get naught, 
nor is aught else to my taste. Whoso receives him thus outright 
must wholly have renounced himself and gone out of himself ; 
he gets straight from God all that he has, as his own just as much 
as it is his, and our Lady and all the habitants of heaven. All 
this is meet and proper to this man. Those who have renounced 
themselves and are in this sense dead unto themselves receive 
the same, no less. . 

Thirdly, the term ‘Father of lights.” The word father implies 
‘to us a son. Father stands for abstract generation, and is an 
expression for the universal principle of life. The Father generates 
his Son in his eternal intellect and the Father generates his Son 
in the soul just as he does in his own nature ; he bears his Son in 
the soul as her own, and his existence depends on his bringing his 
Son to birth in the soul, whether he would or no. On one occasion 

110 MEISTER ECKHART 

I was asked what the Father is doing in heaven? I said, He is 
begetting his Son, an act he so delights in and which pleases him 
so well that he does nothing else but generate his Son, and these 
twain are flowering with the Holy Ghost. When the Father 
gives birth to his Son in me I am his very Son and not another: 
we are another in manhood, true, but there I am the Son himself 
and no other. As sons we are lawful heirs. He who knows the 
truth wots this right well. The word father connotes just be- 
getting and having of sons. We are sons in his Son and are the 
Son himself. 

Now consider the words, ‘they come from above.’ I said, 
referring to this very thing, Whoso desires to receive from above 
must needs be below in true humility. Know in good sooth, if 
a thing is not right underneath it receives nothing nor conceives 
nothing: not a single thing however small. Hast thou an eye 
to thine own self or to any thing or person, then thou art not 
right under and thou receivest nothing ; but being brought right 
under thou receivest all at once and in perfection. It is God’s 
nature to give, and his existence depends on his giving to us when 
we are under. If we are not, then we get nothing: we do him 
violence and kill him. Or if unable so to do to him, we do it to 
ourselves as far as in us lies. If thou wouldst really give him 
all, see to it thou dost put thyself right humbly under God, raising 
up God in thy heart and in thy understanding. The Father sent 
his son into the world in the fullness of time of the soul, when she 
had finished with time. When the soul is free from time and place 
the Father sends his Son into the soul. This is the explanation of 
the words, ‘the best gifts come from above from the Father of 
lights.’ Let us be ready to receive these same best gifts, So help 
us God the Father of lights. Amen. 

- XLI 
A LITTLE AND YE SHALL NOT SEE ME 

Modicum videbitis me et modicum non videbitis (Joh. 161, 49). 
I quote in Latin from the Gospel of St John a saying of our Lord 
to his disciples. The translation runs, ‘A modicum, a little, 
ye shall see me and a modicum, a little, and ye shall not see me.’ 
The disciples were ignorant and did not understand. They were 
saying to each other, ‘We know not what he means.’ So St 
John relates, and he was there. Follows a parable which I will 
not dwell on. Then, knowing what was in their hearts he says 
- quite plainly, “I shall see you again and your joy shall be full.’ 
Now, to my mind this saying will bear four interpretations. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 111 

More or less the same in wording but widely different in meaning. 
The kernel of the prime conception and of eternal happiness is 
knowledge. One theologist who spoke at Paris insisted with 
loud fulminations that this is not so. Then up and said another 
one, better than the best they have at Paris: Sir, you are very 
positive, but in the gospel did not God declare the very thing that 
you denounce so roundly ? Our Lord’s words are, ‘ This is eternal 
life, to know thee the only true God ’—‘ A little and ye shall see 
me.’ Meaning to say, ye must get to look upon everything in 
you as little and of small account if ye are ever to see God. It 
follows that we must observe minutely what will help and hinder 
divine knowledge. However small what comes from God, if 
treated rightly it recurs, it comes again, for we have one divine 
thing of our own that we can work with as with our own soul ; 
not that I work and God looks on: I, as it were, co-operate with 
my own tool which is mine and in me. Thus man being lifted 
up in time shall see God out of himself. I. have sometimes said, 
the time St Paul saw nothing he saw God. Now I say something 
better : when St Paul saw all nothing he saw God: when he saw 
all things as, nothing he saw God, and what God means to say is 
this : when things are all reduced to naught in you then ye shall 
see God. 

Again, he says, ‘a little and ye shall not see me.’ While time 
and world, which is little, is within you, ye shall not see me. The 
angel swore on his eternal life that when this life is done there 
shall be no more time. And in his gospel St John quite plainly 
states, ‘the world was made by him and they knew him not.’ 
In fine then, to quote a heathen doctor, world-and-time is a little 
thing. It is out of world-and-time that we see God. 

Thirdly. He said, ‘a little and ye see me not,’ as though to 
say: the very smallest thing that is foreign to the soul will 
prevent her seeing God. For heaven is shut to strangers ; even 
an angel from another heaven would not succeed in getting in, for 
it is not his. Why has my mouth, my ear, no sense of heaven ? 
Because they are not like it. St Bernard says, ‘ My eye is like the 
heavens in being round and clear and placed high in the body, 
nor can it brook the entry of any foreign matter.’ Before my eye 
can see the painting on the wall this must be filtered through the 
air and in a still more tenuous form be borne into my phantasy, 
to be assimilated by my understanding. These properties, both, 
the soul must needs possess ; and this likeness, how subtile soever 
it may be, with its suggestiveness, its hint of sin, the soul rejects 
as foreign to herself. If God himself were foreign to the soul she 
would have none of him. What the eye perceives has to be 
conveyed to it by means, in images. If there were no means we 

112 MEISTER ECKHART 

should see nothing. If an angel sees another angel or anything 
that God has made, he does so by some means. But himself and 
God he sees immediately. If my soul knows an angel she knows 
him by some means and in an image, an image imageless, not in 
an image such as they are here. Soul and angel are material 
things compared with God. Angelic knowledge, anything created, 
is a means. Which God wholly lacks: he is known without 
means, without little. For my soul to know God with nothing 
between thou must be with me and I with thee. 

I will now suggest a meaning quite other than these three. 
‘ While ye are little ye do not see me. To see me ye have to grow 
great.’ Intellect is great indeed, yet small compared with the 
light of God. Our Lord upbraided his apostles saying, ‘ There is 
still in you but a little light.‘ They were not devoid of light, 
but it was weak, the light of grace, the brightest thing God ever 
made or ever could have made. And after all the soul is small 
so long as she is still in grace. Sometime or other the soul must 
rise in grace. If grace is not yet overcome, the soul has still to 
ascend in grace and, being perfected, to transcend grace: then she 
sees God. 

Fourthly, “and ye shall not see me’: being poor in light and 
grace ye cannot see God. One must abound in light and grace 
before one can see God. Grace is a surpassing light, superangelic. 
In grace we can see God but from afar. While grace exists in 
us as grace we are not able to see God. ‘ Ye do not see me because 
I am going to my Father.’ While the soul progresses God 
remains unseen. While we are on the way to God we have not 
gotten him. With finding God all progress ends, as our Lord 
said to St Mary Magdalene, ‘ Touch me not, I am not yet ascended 
in thee tomy Father.’ While God is ascending in the soul and has 
not reached the zenith, we are unable to see God. St Paul says, 
‘God dwells in light inaccessible.’ And one saint declares, ‘ No 
man ever saw God.’ St Paul tells us ‘ We shall know God as we 
are known.’ As God knows himself so we shall know him; as 
he sees all things in himself so we shall see all things in him. ‘ We 
shall know as we are known,’ St Paul says. The little being cleared 
away, I shall see as I am seen, as he sees himself, without little, 
with nothing between ; all in himself and in him all things, nothing 
outside him; and we too shall know without little and without 
means. We shall know in his Son. The Son is the image of the 
Godhead, not the Godhead itself: he is the idea of God the 
Father. The Father’s reflection is his only Son. In that idea 
where nothing exists, in that image we shall be reflected in the 
Son and by the Son reflected back into the Father: in that 
image, all the same, where there is no this nor that, we shall know 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 113 

God with God’s only Son. May the little depart from us and 
allow us to know thee the one true God. So help us God. Amen, 

XLII 
THE IMAGE AND ITS OBJECT 

Modicum et jam non videbitis (Joh. 16,,, 19). My Latin quota- 
tion is from the Gospel of St John which we read on Sunday. 
It is what our Lord said to his disciples, ‘ A modicum, a little, 
and ye see me not.’ Anything, however small, adhering to the 
soul prevents your seeing me. St Augustine being asked the 
meaning of eternal life answered and said: Dost thou ask me 
what is eternal life? Ask eternal life, see what it says itself. 
None knows what heat is like the hot, nor wisdom like the wise, 
none knows the meaning of eternal life so well as the eternal 
life itself. Our Lord Jesus Christ says, ‘ This is eternal life, to 
know thee God, the one true God.’ : 

“A modicum, a little, and lo! ye see me not.’ Now you must 
understand that if the soul saw God even from afar, or in some 
intervening thing, as in a cloud, an instant, she would not turn 
away from him, not for all the world. What think ye then would 
happen if she saw God in himself, as he is, face to face in his 
naked essence ? All creatures God has ever made or could make 
if he would amount to very little, a mere nothing as compared 
with God himself. The heavens are big, so vast indeed, were I 
to tell ye would not credit me. If you could take a needle and 
prick the heavens with it, that needle-point of heaven, as compared 
with the whole heavens plus this entire world, would be greater 
than this universe compared with God. Well and truly then it 
may. be said, ‘a trifle, a little, and ye shall not see me.” Whilst 
thou seest aught of creature thou seest naught of God; however 
little, it must go. Says the soul in the Book of Love, * I ran about 
and sought him whom my soul loveth and I found him not.’ 
She met with angels and many things besides, but she found not 
him whom her soul loved. Then she goes on to say, ‘ It was but 
a little I passed from them and I found him whom my soul loveth,’ 
just as though to say: when I had gotten beyond creatures 
(little things and of small account) I came on him whom my soul 
loveth. The soul must pass beyond, she must transcend, all 
creatures before she can find God. 

Now you must know, God loves the soul so mightily, he who 
should rob God of loving the soul would rob him of his very life 
and being : would kill God, if one may so say ; for the very love 

wherewith God loves the soul is what his Holy Breath is blowing in. 
8 

114 . MEISTER ECKHART 

But if God loves the soul so much the soul must be a most important 
thing. 

The philosopher says in his book On the Soul: If there were 
no means the eye could see a gnat, an ant, in heaven. And he 
was right, referring to the air and fire, etc. that intervene between 
the eye and heaven. Another philosopher declares that without 
means no eye could see at all. Both are expressing the same 
truth. ; 

The first one says that if there were no means the eye could 
see an ant in heaven. And that is true. If nothing intervened 
between God and the soul she would see God every whit, for 
God himself is wholly free from means and brooks no sort of 
intervention. Ifthe soul were stripped of all her sheaths, God would 
be discovered all naked to her view and would give himself to her, 
withholding nothing. As long as the soul has not thrown off all 
her veils, however thin, she is unable to see God. Any medium, 
but a hair’s-breadth, in betwixt the body and the soul stops actual 
union. That is true of corporal things and how much more of 
ghostly. Boéthius says, Wouldst know the naked truth? Then 
cast off joy and fear and trust and hope and pain. Joy is a 
means, fear is a means, faith and hope and pain, they all are 
means. While thou regardest them and they have regard to thee 
thou canst not see God. 

. The second doctor says: without means the eye would see 
nothing. If I cover my eyes with my hand I can see nothing of 
my hand. If I put it before me I see it quite distinctly. This is 
due to the dense nature of the hand which must be rarefied and 
rendered volatile in air and light and in effigy be carried to my 
eye. The same thing with a mirror. If thou hast it facing thee 
thy image is reflected in the glass. The eye, like the soul, is a 
mirror, and things presented to it all appear therein. I do not 
see the hand, the stone, itself: I see the image of the stone, but 
I do not see this image in a second image or by any other means: 
I see it without means and without image. This image is itself 
the means: image without image like motion without motion 
although causing motion and size which has no size though the 
principle of size. Even so the image is in this sense imageless 
that it is not seen in another image. The eternal Word is the 
means and the image itself which is without means and without 
image, so that the soul in the eternal Word conceives of God and 
knows him without image and with nothing between. 

There is one power in the soul: intellect, of prime importance 
to the soul for making her aware of, for detecting, God. It has 
five properties. First, it is detached from here and now. Next, 
it is like nothing. Thirdly, it is pure and uncompounded. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 115 

Fourthly, it is in itself active or self-searching. Fifthly, it is an 
image. 

First, it is detached from here and now. Here and now, that, 
in other words, is time and place. Now is the minimum of time; 
not a fragment of time nor a fraction of time: a smack, a con- 
nection, an end of time. Small though it be it must go ; every- 
thing time touches has to go. Again, it is detached from here. 
And here means place. The spot I am standing on is small, but 
it must disappear before I can see God. 

Secondly, it has no like. A philosopher says, God is a thing 
that nothing is like and that nothing can become like. But 
according to St John, ‘ we shall be called God’s children ’ and if 
we are God’s children we must resemble God. How then can this 
doctor say God is a thing that nothing is like? The answer is 
that in being like nothing this power is like God. God is like 
nothing and this power is like nothing. You must understand 
that all creatures are by nature endeavouring to be like God. 
The heavens would not revolve unless they followed on the track 
of God or of his likeness. If God were not in all things, nature 
would stop dead, not working and not wanting; for whether 
thou like it or no, whether thou know it or not, nature funda- 
mentally is seeking, though obscurely, and tending towards God. 
No man in his extremity of thirst but would refuse the proffered 
draught in which there was no God. Nature’s quarry is not 
meat or drink nor clothes nor comfort nor any things at all wherein 
is naught of God, but covertly she seeks and ever more hotly 
she pursues the trail of God therein. 

Thirdly, it is pure and unmingled. By nature God can tolerate 
no mingling or admixture. Nor is there in this power any inter- 
mingling or admixture: it is free from impurity and nothing 
foreign can occur therein. To tell a comely person he is fair 
and dark would do him an injustice. The soul must be without 
admixture. If someone hangs something to my cloak or. sticks 
something on it then anyone who wears the cloak will wear too 
its attachments. If I go out hence, there will then go with me 
the whole of my attachments. What the spirit rests on, is attached 
to, takes the spirit with it.. The man who rests on nothing, is 
attached to nothing, though heaven and earth should fall, will 
remain unmoved. 

Fourthly, it is ever seeking, travailing, within. God is such 
that he ever abides in the innermost. And intellect is ever 
seeking him. But will goes out to what it loves in him. So at 
the coming of my friend, suddenly my heart goes out to him and 
he is glad. St Paul declares, ‘ we shall know God as we are 
known.’ And according to St John, ‘ we shall see God as he is.’ 

116 MEISTER ECKHART 

Now if I am coloured I must have something in me that will take 
the colour. I should never colour unless I had a colour nature. 
And I can only see God in what he sees himself in. St Paul declares 
that ‘God dwells in light inaccessible.’ It is not to be denied 
that keeping in the way, in the entry, though all well and good, is 
yet a long way from the truth, for it is not God. f 

Fifthly, it is an image. Mark this, it is important: it gives 
you the whole sermon in a nutshell. Object and image are 
bound up with one another so that we cannot part them. We 
can think of fire apart from heat and heat without the fire. We 
can think of the sun apart from light and of light as independent 
ofthe sun. But we cannot part the object from its image. Isay 
more : Almighty God himself cannot disentangle them : they are 
born together and they die together. I do not die because my 
Father does. Suppose you die, then we no longer say, he is his 
son, we say, he was his son. Cloth that. is bleached is like all 
whiteness in its whiteness. But if you blacken it, it is dead to 
whiteness. And here itis the same. If the image, God’s likeness, 
disappeared, there would perish also its exemplar, God. One 
thing I would say: ye are become two, ye are become three. 
Now mark my words. Intellect peers in, it searches every corner 
of the Godhead and finding the Son in the heart of the Father, 
in his ground, it takes him and sets him in its own. Intellect 
presses in; she is not content with good or wisdom, nor with 
truth nor yet with God himself. She is no more content with 
God than with a tree, a stone. She never rests until she gets 
into the ground whence truth and good proceed and takes them 
in principio, in the beginning, the fount of truth and goodness, 
where they rise before their coming forth: a ground far higher 
than truth and goodness are. Her sister (will) contents herself 
with God as being good. But intellect, leaving this behind, goes 
in and breaks through to the root whence shoots the Son and 
whence the Holy Spirit blossoms forth. May we discover this 
and be for ever blest. So help us Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 
Amen. 

XLIII! 
KNOWLEDGE AND LOVE 

Meister Eckhart said: Doctors debate which is the nobler, 
knowledge or love. Some say that love is better than knowledge. 
I say it is not. Our best authorities declare that knowledge 
is nobler than love. Love and will take God as being good. If 
God were not good, will would have none of him ; if God were not 

ı Jostes, No. 10, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 117 

lovely, love would scout him. But understanding would not. 
Knowledge is not confined either to good or to love or to wisdom 
or lordship. By putting names to God the soul is only dressing 
him up and making a figure of God; nor is this the doing of 
knowledge. Though God were neither good nor wise, still under- 
standing would seize him; it strips everything off, not stopping 
either at wisdom or good, nor majesty nor power. It pierces 
to naked being and grasps God bare, ere he is clothed in thought 
with wisdom and goodness. Where the Son has his beatitude, 
there in the Father, understanding finds hers. 

Now I am going to say something never read nor preached 
before. 

At the College yesterday they admitted that there is a ground 
within the soul corresponding to the Father-nature. Just as the 
Father is bringing forth his Son in the Holy Ghost and these 
three are one God, so this ground is bringing forth understanding 
and will, one-power as God is one Word. Withal this ground is 
free from any taint of creature. All the things we attribute to 
the soul form a screen round this ground wherein God is looking 
at the soul and the soul is looking at God. According to St 
Paul, ‘ We beholding the vision of God’s splendour are changed in 
that same image from glory to glory.’ This image is too closely 
joined to God for creatures to dissever and God himself will not 
divide it. Alas! we reck so little of this image, we keep it not so 
bright as it was given us by God! Whatever we may do God 
is never satisfied unless we there abide in utter destitution and so 
enable God at all times without ceasing to bring his one-begotten 
Son to birth in this same ground. This birth befalls not once a 
year nor once a day nor once an hour, but all the time, above 
time, in the while which is neither here nor now. This is the 
ground I speak of. May we live in suchwise that God can energise 
in us, So help us God. 

I have sometimes said that the soul is an imitation of God ; 
now I say that she is his image, and in the very same form the 
‘Father has eternally formed, and the same that Christ is formed in. 

According to Meister Eckhart, All creatures contain one re- 
flection: one, that is the denial of its being the other; the 
_ highest of the angels denies he is the lowest. God is the 
denial of denials: the one which is exclusive of all otherness. 
To call a tree a tree is not to name it, for all the species are con- 
fused. If we name it in its first eruption, in its perfection, we 
do not call it a tree, we call it pure divine nature. Another 
notion of it, rather better. The divine nature is the great divider. 
Meister Eckhart says, The Pharisee besought our Lord to eat with 
him. What is the Pharisee? He stands for detachment; a. 

118 MEISTER ECKHART 

Pharisee is one who is detached from all and united into one. The - 
rophet cries, ‘Lord have mercy on the work which is in thee.’ 
The highest work God ever wrought was done in mercy. Under- 
standing goes in deep enough to lay hold of being simply as being- 
in-itself, but where being is losing itself, drowned in itself, there 
understanding falls away. 

Friar John says : It is a question among the theologians whether 
it lies with the soul, or with God, for her to be God. I say the 
power lies in the soul. Suppose the soul ready to be God, then 
God must work in that power and draw the power into himself: the 
energy then is in God and the capacity is in the soul. Were I wholly 
that I am I should be God; there would be for me neither time nor 
place nor change. There is nothing so easy to me, so possible, as 
to be God. To stay quiet requires no work, whereas if I change to 
another I must reduce myself to naught: but I remain as I am. 

I say, no creature is so vile but it can boast of being; in proportion 
to its being is its power of being God, for whatever is being is God. 

Bishop Albertus says, Man is divine above all as receiving 
unhindered the inflowing Deity. In the words of the saint, 
The light of my soul is never extinguished and my desire is ever 
in the beholding of God. 

XLIV? 
IN ALL THINGS I SEEK REST 

In omnibus requiem quesivi (Eccl. 24,,). In all things I 
seek rest. 

The masters tell us that God made the powers of the soul by 
nature receptive to their likes, thus the ear is always hearing and 
the eye is always seeing. What my eye sees is one with it, just 
like the air with light. The nature of the eye is to see colour, 
otherwise it would not be an eye. And conversely with colour, 
by nature it affects the eye or it would not be colour. To think 
of it as colour yet incommunicable to the eye would be to deny 
that it is colour. I can see the minster. But no one sees it in 
me. For a thing to be visible in me, it must be so placed that its 
reflection can be seen in me. Standing in front of me and face 
to face a man could see his'image in my eye. Stand over flowing 
water and you cannot see yourself. But supposing it is clear, 
then where it is collected and still enough for a reflection you can 
see your form in it. They say glass is transparent, like a crystal. 
But cover it with lead or wax and it reflects: it gives an image 
__ of whatever stands before it, perfect in every detail. _ 

1 See also Wackernagel, No. Ixiii. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 119 

God made the soul, her highest power, her best, in order to 
beget himself therein. There, says a philosopher, begetter and 
begotten are the same and there is neither time nor place nor 
matter. Matter means gross bodily things; it is intractable 
and hinders. Hence it has been said that if the Father could 
he would make himself. But he cannot, so he makes his like. 

Our Lord said, ‘I dwell in Jacob and I rest in Israel.’ Jacob 
stands for riddance. God is gotten nowhere excepting in the 
soul that has put all creatures under her feet. St Augustine 
says, God is being born within the soul the whole time without 
ceasing, but not born to us to whom he is not manifest but hidden. 
As long as God is hidden in the soul by aught, he is not born to us, 
and you may be quite sure that God is never born to any soul 
excepting she has put all creatures under her feet: where there 
is no other there God begets himself, not his likeness, his own 
self: God and God. Well and truly then the Son may say, ‘I 
dwell in Jacob and in Israel I rest. And said he: ‘My Father 
sent me and he engendered in me that which is my nature: that 
I am being born all the time within the soul who is pure enough 
for him to see himself in.” There God is at rest and the soul 
reposes in God. To deprive God of resting in the soul would be 
to deprive him of his deity. To rob him of it even in one’s thoughts 
is to rob him of his Godhood, since he is pleased to rest in all things. 
David says: ‘My Lord said to my heart: thou art my Son; this 
day have I begotten thee in the reflection of the Holy Ghost,’ 
and again he said: ‘I have begotten thee in my innermost heart, 
in the depths of my soul; I have spread my roots, I have estab- 
lished myself in the city- of Zion and my power in Jerusalem.’ 
The soul in Zion, who has transcended things and is dwelling in 
her central depth, in her does God give birth to his inmost self. 
The heavenly Father said to his only Son: As I begat thee in 
my inmost heart, even so I charge thee by thy divine nature 
that thou comest not to birth save in the innermost recesses of 
the soul.—Whosoever would deny to God that he should beget 
himself in this way in the soul would deny him his God-nature. 
May God thus beget himself in us, So help us God. Amen. 

XLV 
IN ALL THINGS I SEEK REST 

In omnibus requiem quesivi (Eccl. 24,,). We find this in 
the Book of Wisdom. We may imagine Wisdom in friendly 

120 MEISTER ECKHART 

conversation with the soul, saying, ‘In all things I sought rest.’ 
To which the soul replies, ‘ He who created me rested in my tent.’ 
And Wisdom says again, ‘ My rest is in the holy city.’ If I were 
_ asked to say to what end the creator has created creatures, I should 
| answer: rest. And were I asked a second time, what are all 
creatures seeking so eagerly by nature? I should answer: rest. 
' And if a third time I were asked what the soul seeks in all her 
agitations, once more I should say : rest. 

Look how the face of divine nature turns foolish and demented 
all the powers of the soul with longing for it, so as to draw them to 
itself. God likes this so wel], it pleases him so much that his 
entire God-nature is turned into this bent. He says, ‘ In the holy 
place likewise I repose.’ As the soul rests in God so God reposes 
in her. If she rests partly in God he rests partly in her. If she 
rests wholly in him he rests altogether in her. In those limpid 

* souls where God can see the reflection of himself, God is reposing 
in the soul and the soul is reposing in God. To deprive God of 
_this, though but in thought, is to deprive him, to deny to him, his 
‘ Godhood who is seeking rest in all things, for God’s nature is 
\rest. 
7 Fourthly, whether they know it or not, creatures are all in 
search of rest. No one can shut or open his eyes without seeking 
rest: he is ridding himself of some hindrance or finding some- 
\where to rest. These are the two motives of all human action. 
As I often say, my love is placed where I most clearly see God’s 
likeness. But rest is more like God than any creature. 

Mark how the soul must be for God to rest in her. She must 
be pure. What makes the soul pure? Keeping to spiritual 
things. She is exalted too by these. The more she is exalted 
the purer she becomes in her intention and the more efficient in 
her work. As the philosopher says about the stars : they become 
less potent as they near the earth, being out of their true course. 
In their proper orbit, though they are invisible on earth, they have 
more pull upon it. St Anselm apostrophises the soul, ‘ Withdraw 
thyself a little from the tumult of external things.’ And again, 
“ Flee away and hide thee from the rush of inner thoughts which 

_ cause such great disquiet to the soul.’ 

\ We can ask of God no better thing than rest. All God wants 
of man is a peaceful heart ; then he performs within the soul an 
act too Godlike for creature to attain to or yet see. The divine 
Wisdom is discreetly fond and lets no creature watch. As our 

. Lord says, ‘I will lead my bride into the desert and will speak to 
her in her heart,’ into a solitude, that is, away from creatures. 

Fourthly, he says the soul must rest in God. God cannot do 
divine work in the soul, for in the soul things are all ruled by 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 121 

measure. Measure means limit, within and without. There is 
none of this in God’s operations, which are infinite: openly 
enclosed in God’s revelation. David says, ‘God sits above the 
Cherubim. He does not say, above the Seraphim. Cherubim 
means wisdom, knowledge which brings God to the soul and 
leads the soul to God. But not into God. Not in her own 
intelligence does God perform his godly operation, because in her 
this is ruled by measure; but he uses it as being God, divine. 
The highest power steps forth (that is, the will) and breaking into 
God, leads in the soul with her intelligence and all her powers 
and makes her one with God. Here God is acting above the power 
of the soul: not as in the soul but as in God. The soul now 
dowsed in God and in divine nature, receives divine life ; now she 
is subject to the law of God and is of the order of God. To take 
an illustration from natural philosophy. At the moment of 
conception the child in its mother’s womb has neither limbs nor 
colour. But when the soul is poured into the body it takes form 
and colour and becomes an entity (in virtue of the soul), with 
.the created nature of the soul and the appearance of a living 
being. And the soul, when perfectly atoned with God and 
dowsed in his divinity, loses all her hindrances, her feebleness 
and instability, and suddenly renewed with divine life grows 
orderly in all her ways and virtues. Look at a light, the nearer 
the wick the duller and denser the glow; as the flame shoots up 
from the wick it gets brighter and brighter. The more exalted the 
soul the better God can do in her his divine work in his own 
likeness. Like a mountain rising up two leagues above the earth, 
graven with magic runes and sacred characters which defy the 
winds and rain. Even so the really holy soul is uplifted into 
perfect calm, absolute and changeless in divine activity. That 
religious has good cause for shame who is moved so readily to 
gloom or anger or desire. He is no true religious. 

Lastly, creatures are all seeking rest whether they know it or 
not. Never is the stone bereft of motion while it is not lying on 
the ground. And similarly fire. All creatures also: they seek 
their natural place. The loving soul finds rest nowhere except in 
God. David says, ‘God has ordained to everything its place: 
to fish the water, birds the air and beasts the earth and to the 
soul the Godhead.’ And Job declares in the same strain, ‘ What 
is in God he gives us for our joy and bliss.’ God grant us peace 
and rest in him, So help us the eternal truth, which is himself. 
Amen. 

SOUTHERN CA schoo SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 

122 MEISTER ECKHART 

XLVI! 
POVERTY 

The really virtuous man does not want God. What I have 
i want not. He makes no plans, he sets no store by things. As 
God is higher than man so is he readier to give than man is to 
receive. Not by his fasts and vigils and his many outward works 
does a man prove his progress in the virtuous life, but it is a sure 
sign of his growth if he finds eternal things more and more attrac- 
tive than the things that pass. The man who has a thousand 
marks of gold and gives it all away for love of God is doing a 
fine thing ; yet I say, it were far finer and far better for him to 
despise it, setting it at naught on God’s account. 

A man should orient his will and all his works to God and having 
only God in view go forward unafraid, not thinking, am I right 
or am I wrong ? One who worked out all the chances ere starting 
his first fight would never fight atall. And if, going to some place, 
we must think how to set the front foot down we shall never gety . 
there. It is our duty to do the next thing : go straight on, that 
is the right way. 

There are five kinds of poverty. The first is devilish poverty ; 
the second, golden poverty ; the third is willing poverty; the 
fourth is spiritual poverty ; the fifth, divine poverty. 

The first, or devilish poverty, applies to all who have not what 
they fain would have, outward or inward. That is their hell. 

The second, golden poverty, is theirs who in the midst of goods 
and properties pass empty out and in. If everything they own 
was burnt the effect on them would be to leave them quite un- 
moved. Heaven must needs be theirs and they would have no 
less. 

The third is willing poverty and belongs to those who, renouncing 
goods and honours, body and soul, leave everything with right 
good grace. These give judgment with the twelve apostles and 
by pronouncing judgment it is their judgment day who, knowing 
what they leave, yet set another in their heart and mightily bestir 
themselves about their own departure. Such are the willing poor. 

The fourth are spiritual poor. These have forsaken friends and 
kindred, not merely goods and honour, body and soul; further, 
they are quit of all good works: the eternal Word does all their 
work while they are idle and exempt from all activity. And 
since in the eternal Word is neither bad nor good, therefore they 
are absolutely empty. 

The fifth are godly poor, for God can find no place in them to 

1 Jostes, No. 34. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 123 

work in. Theirs is riddance without and within for they are bare 

and free from all contingent form. This is the man : in this man 

all men are one man and that man is Christ. Of him one master 

says, ‘ Earth was never worthy of this man who looks on heaven 

and earth the same.’ This man is object-free in time and in 
eternity. 

Now enough of those who have no object in eternity, but one 
thing more of those who are objectless in time. What is meant 
by object ? There are two objects : one is otherness (not I); the 
other is a man’s own proper self (his I). 

The first otherness is becoming, all that has come into existence ; 
such things breed otherness and pass away. This applies to the 
passage of time. 

He who knows one matter in all things remains unmoved. 
For matter is the subject of form and there can be no matter 
without form nor form devoid of matter. Form without matter 
is nothing at all; but matter ever cleaves to form and is one 
undivided whole in every single part of it. Now since form in 
itself is naught, therefore it moves nothing. And since matter 
is perfectly impartible, therefore it is unmoved. This man then is 
unmoved by form or matter and is therefore objectless in time. 

Man’s other object is to possess his proper self, to identify 
himself with all perfection, with that most precious treasure 
his own aught: that is his quest. Now when a thing has gotten 
its own form, no more nor less, that thing is all its own and no one 
else’s. He who conceives this really is perfect in the sense that 
he is wholly objectless to eternity, etc. 

XLVII 
THIS IS LIFE ETERNAL 

Hec est vita eterna ut cognoscant te solum deum verum etc. (Joh. 
17,). Here beginneth a discourse on a gospel saying, Christ’s 
dictum, ‘ This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God and 
thy Son whom thou hast sent.’ 

Now no one knows the Father except his only Son, for he says 
himself, ‘No man knows the Father save the Son and no man 
knows the Son save the Father.’ Ergo, if man is to know God, 
and therein consists his eternal bliss, he must be, with Christ, the 
only Son of the Father. If ye would be blest ye must be the 
only Son; not many sons: one Son. True, ye are many in your 
carnal birth, but ye shall be one in the eternal birth, for in God 
there is no more than the one natural spring with its single natural 
outlet of the Son; not twain but one. And hence if ye are one 
with Christ ye are the sole issue with the eternal Word. 

1% 

124 MEISTER ECKHART 

How does man come to be the oniy Son of the eternal Father ? 
I answer. The eternal Word did not take upon itself this man or 
that, it took upon itself one indivisible free nature, human nature, 
bare and formless, for the impartible form of manhood is wholly 
without form ; and since in this union the eternal Word took 
human nature formless, therefore the Father’s image, his eternal 
Son, became the form of human nature. Here it is just as true 
to say that man became God as that God became man. For 
human nature was transformed by taking the divine form which 
is the image of the Father. It follows that to be the Son ye must 
depart from and discard whatever makes for division in you. 
Man is an accident of nature. Do away with accidents and take 
yourselves in the freedom of your impartible humanity. But 
this very nature wherein ye take yourselves is become the Son of 
the eternal Father by union with the eternal Word, and therefore 
ye with Christ become the Son of the eternal Father by reason of 
enjoying the same nature which was there made God. Beware 
lest ye take yourselves as either this or that: realize yourselves 
in the liberation of your undivided manhood. If ye would be 
one ye must be rid of not, for not’s pride is division. How so? 
Well, suppose I say, Thou art not the man. This not puts a 
division between thee and this man. To be undivided ye must 
be free from not. There is one power in the soul which is immune 
from not, which has not aught in common with any mortal 
thing: there is nothing in this power; only God is seen there 
face to face. 

A man being thus the Son, his motion, his energy, whatever 
he enjoys, he has gotten of his own. Now the Son of the Father 
is the eternal Son as being descended from the Father. Further, 
all he has he has within himself since he-is one in essence and in 
nature with the Father: his essence and his quiddity, he has 
both in himself and in this sense he prays, ‘ Father, as I and thou 
are one even so I would they should be the same.’ And just as 
the Son is one with the Father in ‚his essence, so thou being one 
with him in essence and in nature, hast got it all in thee as the 
Father has in him. Thou hast it not on loan from God, because 

God is thine own: all thou hast gotten thou hast gotten of thine. 

own and such works as are not produce of thine own are dead 
works in the sight of God. These thou art moved to by extraneous 
things and they are not living: they are dead, for anything alive 
is endowed with a motion of its own. If man’s works are to live 
they must be indigenous: not foreign things nor outside but 
within him. 

Remember. If ye love right as God ye love not right as right, 
therefore ye neither take it nor love it as a whole but as divided. 

) 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS ° 125 

But God is right, so ye are not taking him nor loving him in his 
entirety. Take right as right and ye take it as God. Then 
where right is at work ye will be working too, seeing that ye do 
right all the time. Though hell stood in the way of right ye 
would still do right and that not as a hardship but a pleasure, 
because being right itself ye must do right. The more a thing 
participates in a common nature, the more it is one with the 
impartibility of the common nature, the more impartible it is 
itself. To the whole truth, God help us. Amen. 

XLVII 
BEHOLD, I SEND MY ANGEL 

Ecce ego mitto angelum meum etc. (Matt. 11, Luc. 7,7). 
* Behold, I send my angel before my face to prepare my way before 
me. And he whom we seek shall suddenly come into his temple. 
Who knoweth the day of his coming? For he is as a fire that 
blazes up.’ Suddenly, he says, he shall come into his temple. 
The soul shall come with all of her possessions, be they sins or 
be they virtues, and offer them all up at once, lifting them up in 
the Son into the Father. As the love of the Father is the loveli- 
ness of the Son. The Father loves nothing at all but the Son 
and such things as he finds in the Son. Let the soul then rise up 
in her whole power and offer herself to the Father in his Son so 
that she with the Son may be loved by the Father. 

He says, ‘ Behold, I send my angel.’ The word behold suggests 
three things. Something great or marvellous or rare. Behold, 
I send my angel to refine the soul and prepare her for divine light. 
Divine light is always in the angelic light and of the angelic light. 
The soul would be troubled and distressed if God’s light were not 
shaded therein. God, clouded by angelic light is always waiting to 
come out and shine upon the soul. I am wont to say, when I am 
asked what God is doing, that he is begetting his Son, bearing him 
ever fresh and new and with such delight that he does nothing else 
besides this work with his Holy Ghost and all things in it. Hence 
his words, ‘ Behold I.’ He who says I does the very best work. 
None but the Father can say this word right. The act is peculiar 
to him and theré is no issue thereof but his Son. In this act 
God tells forth his all. When God does this work in the soul, 
that is his birth: his birth is his work and his’ work is his Son. 
God performs this operation in the innermost depths of the soul 
so secretly that neither saint nor angel knows, nor is the soul 
herself a party to it save that she is the patient ; God does it 
by himself. It is really the Father who says, ‘ I send my angel.’ 

126 2 MEISTER ECKHART 

Now I maintain we cannot be content with this and will have 
none of him. It was Origen who said, ‘Mary Magdalene sought 
our Lord; she sought for one dead man and was disappointed 
to find two living angels.’ She was right, for she expected God. 
Dionysius says of the august principalities of angels, that divine 
order reigns there and divine activity and divine likeness or divine 
truth, as far as that is possible. What is divine order but divine 
power and from them both springs love which is ardour and 
wisdom and truth and power. For love is burning in the realm 
of essence: transcendental, actual being, free from nature. It is 
its nature to be natureless. To think of goodness or wisdom or 
power dissembles the essence and dims it in thought. The mere 
thought obscures essence. Such is divine rule. And where 
God finds its like within the soul there does the Father give his 
Son birth. The soul’s whole power bursts alight. Out of this 
power, out of this light, leaps the flame: love. The soul with all 
her might ascends to the order of God. 

Now to speak of the order of the soul. According to a heathen 
doctor, the supernal light of the soul is very bright and clear and 
dearly loves itself, whereas the soul dislikes herself and never 
sheds this natural light upon herself unless her lower powers are 
ordered to her highest; her natural light being high enough to 
reach angelic nature, but all averse from her inferior powers, it 
will not pour therein nor will it drench the soul unless these lower 
powers will give way. When a lord rules over a people the serf 
is under the knight and the knight is under the baron. They 
all desire peace and to that end they will all help each other. 
And even so each several power is subject to the others and 
helps to keep peace in the soul, perfect rest. Our doctors define 
perfect rest as absolute freedom from motion. In it the soul 
can rise above herself to the order of the gods. In this absolute 
rest the Father gives the soul his only Son. Now he ranks first 
in order of divinity. : 

The other members take somewhat lower rank as I was saying 
of the angels who have God’s likeness very strong in them and 
illumination. In this interior light they soar above themselves 
into the divine image, all face to face with God in his divine light 
and so much the same that they do God’s work. Angels illumined 
like this and who are so like God, absorb and suck in God. I 
often say that were I void and had this fiery inner love and likeness 
I should absorb God altogether. Light streams out and lights 
up what it falls on. To call a man enlightened as we sometimes 
do, means little. Where it comes in it is far better; where it 
breaks through into the soul and makes her Godlike, divine, as 
far as may be, and light inwardly. In this interior light she 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 127 

towers above herself in the light of God. Now she has come 
home and is at one with him and is his fellow-worker. Nothing 
is wrought by creature, the Father works alone. The soul shall 
never stop until she works as well as God. Then she and the 
Father shall do his work together : she shall work as one with 
him, wisely and lovingly. That we may be in unity with him, 

God help us. Amen. 

XLIX 
BEHOLD, I SEND MY ANGEL 

Ecce mitto angelum meum (Malach. 8,, Luc. 7,,). It is written 
in the gospel, ‘ Behold, I send my angel.’ Angels are within our 
ken for the evangelists declare, ‘we shall be like the angels.’ 
One authority says, an angel is an image of God. Another one 
says he is fashioned like God. A third one describes him as a 
clear mirror wherein is reflected the goodness of God, the absolute 
stillness and mystery of God, as far as that is possible. Angels, 
again, have been defined to be pure intellectual light free from 
material things. We shall be like the angels. Perception here 
means seeing in the light that is in time, for anything I think of 
I think of in the light that is in time and temporal. But angels 
perceive in the light that is beyond time and eternal. They know 
in the eternal now. Men know in the now of time. The now of 
time is infinitely short. Yet take away this now of time and 
thou art everywhere and hast the whole of time. This thing or 
that thing is not all things ; as long as I am this or that, have this 
or that, I am not all things nor I have not all things. Purify till 
thou nor art nor hast not either this or that, then thou art omni- 
present, and being neither this nor that thou art all things. An 
angel is and acts as an intelligence in his degree, beholding God 
without ceasing and his object is intelligible essence. Hence he 
is far removed from things. Remote from time and tempor- 
alities. 

Mark the prophet’s words, he says, ‘I send my angel.’ The 
evangelist, however, omits the pronoun I. This points, in the 
first place, to God’s elemental nature: to the fact that God is 
unnameable, transcending speech in the abstraction of his essence 
where, without word or utterance, God is ineffable to creatures. 
It shows next, that the soul is ineffable and wordless; in her 
proper cause she is inarticulate, nameless and mute. The I 
is suppressed because there she has neither word nor utterance. 
Thirdly, it suggests that God and the soul are so entirely one that 

God has not a single thing to tell him from the soul, nor is he any 

128 MEISTER ECKHART 

other than the soul. The J is silent because he and the soul are 
every whit the same ; he has no property apart from soul nor does 
any other nature come within his ken. In the other reference, 
the text says I to indicate God’s is-ness: that God simply is. 
All things are in God ; out of him, without him, is naught. All 
creatures are infernal and of no account compared with God. 
What they are in truth that they are in God, for it is God alone 
who is the truth; the word / stands for the actuality of divine 
truth for it is the glyph of one-existence. It proclaims that God 
alone is. Secondly, it means that God is inseparate from things ; 
that he is more innate in them than they are in themselves. And 
man should be inseparate from things: not as cleaving to self 
but as wholly detached from himself; thus he is inseparate from 
all things, and he is all things. So far as thou art nothing to thy- 
self so far thou art all things and inseparate from all things ; and 
so far as thou art not divorced from all things so far thou art 
God and all things, for God’s deity consists in his being present 
in all things. Wherefore the man who is inseparate from all 
things enjoys divinity as God himself enjoys it. Thirdly, the 
word I is in a sense the end of name for it is no proper name: 
it signifies the perfection of name and means immutability, 
dispassion : that God is immoveable, intangible, eternal stability. 

Fourthly, it points to the absolute purity of the divine being 
which is entirely without admixture. Goodness, wisdom and 
anything else that we can attribute to God are impurities with 
God’s abstract essence ; coexistence is foreign to essence, but the 
word I denotes God’s pure essence, his being in itself without 
anything alien and strange. The angels are the image, the 
mirror of God, which contains the reflection of the Godhead, of 
the glory, the stillness and the mystery of God. Let us like 
the angels imitate God. According to philosophers, to make a 
portrait of a man one must not copy Conrad nor yet Henry. For 
if it be like Conrad or like Henry it will not recall the man, 
but will remind one of Conrad or of Henry. Moreover, Conrad’s 
portrait will not be like Henry for, given the knowledge and the art, 
one could do Conrad to the life, the very image of him: Now, 
God both will and can: he made thee like unto himself, the very 
image of himself. But like him argues something foreign and aloof. 
Now there is nothing foreign nor aloof betwixt God and the soul, 
therefore the soul is not like God: she is identical with him, 
the very same as he is. 

More I do not know and cannot tell, so here my argument 
must end. But I was thinking on the way, that we ought to be 
utterly detached in our intention, having no one, nothing, in 
view but the Godhead as such: not happiness nor this nor that, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 129 

just God and Godhead in itself. Aught beside that thou intendest 

is a divine impurity. Seize the actual Gödhead itself. God help 
us so to do. Amen. 

L 
I CAME FORTH FROM THE FATHER 

Exivi a patre et veni in mundum (Joh. 16,,). I quote from the 
Gospel of St John. Our Lord says, ‘I came forth from the 
Father and am come into the world and again I leave the world 
and return to my Father.’ Another of his sayings is, ‘ Amen, 
Verily I say unto you whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in 
my name the same shall be yours.” Scholars say the word amen 
is an expression for stability. Our Lord says, ‘ Heaven and earth 
shall pass away before my word shall pass away,’ which never 
changes. The heavens which are manifold and the unnumbered , 
stars are all self-coloured. The moon alone is pied, thick and 
clear, dark and light. That is due to the neighbourhood of earth. 
And our doctors teach that in God there is no yesterday nor 
morrow, it is to-day and now all the time in God. Augustine 
observes that the architect who builds a house therein displays 
his art ; though it may fall to ruin the art within his soul neither 
ages nor decays. And again Augustine says, All things are 
immutable in the eternal Word, nor do they wear away albeit 
in themselves they are corruptible, apt to be in some sort or not 
to be at all. 

He says, ‘ Verily’ (i.e. without fail or invariably), ‘ whatsoever 
ye ask of my Father in my name the same shall be yours,” Accord- 
ing to St Augustine, ‘To pray to God for aught save God is not 
to pray at all.’ John Damascene declares that ‘seeing herself 
the soul sees spirit; seeing an angel she sees spirit, yet, beholding 
God, she and the angel are but corporal things compared with 
him.’ Their mind is as matter to God. Angelic light is darkness 
as compared with him. Our Lord says, ‘ Verily, I say unto you, 
whatsoever ye ask in my name the same shall be yours,’ meaning, 
what is in man’s name is man; what is in light’s name is light ; 
what is in God’s name is fixed and immutable. The name of 
God belongs to none but him who stands in this light. No man 
can say Father‘except he be Son and none is called Son unless 
he be one with the one-begotten Word. Whoso asks in God’s 
name may demand of the Father whatever he will. Words have 
enormous power and have gotten it from the emanation of the 
eternal Word. f 

Our Lord says, ‘ I am come into the world.” The Father comes 
into his Son with all he is, he comes into his Son with a has, 

130 MEISTER ECKHART 

he comes into his Son with all that he affords and, fourthly, he 
comes in an intellectual act. It is proper to the Son to dwell in 
the Father and it is proper to the Father to dwell in his Son and 
in the Holy Ghost. The full promise of the Father is brought 
forth in the Son to the end that the Son may transmit it to the 
soul. To use a favourite simile of mine. When a stone is thrown 
into a pond the impact starts a circle, small but energetic, which 
sets up other circles, the second being larger than the first albeit 
not so potent and the third one bigger still; one is gotten from 
another without stopping; and if the throw was hard enough 
the water’s edge is reached before the ripples are exhausted. 
One unique throw with the world a sheet of water and the water 
would fail ere the circles died away. 

Now mark the application. First, out of the Father there 
leaps forth the Son, small, but so puissant in his godly strength 
that it is he who causes the whole emanation. The second sally 
is the premier angel, following hard upon the first event. It 
speeds apace, and though less energetic than the first and fully 
small, it is endowed with so much force that its superfluous 
energy supplies the lower angels while its successors, yet more 
widely flung, are bigger in circumference than the second or the 
‘first. They keep on brimming out the one behind the other, all 
busy pouring themselves forth from the highest to the lowest of 
the angels; but however far it be from the initial sally of the 
eternal Word to the first angel, this latter is too high to be 
affected by any corporal thing. Further. Our master claims 
for the lowest of the angels that in view of his energy projecting 
into God, the very basest of the inferior angels has so much of 
God’s might that the smallest fraction (a chip as it were from 
the carpenter’s axe), the minutest trace, of his activity makes 
all things grow and flourish. If this chip does not fall from 
his work, everything instantly perishes. They spread far and 
wide, reproducing so far as they may the first welling out of 
the Son from the Father; but this first emanation was so 
charged with power that given a thousand or more worlds they 
would be wanting in capacity ere the first issue had been spent, 
just as the water’s edge was reached before the ripples were 
exhausted that arose from the impact of the stone. 

Our Lord says, ‘I came forth from the Father and am come 
into the world.’ World meaning pure or virgin. He is referring 
to the soul. Boéthius says the world of the soul is called pure 
because she is fashioned like the fair and virgin world in God. 
And God is that soul which has gotten her into the perfect image 
of the divine world and wholly there abides, not peering forth but, 
all aloof from the outside world, standing still in the light-world 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 131 

in God. Into this soul comes the Son, begotten there in all the 
panoply of God: Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all together in 
one perfect being. The soul that has gotten in her the Son, has 
in one perfect entity the entire promise of the Godhead. One 
thing more. Creatures communicate themselves so far as they 
are good. It is peculiar to God as being wholly good that into 
whomsoever does partake of him he empties himself wholly in 
his Son. Which is another argument for the soul who has gotten 
the Son receiving the Godhead altogether. Thirdly, the Father 
is performing, in his Son, an intellectual operation. According 
to the philosophers, man’s highest happiness consists in thé 
mental exercise of wisdom. And the Father’s whole delight, his 
perfect bliss, is this intellectual wont which is the birth of his 

Son. This birth he so enjoys that he puts his whole might into 
‘it and his entire nature. Accordingly the soul having gotten 
the Son by a feat of understanding, in him possesses all that God 
can give, in one perfect joy and bliss. 

Our Lord says, ‘I came forth from the Father and am come 
into this world,’ into the light-world, that is. The soul, true 
reflection of the divine world, into her enters the Son ; just as he 
falls from the Father he is born in the soul. In this very same birth 
he is born in the world, in the soul, and bearing her up brings her 
to birth in the Father. As he says, ‘again I leave the world,’ 
the outer world, ‘and re-ascend to my Father,’ with the light- 
world of the soul, copy of the world divine, made on the same 
last, in the same likeness. He carries her up to his Father, into 
the first, into the ground whence the Son comes out and strikes 
down from the Father. 

There is another meaning in his words, ‘I came forth from the 
Father,’ ‘which is this: the Father goes into his Son in all his 
deity, for he is wholly intellectual.. He goes clean into 'his Son. 
Had he more sons they would get naught ; he could never have 
but one Son for he is none other than his understanding. Had 
he a thousand sons they must needs be all the same Son. ‘ 

Our Lord says, ‘I came forth from the Father and am come 
into the world. Again I leave the world and return to my Father.’ 
He implies that his going out is his going into the soul. But 
her going in is her going out. The soul goes out of her outermost 
into her innermost, out of her own into the Son’s. Her being 
caught up to the Father is his quitting the outer world and, with 
the soul, ascending once more to his Father. Mark tells of some- 
one addressing our Lord as ‘ Good Master.’ He replied, ‘ There 
is none good but God,’ for in coming forth he falls clean into the 
soul with all he is. No creature exists that can give itself whole ; 
it goes out in kindness and work but itself stays at home. His 

132 MEISTER ECKHART 

exit is his entrance. His passage out of the Father is his passage 
into the soul. His emanation verily is God giving himself once 
for all in his Son. We say : the only-begotten Son who proceeds 
from the Father is the same as himself. From the moment the 
Father launches forth in all his might in the Son, he (the Father) 
reverts to pure essence. He has no other course seeing he has 
spent all his substance on his Son. Were there no time nor place 
nor matter, nothing left at all, the begetter would be as the 
begotten. It follows that the Son so called, must be the only 
Son and be one with the Father who utters in one single Word 

“the whole of what he knows, the whole of what he can afford, in 
one single instant, and that instant is eternal. 

Now our doctors say: natural acts make for unity. God 
vouchsafes himself, gives himself, as a whole to the soul in order 
that she may be one with him. Moreover, his first issue is his 
only Son. Again, our doctors teach that the highest of the 
angels is pure yet he forms a part of nature. But the only Son 
never entered any nature, he remained superior to nature: in 
pure being he went into the Father. The second eruption into 
nature, so our masters say, the highest spirit, remained by nature 
simplex, one in proportion to the nearness of his nature (to its 
origin). He broke in to let us out: his exit thence is his entrance 
here. Hence his words, ‘ Let. . . .’ 

LI 
HE SOUGHT TO SEE ... WHO HE WAS 

Et querebat videre Jesum, quis esset etc. (Luc. 193). St Luke 
relates that when our Lord walked upon earth in human nature 
‘there was a rich man who sought to see him, and could not for 
the press for he was small of stature.’ According to a holy man, 
Only he is rich who has plenty of God and virtue. To be well 
off for goods and stinted for God makes one poor and not rich, 
for things are as nothing to God. Hence the protest of that 
seigneur whom his retainers lauded for his power and his riches. 
Quoth he, ‘I trow they laud not me one whit who have forgot my 
strongest claim to praise, my power over my body to demand 
of it what I will.’ This man who sought to see Jesus did outrun 
the crowd and climbed up into a tree in order to see him. And 
Jesus said, “Make haste and come down, for to-day I abide at 
thine house.’ Whoso would see Jesus must outrun all things. 
What does it show when a man does not hasten past things ? 
It shows he has not tasted God. If he had tasted God he would 
hasten to pass by all things, and not pass by merely but break 
through all creatures. What his love is ready to leave he breaks 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 133 

through. If we fail to see God that is due to our feeble desire 
no less than the concourse of creatures. Aim high, be high. 
To see God needs high aspiration. Know, ardent desire and 
abject humility work wonders. I vow God is omnipotent, but he 
is impotent to thwart the humble soul with towering aspiration. 
And where I cannot master God and bend him to my will it is 
because I fail either in will or meekness. I say, and I would 
stake my life upon it, that by will a man might pierce a wall of 
steel, and accordingly we read about St Peter that on catching sight 
of Jesus he walked upon the water in his eagerness to meet him. 

Look you: a thing that grows in the filling will never get full. 
Take a vessel, a stoup; if you pour a stoup in and it stretches 
thereby then it will not be full. And so with the soul: the more 
she demands the more she is given; the more she receives the 
bigger she grows. Who is Jesus? He has no name. Where do 
we see God? Where there is no yesterday nor morrow : where 
it is now and to-day, there we see God. What is God? One 
master says, If I were forced to tell of God then I should say, 
God is a thing no mind can reach or grasp and that is all I know 
about him. Another master says, He who knows of God that he 
is unknown, that man knows God. Then comes St Augustine 
with his dietum, God is something sovran, supreme, which is 
common to all partakers. He means that God is somewhat 
wherein every creature must be; for if he fall out of the hand of 
the mercy of God he will fall back into the hand of the justice of 
God. He must ever be in him. Needs must a man have his being 
in God and have enjoyment in God withal, aye in God himself, 
an he will. But he who does not find eternal satisfaction and 
enjoyment in God himself must get it out of things, things that 
are base, far lower than his footstool; yet creatures without 
exception get their being from God, even the damned in hell 
persist on somewhat of his being. Though they dwell not in God 
in felicity, still they must go on without him, against their will, 
in damnation. What folly it is to refuse to be with him we cannot 
be without ! 

St Augustine says, ‘What is God? He is something we cannot 
conceive any better.’ But I say, God is better than anything we 
can conceive; I say, God is somewhat, I know not what, verily 
I know not. He is all that is being rather than not-being, existent 
more than non-existent ; our highest aspirations are but grovelling 
things falling hopelessly short of God. He transcends heart’s 
desire. When I preached at Paris I declared, and I durst now 
repeat, that not a man at Paris can conceive with all his learning 
‚what God is in the very meanest creature, not even in a fly. More- 
over, I now say that the whole world is powerless to conceive it 

134 MEISTER ECKHART 

What God is in himself no man can tell except he be ravished into 
the light that God is himself. What God is in the angels is very 
remote and nobody knows. What God is in the God-loving soul 
not a soul knows but the soul he is in. What God is in these 
nether things, I know to some extent but very little. What 
time God comes within our ken the natural faculties vanish. 
May we be rapt away into the light that. is God himself and 
therein be forever blest. So help us God. Amen. 

LII 
THE GOOD HOUSEWIFE 

Consideravit domum etc. ‘The good housewife looks well to 
the ways of her house, not eating the bread of idleness.’ This 
house represents the soul as a whole, and the ways of the house 
are the powers.of the soul. An ancient philosopher says the soul 
is made in between one and two. The one is eternity, ever alone 
and without variation. The two is time, changing and given to 
multiplication. He means to convey that the soul in her higher 
powers touches eternity, God to wit, while her lower powers being 
in contact with time make her subject to change and biased 
towards bodily things, which degrade her. Could the soul know 
God as well as the angels do she would never have come into body. 
If she could know God without the world the world would not have 
been made for her sake. The world was contrived on her account 
for training and bracing the eye of the soul to endure divine light. 
The sunshine falling on the earth-is dimmed first in the air and 
diffused on various things, for no human eye can support the sun. 
And even so the light of God is over strong and bright for the 
soul’s eye to bear, without being fixed and given up by matter 
_ and reflection which accustom it to dwelling in the light divine. 

In her superior powers the soul is in contact with God; so she 
takes after God. God takes after himself; he has gotten his 
form from himself and from no one beside. His form is that of 
perfect self-knowledge, absolute light. When the soul comes in 
contact with him in real understanding, then she is like him in form. 
Suppose you press a seal into green wax or red, or into cloth, 
just enough for the seal, the seal being stamped right into the wax 
so that none of the wax is left over unsealed, then it is one and the 
same with the seal. In just the same way the soul is wholly 
united with God in image and form when she is in contact with 
him in actual gnosis. St Augustine says the soul is of more noble 
build than any other creature, and that is why no mortal thing, 
_ destined to perish at the latter day, can hold communication with 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 185 

or eke affect the soul save from a distance and by messengers. 
Such are the eyes and ears and the five senses: these are the 
soul’s ways out into the world, and by these ways the world gets 
back into the soul. According to one master, the powers of the 
soul flow back into the soul laden with fruits; they never go 
out but they bring something back. So beware lest thine eyes 
bring back aught to hurt thy soul. My firm conviction is that 
everything a good man sees must better him. On seeing evil he 
thanks God for saving him therefrom and prays God to convert 
him to what he is. On seeing good his great desire will be to have 
it perfected in him. 

This seeing serves two purposes : it scotches what is mischievous 
and makes us forthwith remedy our faults. Many a time I have 
laid it down that great workers, great fasters, great vigil-keepers, 
if they fail to mend their wicked ways, wherein true progress lies, 
do cheat themselves and are the devil’s laughing-stock. A man - 
once had an arrow he grew rich on. He was neighbour to a 
sower. When the arrow was in use a breeze from any quarter 
would catch it by the head and turn its tail into the wind. So this 
man approached the sower and quoth he, ‘ What will you give 
me to tell you the way of the wind?’ Thus he sold his arrow and 
waxed rich thereby. And so might we become right rich in virtue 
by finding out our frailties, and then, in rue, setting ourselves to 
cure them. 

This St Elizabeth did with much care. She looked well to the 
ways of her house. She had no fear for the winter for her house- 
hold was doubly clad. Probable ills she provided against. Any 
lack she worked hard to supply. So she ate not the bread of 
idleness. Withal her superior powers she kept oriented to God. 
The superior powers of the soul are three, The first is intuition; 
the second irascibilis, i.e. the power of attack; the third is will. 
In the act of imbibing knowledge of the very truth into the 
impartible power whereby we apprehend God, the soul is a light. 
And God too is light, and when the divine light is flooding the soul, 
soul becomes merged into God just like a light into light. Then 
she is called the light of faith which is a divine virtue. And 
whither the soul is unable to go with her senses and powers thither 
faith takes her. 

The second is the attacking force whose special function it is 
to progress. As the eye is for seeing colour and shape and the 
ear is for hearing sweet voices and sounds, so the soul with this 
power is ever advancing ; if she glances aside to waver from him, 
that is sin. She cannot brook that aught should be above her. 
I trow she cannot brook God even being above her; unless he 
be within her and she has gotten as good as God himself, she 

136 MEISTER ECKHART 

never rests. With this power God is apprehended by the soul, 
as far as that is feasible to creature and so it is called hope, which - 
is a divine virtue also. Herein the soul has such a clear prospect. 
of God that she fondly imagines God in his whole being has not a 
thing withholden from her. King Solomon says, ‘Stolen waters are 
sweet.” And St Augustine tells us, ‘ The pears I stole were nicer 
than the ones my mother gave me, because they were forbidden 
and locked up.’ So is that grace far sweeter to the soul which 
she has won by special work and wisdom than that which is our 
common property. 

The third power is interior will, turned ever face-like towards 
God in godly will, drawing from God his love into itself. God is 
drawn by the soul and the soul is drawn by God, and this is divine 
love, another divine virtue. Divine felicity lies in three things. 
In knowledge and in liberation from the bondage of creature : 
in having enough of, having finished with, self and all creatures. 
Further, the soul’s perfection lies in gnosis, in conception, in 
conceiving God and in union of perfect love. Do we want to know 
what sin means ? Lapsing from felicity and virtue, that is the 
whole cause of sin. It behoves every soul to look to her ways. 
‘She had no fear for the winter with her household doubly clad,’ 
as the scriptures tell of her. She was clothed with strength to 
withstand imperfection and was adorned with the truth. To all 
appearance this woman was rich and had the world at her feet, 
but in secret she knelt at the shrine of true poverty. And when her 
outward comforts failed she fled to him to whom all creatures 
flee, setting at naught the world and self. In this way she trans- 
cended self, despising men’s despisery and not minding it, for all 
she had in mind was the tending of the sick and the cleansing of 
the foul, which she managed by dint of her pure heart. Even so 
let us look to the ways of our house and not eat the bread of 
idleness. So help us God. Amen. 

LIII 
WHOSOEVER WOULD COME AFTER ME 

Dominus dicet : qui vult venire post me etc. (Matt. 16,,; Luc. 
9,3). Our Lord says, ‘ Whosoever would come to me let him take 
up his cross and with willing martyrdom forsake himself and 
follow me.’ Everything by nature is pursuing God after its own 
fashion. Fire draws upwards, earth falls downwards, and similarly 
every creature here is searching out the place God has ordained 
it for. Origen says a man forsakes himself when he by striving 
rids himself of customary sins and denies himself those things 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 137 

he is addicted to ; so doing he takes up his cross with willing pain 
and disciplines himself in virtuous uses. Basilius, the saint, 
once said that any man who leaves the things that are behind him 
and beneath him and which are not God, has left himself. And 
treating of this subject in the book wherein he speaks about the 
soul, St Augustine calls her nobler, mightier, grander than any 
other ereature and in these respects most like to God of all, barring 
the angels, who are nobler than her nature because they were the 
first to be poured forth and loosed from spirit although they keep a 
refuge in it. This the soul has not. She has to pour into the body. 

Various people comment sagely upon this: If God is quite 
impartible why did he not create all things simply like the angels ? 
That would never do, theologians say. One sort of creature 
could not show forth God. He made many kinds of creatures 
for each one to show forth a modicum of God albeit no more of 
him that one drop of water reveals about the sea. Not but what 
a drop of water tells us more about the sea, and indeed the universe, 
than any creatures can reveal (of God). For out of drops we 
might get a sea, but not by means of any creatures could we 
succeed in getting God. St Gregory observes that, The soul whom 
God shines into so that she sees him somewhat, to her creatures 
are dwarfed or merely ciphers. 

Thirdly, the text refers to one who dies a martyr’s death as 
forsaking self. Our Lord says, ‘ Moses, to me no man comes as 
himself.’ Now according to St Chrysostom, ‘To be an other 
than I am I must abandon that Iam.’ This is accomplished by 
humility. ‘ Nothing ’, says St Gregory, ‘ gives more power than does 
lowliness.’ We see this well with Moses, who when he wanted to 
rest drove his flock of sheep into the valley. It was there he saw 
the bush burning but not consumed. ‘I will go,’ said Moses, ‘ and 
look at this great sight.’ Then God called to him, ‘ Stay, Moses, 
go no further! Doff thy shoes.’ The feet are symbols of desire. 
They must be bare : drawn out of everything temporal and mortal ; 
then the soul can offer her whole self to her Lord. One of the 
saints has said that if the soul should rise and, being unillumined, 
offer herself to our Lord she would be rebuffed and come to grief ; 
like an eye that likes trying to look at the sun finds it grows weaker 
and blinder. 

| LIV 
FROM HIM AND THROUGH HIM AND IN HIM 

Ex ipso et per ipsum et in ipso sunt omnia, ipsi gloria in secula 
(Rom. 11,,). St Paul says, ‘ From him and through him and in 
him are all things, to whom be glory and honour.’ These words 

138 MEISTER ECKHART 

are said of the three Persons and the unity of their nature. From 
him applies to the Father, the origin of all things in eternity and 
in time. Through him applies to the Son, through whom all 
things proceeded forth. In him applies to the Holy Ghost, in 
whom all things are contained, made spirit and brought back to 
their end. From another point of view these words, again, 
betoken the three Persons by. their from and through and in. As 
these words are distinct even so do they show the distinction of 
the Persons. But from the word him (which is the same for all) 
we gather the oneness of their nature. He says, ‘ To him be glory 
and honour.’ Proclaiming the three Persons as one God, to whom 
alone be all honour. 

Now we proceed to speak of the things of God, of Persons and 
of essence, which we hardly understand. Those that cannot 
follow this discourse can take refuge in the dogma I have taught 
before, that the three Persons are in one essence and one essence 
in the three Persons. Remember we are speaking of Father and 
paternity, and you must understand that these two are not apart 
in two hypostases, but they are one hypostasis, and moreover 
they are one and three rationally speaking. Consider the meaning 
of paternity. It means the power of father-kind. A father is 
known by the fact that he begets, but we recognise paternity in a 
potential father. Take, for example, the maid who is a virgin. 
By nature she is maternal though not actually mother. The same 
thing with a father: in his power to beget he is paternal, but the 
fact of his begetting makes him father. Mark this difference 
between father and paternity when the Word is gotten ghostly 
in the soul. This we take to be the case when the soul, sublimed 
and in the proper state, grows pregnant with God’s light and 
divine by nature: by the unique power of God grown big with 
Deity. You see, in this immanent power, soul too is paternal. 
But radiant with revelation, she with the Father begets and is 
then with the Father called father. This father and fatherhood 
differ as applied to the soul. Mark, too, that Son differs from 
filiation, remembering that these two are not separate in two 
hypostases : they are the same hypostasis. We find filiation in 
potential father-nature, unborn. If he were not unborn in his 
potential nature the Father could not beget him, for a thing that 
comes out must first have been in. So much for filiation. But 
the Son we explain as the Father’s begetting of his own Word, 
whereby the Father is Father. The Son, moreover, is God in 
himself, not God of himself but of the Father alone. Were he 
. God of himself he would not be one with the Father so there 
' would be two without any beginning. Which is impossible. We 
postulate three distinct properties, the Father’s property is that 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 139 

he comes from none but himself. The Son’s property is that he 
does not come from himself : he descends from the Father by way 
of nativity. The Holy Ghost’s property is that he comes from 
the Father not as being born: he proceeds from them twain, 
both Father and Son, not as a birth but as love. For two who are 
sundered in Person cannot together bear one but they can bear 
mutual love. The Holy Ghost is not born because he proceeds 
out of two and not merely out of the Father, albeit certain doctors 
do maintain that the Holy Ghost comes from the Father alone and 
not from the Son at all. This is false; for when the Father 
gat the Son he gave him his whole nature as well as all perfection, 
which goes with being of that nature, the Father withholding 
nothing from his Son. It follows that the Father cannot alone 
bring forth the Holy Ghost as he alone did get the Son. Had 
these doctors envisaged it aright, they would no doubt have said 
the same. They were speaking without understanding. So it 
is wrong to say the Son is God from himself and not from the 
Father. The Son may be said to bring forth the Spirit yet not 
from himself: from the Father whence he comes himself. Thus 
the Holy Ghost comes from them twain and not from one; but 
not as being twain, as being one. So much for the Son and 
filiation. ; 

It may be asked concerning Spirit and spiration, Can we use 
these terms ornot ? Is there some objection, which makes it inad- 
missible ? Filiation is found latent in the nature of the Father, 
that is plain, seeing he is not merely brought forth out of him. 
Herein lies the objection to speaking of Spirit and spiration. 
Let us see if we can find precisely the right meaning of Spirit and 
spiration. We have here two and one. That is the difference 
between Spirit and spiration. In the first, when we predicate 
two we mean Father and Son. . But by saying in one we refer to 
spiration. This same in one is formless: the mark of spiration. 
Again, when we say in another that signifies Spirit, who is another 
than Father and Son in his Person. 

LV! 
GOD MADE THE POOR FOR THE RICH 

God made the poor for the rich and the rich for the poor. Lend 
to God, he will repay you. Some say they believe in God who 
believe not God. It is a greater thing to believe in God than to 
believe God. I may trust a man to pay me back five shillings 

1 See also Wackernagel, No. lix, from which the last sentence is added. 

140 MEISTER ECKHART 

I have lent him yet not trust in theman. So if aman believes in 
God why will he not trust him to repay what he lends his poor? . 
He who gives up all things gets back an hundredfold. If he. 
expects his hundredfold he shall get nothing : he is not giving up 
the things but getting more, an hundredfold. Our Lord repays 
an hundredfold the man who leaves all things. Letting go all 
things he gets an hundredfold return and eternal life. If it 
happens to a man in the course of riddance to get again the very 
same he gave, then, not giving all, he shall get nothing. Anyone 
who looks to find anything in God, knowledge, understanding or 
devotion or whatever it may be, even if he find it will not be 
finding God but knowledge, understanding or devotion : all things 
I heartily commend; but to him not lasting. 

Seek nothing at all, not understanding nor gnosis nor piety nor 
inwardness nor peace but only God’s will. The soul who is as 
she by rights should be, would not be satisfied even if God gave 
her his whole Godhead; it would no more console her than his 
giving her a fly. God-knowledge is vain apart from God-will. 
In God’s will are all things, eternal and perfect and pleasant to 
God ; but out of God’s will things are all of them naught and not 
pleasant to God and not perfect. Never pray for any mortal 
thing; if thou must pray for anything at all, pray for God’s will 
and nothing else for therein thou hast all. To ask for aught 
beside means getting nothing. In him is naught but one and one 
is indivisible and aught save one is part, not one. God is one and 
anything extra that is sought or found is not God but a fraction. 
Peace, intuition or anything elsé than simply God’s will is for 
self-love and is naught; but if he seeks God’s naked will then 
whatever he may find or have revealed to him therein that man 
may take as a gift of God without ever thinking or looking to see if 
it is of nature or of grace or from whence or in what wise it may 
be: he need have no anxiety whatever on that score; he is 
going the right way and while following the broad lines of the 
christian life there is no need to scrutinize each detail. He can 
just take each thing from God, and whatever comes accept it as 
the best for him, and have no fear of meeting on his lonely road 
with anything, do what he may, that hinders his awareness of the 
love of God, which to him is all that matters. : 

People have a way of saying, when it falls to them to do or 
suffer something, ‘ If only I knew it was the will of God I would 
gladly suffer and put up with it.’ Dear God! what a question 
. for a sick man to ask, does God intend me to be ill? He ought 
to know it is the will of God by the very fact of being ill. And 
so with other things. Whatever comes accept it as God’s will, 
pure and simple. Some, when things prosper with them, inwardly 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 141 

or outwardly, praise God and have faith in him. They will say, 
for instance, ‘I have gotten four quarters of corn this year and as 
many of wine: I put my trust in God.’ Nay, I say thou dost 
trust in the corn and the wine. 

The soul is created for good so great, so high, that she cannot 
rest in any mode; all the time she is hastening past modes to the 
eternal good, to God who is her goal. This is not won in the heat 
of the assault, in the stress and strain of action or of passion, but 
by gentleness and true humility and self-abnegation in that and 
everything that may betide. A man should not dragoon himself : 
‘ Thou shalt do this at whatever cost,’ that would be wrong for 
so he lends importance to himself. If anything should chance to 
grieve or trouble or disquiet him, again he would be wrong for 
that means giving way to self. When out of the depths of humilia- 
tion he calls on God for counsel and bending low before him 
accepts with quiet faith whatever he may send, then he is right. 
It all depends, in teaching and advising, if a man will listen, 
disregarding everything but God. Many and,various are the 
ways of putting this, but it promotes the proper play of conscience 
to refuse attention to casual happenings and for a man when he is 
by himself to make an offering of his will to God and then proceed 
to take each thing alike from God, grace or whatever comes, 
inward or outward. 

Whoso sees aught of God’s sees naught of God. The righteous 
man does not need God. What I have I am not in need of. He 
serves for naught, he cares for naught, he has God and that is 
all he needs. As God is higher than man so is he readier to give 
than man is to receive. Not by fasting and good works can we 
gauge our progress in the virtuous life, but a sure sign of growth 
is a waxing love for the eternal and a waning interest in temporal 
things. The man who owns an hundred crowns and gives them all 
in the name of God to found a cloister is doing a good work. And 
yet I say, it were a better to despise and naught himself for love 
of God. It behoves a man in all he does to turn his will in God’s 
direction and keeping only God in view to forge ahead without 
a qualm, not wondering, am I right or am I doing something 
wrong? If the painter had to plan out every brush-mark before 
he made his first he would not paint at all. And if, going to some 
place, we had first to settle how to put the front foot down, we 
should never get there. Follow your principles and keep straight 
on; you will come to the right place, that is the way. 

This is a collation of Meister Eckhart’s. 

142 MEISTER ECKHART 

LVI 
THE EMANATION AND RETURN 

Nolite timere eos qui corpus occidunt, animum autem occidere 
non possunt (Matt. 10,,). ‘Fear not them which kill the body 
but are not able to kill the soul.’ Spirit does not kill spirit ; spirit 
gives life to spirit. ‘Them which kill you’ are flesh and blood 
which die by one another. Man’s most precious possession is 
blood, when it is well-liking. The most mischievous thing in 
man is blood when it is ill-liking. When the blood rules the 
flesh, the person is humble and patient and chaste and has all the 
virtues. But where the flesh has the upper hand he is supercilious, 
hasty, and lascivious and has all the vices. Praised be St John 
the glorified of God himself. 

Now mark. I will say something I never said before. When 
God created the heavens and the earth and all creatures, God 
did no work; he had no work to do; there was no activity in 
him. God said: ‘We will make a likeness.’ To create is easy : 
we do it when and as we will. But what I make, I make myself, 
with myself and in myself, imprinting my image clearly in it. 
‘We will make a likeness’: not the Father nor the Son nor the 
Holy Ghost: we, the holy Trinity in concert, we will make a likeness. 

When God made man he wrought in the soul his like work, 
his ever-cherished, his working work. This work was a great one, 
no less than the soul: she was the work of God. God’s nature, 
his being and his godhood depend upon his working in the soul. 
God be praised, God be praised! God works in the soul; he is 
in love with his work. The work is love and the love is God. 
God loves himself and his nature, his essence and his Godhead. 
In the love wherein he loves himself therein God loves all creatures. 
With the love wherewith God loves himself therewith he loves 
all creatures, not as creatures: creatures as God. In the love 
wherein God loves himself therein he loves all things. 

Again I say what I have never said before. God enjoys him- 
self. In the joy wherein God enjoys himself therein he enjoys 
all creatures. With the joy wherewith God enjoys himself he 
enjoys all creatures, not as creatures : creatures as God. In the 
joy wherein God enjoys himself, therein he enjoys all things. 
And mark. All creatures tend towards their ultimate perfection. 
Apprehend me, I beseech you, by the eternal ever-valid truth 
and by my soul. For yet again I say a thing I never said before : 
God and Godhead are as different as earth is from heaven. More- 
over I declare: the outward and the inward man are as different, 
too, as earth and heaven. God is higher, many thousand miles. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 1483 

Yet God comes and goes. But to resume my argument: God 
enjoys himself in all things. The sun sheds his light upon all 
creatures, and anything he sheds his beams upon absorbs them, 
yet he loses nothing of his brightness. All creatures sacrifice their 
life for being. Creatures all come into my mind and are rational 
in me. I alone prepare all creatures to return to God. Beware, 
all of you, what ye do. 

To return to my inner and my outer man. I see the lilies in 
the field, their gaiety, their colour, all their leaves. But I do not 
see their fragrance.. Why ? Because what I give out is in me. 
What I am saying is in me and I speak it forth of me. My outward 
man relishes creatures as creatures, as wine and bread and meat. 
But my inner man relishes things not as creature but as the gift 
of God. And again to my innermost man they savour not of 
God’s gift but'of ever and aye. I take a bowl of water and place 
a mirror in it and set it in the sun. The sun sends forth his 
light-rays both from his disc and also from the bottom of the 
bowl, suffering thereby no diminution. The reflection of the 
mirror in the sun is in the sun. The sun and it are thus what it 
is. And so with God. God is in the soul with his nature, his 
essence and his Godhood, but he is not on that account the soul. 
The soul’s reflection is in God. God and she are thus what she 
is. There God is all creatures. There God’s utterance is God. 

While I subsisted in the ground, in the bottom, in the river 
and fount of Godhead, no one asked me where I was going or 
what I was doing: there was no one to ask me. When I was 
flowing all creatures spake God. If I am asked, Brother Eckhart, 
when went ye out of your house? Then I must have been in. 
Even so do all creatures speak God. And why do they not speak 
the Godhead? Everything in the Godhead is one, and of that there 
is nothing to be said. God works, the Godhead does no work, 
there is nothing to do; in it is no activity. It never envisaged 
any work. God and Godhead are as different as active and. 
inactive. On my return to God, where I am formless, my breaking 
through will be far nobler than my emanation. I alone take all 
creatures out of their sense into my mind and make them one in 
me. When I go back into the ground, into the depths, into the 
well-spring of the Godhead, no one will ask me whence I came or ~ 
whither I went. No one missed me: God passes away. 

All happiness to those who have listened to this sermon. Had 
there been no one here I must have preached it to the poor-box. 
-. Some poor souls will go back home and say, I shall settle down and 
seat my bread and serve God. Verily I say, they persist in error, 
- “and will never have the power to strive for or to win what those 
others do who follow Christ in poverty and exile. Amen. 

144 MEISTER ECKHART 

, 

LVII 
SUCH IS THE NATURE OF GOD 

A master cries, Dear God, how well for me did my love bear 
fruit ! 

Our Lord says to every loving soul, ‘I was made man for you, 
and if ye are not God for me ye wrong me. I in my God-nature 
did dwell in your man’s nature, sö that none guessed my godly 
might seeing me walk like any other man. And even so shall ye 
in your humanity hide you in my divinity, and none shall guess 
your human weakness: your life being all divine they shall see 
naught in you but God.’ This does not mean soft words or pious 
mien or much parade of holiness, so that our name borne far and 
and wide is highly honoured by the friends of God ; nor that as 
cherished and elect of God we fondly think God has forgot all 
creatures but ourselves and anything we ask of God is straight- 
way done. No, not by any means! That is not what God 
wants of us: all the other way. 

He would have us found wholly unmoved when people call us 
cheats and liars or whatever it may be whereby we are bereft 
of our fair name; and not only evil speaking but evil deeds as 
well: denying us our animal necessities ; and not only temporal 
needs but bodily hurt. (He would that) our sickness, or whatever 
ill it be, should help us in our bodily work ; that we should always 
do our best despite that people turn it to the worst account ; 
further, that we should suffer in this sense not alone from people 
but from God as well, who, withholding from us his present con- 
solation, builds as it were a wall between us and when we bring 
our work to him seeking his help and comfort, he behaves towards 
us as if he shut his eyes and refused to see or hear: he leavés us 
in our need to stand and fight alone, like Christ forsaken by his 
Father. Then hiding us in his divinity, behold us unbowed down 
by woe and with no other help than the words Christ uttered, 
* Father, they will be done.’ 

Such is the nature of God that we know it by nothing better 
than naught.—How, by naught ?—By getting rid of all means, 
not merely by spurning the world and the possession of virtue: 
I must let virtue go if I would see God face to face; not that I 
should flout virtue, but virtue being innate in me I transcend 
virtue. When a man’s mind has lost touch with every thing 
then, not till then, it comes in touch with God. A heathen philo- 
sopher has said, nature cannot transcend nature. Ergo, no 
creature can see God. If he is seen it must be in light that is 
supernatural. Theologians have a question, When God uplifts 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 145 

‚the soul above himself and above all creatures and leads her 
home into himself, why does he not raise up the body too so that 
it has no earthly needs? One of the masters—I think St Augus- 
tine—answers this as follows. When the soul attains to union 
with God then at last the body enjoys all things to God’s glory. 
Through man all creatures have flowed forth and the body’s 
rational use of creatures is not a drawback to the soul: it is an 
added dignity, for creatures can find no better way of returning 
to their source than in the righteous man who of his soul can say 
that even for an instant it has been absorbed in union with God. 
For then there is no obstacle between God and the soul, and as 
far as the soul follows God into the desert of his Godhead so far 
the body follows the bodily Christ into the desert of his willing 
poverty : as the soul is united with his deity so the body is atoned 
in Christ by the operation of true virtue. Well, then may the 
heavenly Father say, ‘ This is my beloved Son in whom I am well 
pleased,’ for not only has he gotten in the soul his only Son: he 
has begotten her his only Son. 

From the very bottom of my heart I say, Man, how can aught 
afflict thee or be hard to bear when thou considerest that he who 
yonder subsisted in the form of God and in the day of his eternity 
and in the glory of the saints, and who before was born the splendour 
and substance of God, did enter the prison, the trap of thy sense- 
nature which is so unclean that aught, however pure, is besmirched 
and fouled by coming near it, yet notwithstanding this he abode 
there for thy sake ? What is there thou wouldst not gladly suffer, 
reading of the bitterness of thy Lord and God, pondering the 
afflictions, all the woes, that did befall him? The scorn and 
contumely he bore from king and soldier, from knaves and passers 
by his cross ? How the glory of the eternal light was mocked and 
scorned and tortured? Behold, what innocence, compassion 
and true love, and nowhere shown to me more clearly than where 
the love-power pierced his heart. Make thee then a bundle of the 
woes of thy Lord God and let it lie between thy breasts. Regard 
and realize his virtues, how all his works make for thy weal, 
and see thou pay him back in his own coin his infamous and 
shameful death and his pain-bearing nature wherein he, sinless, 
suffered for thy sin as if it had been his; as he says in the Prophets 
concerning his afflictions, ‘ Lo, I suffer for my sins,’ and speaking 
of the fruits of all his labours, ‘ By your works shall ye possess 
this kingdom!’ calling our sins his sins and his works our works ; 
and he has answered for our sins as though he had committed 
them, whereas we profit by his works as though they were our 
own. And this should make our labour light, for the good knight 

laments not his own wounds, seeing his king who is en with 

146 MEISTER ECKHART 

him. He offers us the drink he drank himself. He asks nothing 
of us but what he has already done or suffered. We ought to 
suffer gladly, for God did nothing else while he sojourned upon 
earth. May we in God’s nature so transcend and lose our human 
nature, all our weakness, that nothing should be found in us but 
good alone, So help us God. Amen. 

LVIII! 
DIVINE UNDERSTANDING 

Lord God Almighty, all things are in thy power. Power and 
lordship lie in two things, in freedom and in the possession of 
many good things. in peace. What is freedom? A ‘heathen 
philosopher says, ‘That thing is free which cleaves to naught 
and to which naught cleaves.’ So there is nothing free but the 
first cause, that is, the cause of all things. 

To lordship belongs the possession of many good things and 
beautiful. God is all good in all; hence he possesses himself in 
all. What God has, that is he in all. The love and will, the 
wisdom, the goodness we say that he has, these he is. If God is 
this, he is not naught, for God was prior to naught. God has no 
before nor after: but naught has a sequel; its sequel is aught. 
Naught’s foregoer was God, for he was prior to naught. Naught’s - 
issue is aught. God then has no before nor after. Lo, the cause 
of all things, self-subsistent, discriminate light which is himself! 
God is a light shining in itself in silent stillness. The one light, 
the one essence itself, which knows and understands itself. The 
understanding of this unique light is the light from the light, it 
is the eternal Person of the Son from the eternal Person of the 
Father. The Father spoke one Word, namely, his Son. In this 
only Word he spoke all things. The Word of the Father is none 
other than his understanding of himself. The understanding of 
the Father understands that he understands, and that his under- 
standing understands is the same as that he is who is understanding. 
That is, the light from the light. ; 

Job says, God spake one Word; this was his own conception 
of himself: it was his Son. In this one conception he conceives 
all things ; he sees them as issuing from nothing. They are that 
in themselves. But as subsisting eternally in him, they are without 
themselves. What they were (without) themselves, was he him- 
self: God is nothing but God, for God is without other. All 
creatures are a light, for they are conceived in the light of unity 

1 See Pfeiffer, Zt. f. disch. Alt., Bd. 8 (2), 1850. For authorship see Preger’s 
Geschichte, p. 319. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 147 

and eternity. Creatures flowing forth as light reveal the hidden 
light. As St James says, ‘Every good gift and every perfect 
gift come down from above from the Father of lights.” We may 
deduce from this that all things are one light radiated by the 
Father for the purpose of revealing his own hidden light. And 
as all things have been one light proceeding forth, so also they are 
all one light which is flowing back, if they turn not away there- 
from of their own free will. Those who are steadfast in the face 
of multiplicity, behold what light and grace are revealed to them ! 
For the sovran good is so ordered towards the soul that she 
receives it not except by means. As St Dionysius says, ‘ The © 
means is light: grace that illumines understanding.’ What is 
understanding ? Understanding means seeing a thing quite 
clearly and without mistake. St Dionysius says, ‘ Disengage thy- 
self entirely from things if thou wouldst understand the highest 
good, God namely.’ What are we to understand by God ? That 
he is the one power. Let us therefore unify ourselves so that 
this one power may energise in us. He is also the good which 
moves things towards their good, namely himself, albeit he himself 
remains unmoved. And he is perfect simplicity ; and the simpler 
the soul is the better she understands his simplicity. How can 
we be perfectly simple? By departing from things and from our- 
selves, and knowing our own mind and all the working of the powers 
of the soul, except the chief one, understanding: leave that to 
God alone. The passive soul stands to lose all this and leave 
God to work without hindrance; then he begets his perfect likeness 
in her and conforms her to himself. Then she understands with 
him and loves with him. This is perfection. It is sometimes 
asked, Do’ we love God with the love wherewith the Father and 
the Son love one another ? Let us consider. 

Two kinds of love belong to us. One is the virtue. In this 
love we go on growing and any good we do in this love wins us 
eternal merit. But the love of the Father and the Son knows no 
increase for it is the Holy Ghost. Thus our love is as nothing 
compared with the love of the Father and the Son : it is the virtue 
that we grow with.—The other love which is in us is the love of 
the Father and the Son. As St Paul says, * God’s love is poured 
into our heart.’ In giving us his love God has given us his Holy 
Ghost so that we can love him with the love wherewith he 
loves himself. We love God with his own love; awareness of 
it deifies us. 

Intuition of the Sovran Good, that is God! To have that is to 
have the life most worth of any creature. God is willing his own 
clear conception and his own delight. What is willing in the 
Godhead? It is the Father watching the play of his own nature. 

148 MEISTER ECKHART 

What is this play ? It is his eternal Son. There has always been 
this play going on in the Father-nature. Play and audience | 
are the same. The Father’s view of his own nature is his Son. 
The Father embraces his own nature in the quiet darkness of his 
eternal essence which is known to none except himself. The 
glance returned by his own nature is his eternal Son. So the Son 
embraces the Father in his nature for he is the same as his Father 
in his nature. Thus from the Father’s embrace of his own nature 
there comes this eternal playing of the Son. This play was played 
eternally before all creatures. As it is written in the Book of 
Wisdom, ‘Prior to creatures, in the eternal now, I have played 
before the Father in his eternal stillness.’ The Son has eternally 
been playing before the Father as the Father has before his Son. 
The playing of the twain is the Holy Ghost in whom they both 
disport themselves and he disports himself in both. Sport and 
players are the same. Their nature proceeding in itself. ‘God is 
a fountain flowing into itself,’ as St Dionysius says. The Father 
has eternally been loving himself in his Son just as the Son has 
been loving himself in the Father eternally. Their mutual love 
is the Holy Ghost: the third Person, who proceeds from the 
other two as love. The essence of the Godhead begets not. The 
Father’s Person begets the Person of the Son eternally and together 
they pour forth their Holy Ghost: their mutual love. Father 
and Son are the pouring-in and the Holy Breath is the thing 
inpoured, identical in nature with them both. Did the essence of 
the Deity beget there would be more than one essence; but 
there is not. There is one essence which gives all things life and 
being, for the Son is born out of the heart of the Father eternally 
and shall bring back into it again all things which issued forth 
therefrom in him. As Christ declares, ‘When I am exalted I 
will draw all things to me.’ The Holy Ghost proceeded forth as 
love to make our spirits one with him. The Son takes back with 
him all the things that issued forth in him and the Holy Ghost 
returns with all that he expired. St Dionysius says, ‘Son and 
Holy Spirit are the light of the God-bearing Godhead.’ St 
Philip cried, ‘ Lord, show us the Father and we shall be satisfied.’ 
Our Lord answered and said, ‘ Philip, he who seeth me seeth my 
Father.” The Son revealed the mysteries of the Father for he 
was like him in all things and of one nature with him. Nothing 
satisfies the soul except the Father who is altogether good and 
absolutely simple. The more simple the soul the more like God 
she is. God spake never a word but one: his simple understand- 
ing. If the soul is to be simple she must withdraw from multi- 

plicity into his one conception. That can happen here only now 
and then. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 149 

' The soul has three understandings. First, the understanding of 
things that are above her. Next, the understanding of herself. 
From this knowledge she passes to the third: the one alone. 
Therein she loses herself speaking never a word but possessing 
herself in silence for God has rapt her up above herself to him ; 
she is not and knows not by herself. What she understands she 
understands with him and even this she must forgo, must leave to 
that wherewith she understands it. As St Dionysius says, ‘Make 
thyself passive, void of definition. One single glimpse of the 
abstraction that God is, more unifies the soul with God than all 
the works of holy Christendom.’ 

Try diligently, therefore, to get some grasp of truth: in the 
conception of it thine own wont is altogether lost and thou dost 
live in truth. Those exalted ones who stand therein can never be 
disjoined from God. They are the blessed who know God in 
himself eternally. God is unchangeable, so these can never more 
be separated from him. It behoves us therefore to depart from 
all unlikeness to our highest good. 

LIX 
THE JUST LIVES IN ETERNITY 

Justus in perpetuum vivet apud dominum est mersce ejus (Sap. 
516). We read to-day in the epistle the wise man’s words, ‘ The 
just lives in eternity.’ I have defined elsewhere what a just 
man is, but here I say in another sense, that man is just (i.e. 
righteous) who is informed with and transformed into justice 
(righteousness). The just lives in God and God in him, for God is 
born in the just and the just in God: at every virtue of the just 
God is born and is rejoiced, and not only every virtue but every 
action of the just wrought out of the virtue of the just and in 
justice; thereat God is glad, aye, thrilled with joy, there is 
nothing in his ground that does not dance for joy. To unen- 
lightened people this is matter for belief but the illumined know 

The just seeks nothing in his. work ; only thralls and hirelings 
ask anything for work, or work for any why. If thou wouldst 
be informed with, transformed into, righteousness, have no 
ulterior purpose in thy work; form no idea in thee in time 
or in eternity, not reward nor happiness nor this nor that, for 
verily all such works are dead. Believe me, the idea of God 
in thee, if thou dost work with that in view, means death to all 
thy works; they are good works spoilt and thou dost sin to boot, 
for thou doest like the gardener who first plants the garden and 
then roots up the trees but still expects a crop. So thou dost 

150 MEISTER ECKHART 

throw away good work. If thou wouldst live and have thy work 
live also thou must be dead to all things and reduced to naught. _ 
It belongs to creature to make aught from aught, but God’s | 
idiosyncrasy is making aught from naught, wherefore, if God is 
to make aught of thee or in thee, thou must first come to naught ; 
so enter thou into thine own ground and work ; works wrought by 
thee there are all living. 

He says, ‘ his reward is with the Lord.’ He says with, meaning 
that the reward of the just is where God is himself; that the 
happiness of the just and God’s happiness are one ; the righteous 
are in bliss where God is in bliss. St John says, ‘ The Word was 
with God.’ He says with because God is righteousness and the 
righteous are like him. Whoever is in righteousness is in God 
and is God. 

Further, with regard to the word, just. He does not say, the 
just man or just angel, he simply says, the just. The Father 
begets his Son the just and the just his Son ; every virtue of the 
just, every act done by the just, is nothing but the Son being 
begotten by the Father. The Father never stops, he is always 
trying to beget his Son in me, according to the scriptures: ‘ For 
Sion’s sake will I not hold my peace and for Jerusalem I will not 
rest till the righteous is revealed and shineth like the lightning.’ 
Sion is the height of living, the contemplative life, and Jerusalem 
the profoundest calm. Not for the most exalted life nor for the 
deepest peace will God desist until the righteous is revealed. 
God and God alone works in the just. If thy works are prompted 
by anything external, then thy works are dead. For thy works 
to be living it must be God that prompts them in the innermost 
recesses of thy soul: that is thy life and that alone. 

Further I declare : if it seems to thee that one virtue is greater 
than another, if thou dost cultivate it more and value it above 
. the rest, then thou art not loving it as it is in righteousness nor is 
it God who is working in thee. As long as a man prizes or leans 
to one virtue more than to another he neither takes nor feels it 
as it is by rights, and he is not righteous. The just man loves and 
practises virtue as a whole, in righteousness, as righteousness itself. 
It says in holy writ: ‘ Before the fabricated world, I am.’ He 
says, Iam before, above. Meaning that in eternity, exalted above 
time, man does one work with God. People sometimes ask how 
man can do the work that God was doing a thousand years ago 
and in a thousand years will be doing still. They cannot under- 
stand it. But in eternity is no before nor after; the happenings 
of the past millennium and the future one and now, in eternity are 
all the same. God’s doings of a thousand years ago and now and 
a thousand years to come are but one single act. It follows that 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 151 

the man who is exalted above time into eternity will do with 
God what he did in the past and also what he does in the next 
thousand years. This is matter of knowledge to the wise and of 
belief to fools. 

St Paul says, ‘ We are eternally chosen in the Son and we should 
never rest until we get to be what we have been in him eternally.’ 
The Father ceaselessly endeavours to get us born in his Son so that 
we may be the same as his Son is. The Father is begetting his 
Son, and in his begetting the Father finds so much peace and 
pleasure that his entire nature is expended in it. That which is 
in God moves him to beget; by his ground, his nature and his’ 
essence the Father is moved to generation. And you must know, 
God is born in us as soon as all our soul-powers, which hitherto 
have been tied and bound, are absolutely free (and passive) 
and when the mind is stilled and sense troubles us no longer. 
Then the Father begets in us his Son. Then we keep as free from 
forms and images as God, and find ourselves as free from likeness 
as God is void and free in his very self. When the Father bears 
his Son in us we shall know the Father with the Son and the 
Holy Ghost in both of them and the holy Trinity, and therein all 
things as a mere naught in God. Then time and number are no 
more. God’s essence neither does nor suffers, nor does his nature 
suffer, but it works. 

Sometimes a light is apparent in the soul and she fondly thinks 
it is the Son, whereas it is nothing but a light. When the Son 
reveals himself within the soul the love of the Holy Ghost is 
revealed at the same time. It is the nature of the Father to 
beget his Son, and it is of the nature of the Son for me to be begotten 
in him and in his nature ; it is of the nature of the Holy Breath 
for me to be consumed therein and melted and reduced entirely 
to love. One who is thus in love and altogether love, will think 
that God loves none but him and knows no love for anyone nor 
yet from anyone but him alone. | 

Some doctors hold that the spirit finds its beatitude in love. 
Some make him find it in beholding God. I say he finds it not 
in love nor in gnosis nor in vision. But, it may be asked, has the 
spirit in eternal life no vision of God? Yes and no. Once born 
he neither sees nor pays heed to God. But in being born he does 
see God. The spirit is in bliss then, not in its begetting but as 
being begotten, for then it lives as the Father lives, impartible, in 
its abstract and essential nature. Wherefore do thou turn from 
things and realize thyself in thy naked essence, for outside essence 
all is accident and the accidental makes for why. Let us live in 
the eternal, So-help us God. Amen. 

152 MEISTER ECKHART 

LX 
LIKES LOVE AND UNITE 

Meister Eckhart says, Likes love and unite with one another ;' 
unlikes hate and shun each other. According to one master, no 
two things are so unlike as earth and heaven. Earth knew 
itself by nature alien and unlike to heaven. Wherefore it fled 
from heaven to the lowest place and there bides still lest haply 
it draw night at all to heaven. And the celestial nature grew 
aware that earth had fled and had possessed itself of the lowest 
place. And that is how the heavens came to empty themselves 
out into the earth in fruitful wise, indeed the masters say the 
broad expanse of heaven does not withhold a needle-point in 
size, it brings itself forth every whit as fruitfulness on earth. So 
earth is the most fruitful of all mortal creatures. 

Likewise I say about the man who has brought himself to 
naught in himself, in God and in all creatures. That man assumes 
- the lowest place and God is bound to empty himself whole into 
his soul, else would he not be God. I warrant you by God’s eternal 
truth, that into any man who is brought low God pours out his 
whole self in all his might, so utterly that neither of his life, his 
being, nor his nature, nay, nor of his perfect Godhead, does he keep 
aught back, he empties out the whole thereof as fruits into that 
wight who in abandonment to God assumes the lowest place. 

To-day as I pursued my way pondering my discourse and 
wondering how to make you understand, I hit on an analogy. 
If ye can follow this my meaning will be plain and eke the drift 
of all my teaching. ‚The analogy is with my eye and wood. My 
eye when it is open is aneye. It is the same eye, shut; and the 
wood is neither more or less by reason of its seeing. Now mark 
me well. Suppose my eye, being one and single in itself, falls on 
the wood in seeing, then though each thing stops as it is, yet in 
the actual seeing they are so far the same that we can argue: my 
eye is the wood and the wood my eye. Now if the wood were free 
from matter and wholly immaterial, as my eyesight is, then we 
could truly say that in my actual vision wood and eye are essen- 
tially the same. If this is so with corporal things, then how much 
more with ghostly. Remember, my eye is far more one with 
some transoceanic sheep’s that I have never seen than with my 
ear, albeit with this it has organic union. The sheep’s eye works 
like mine, and therefore I impute to it more unity of action than I 
can do to eye and ear which have their different functions. 

I have often spoken of the light within the soul, which is un- 
created and eke uncreaturely. It is this light I am so often hinting 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 153 

at in my discourses, it is the light which lays straight hold of God, 
bare and unveiled, as he is in himself; that is to say, it catches him 
in the act of self-begetting. Hence I can truly say this light is 
rather one with God than with any of my powers wherewith it has 
organic union. For know, this light within my soul is no better in 
its essence than the humblest, the grossest of my powers ; my sight 
or my hearing, for example, or any other sense which is the sport 
of heat and cold, hunger or thirst, seeing that essence is impartible. 

Now I maintain, if thou dost turn from thine own self and from 
created things, then in what measure thou dost this thou dost 
attain to unity and happiness in thy soul-spark ; a thing which is. 
immune from time and space. This spark is opposed to creatures. 
It has no want but just God, God as he is in himself. Not enough 
for it the Father or the Son or Holy Ghost, nor even all three 
Persons, so far as they preserve their several properties. I trow this 
light would not be satisfied with the alone-begotten fruit of Deity. 
Nay, more, and even stranger to relate, I warrant you this light is 
not content with the changeless impartible essence of God, which 
neither gives nor takes, but wants to find its source; it wants 
to get into its simple ground, into the silent desert whereinto no 
distinct thing ever pryed, not Father, Son nor Holy Ghost. At 
the centre, where no one abides, there this light is quenched in 
still stronger light, wherein it is more one than in itself, for this 
ground is the impartible stillness, motionless in itself, and by this 
immobility all things are moved and all those have their life who, 
recollected in themselves, do live the life of mind. May we too 
live this intellectual life, So help us God. Amen. 

LXI 

THERE COMES FORTH A ROD OUT OF THE 
ROOT OF JESSE 

Egredietur virga de radice Jesse et flos de radice ejus ascendet et 
requiescet super eum spiritus domini (Isaias 11,,,). We read to-day 
in the Mass that there comes forth a rod out of the root of Jesse, 
and out of the root comes forth a flower, and on this flower there 
rests, reposes, the spirit of the Lord. Jesse means a brand, 
which is burning ; it signifies love in the abstract, where it is no 
more called love, where nothing adventitious exists, and in this 
ground where as yet nothing grows, it germinates just like, within 
the root, the coming shoot. The offshoot has three properties : 
likeness to what it shoots from, the nature of the same, and it 
is of exactly the same species ; thirdly, it is free from all attach- 
ments, simply an emanation. Thus the Son proceeded from the 

154 MEISTER ECKHART 

Father, as another Person with the Father, albeit in the Father 
essentially the same. Accordingly he says, * Out of the root came 
a rod and on the rod came a flower.’ My loving is a heavenly 
matter, for likes all end in same and the same is in the ground, and 
a thing that grows out of another is in every respect the same 
kind. An apple grafted on a pear-tree has the taste of both. It 
is not so here: this has the flavour of the one alone; itself is. 
not therein and yet it is therein. It could never come out were it 
not first within in the abstract, in brooding essence. The wine is 
in the vine: it is and it is not. 

I say concerning God’s freedom that it yields no nature save 
one. God starts with the Son, and the Son is another than the 
Father who is power, and from them twain there blossoms forth 
the Holy Ghost. Our philosophers teach that the sun draws the 
flowers out of the roots through the stem, timelessly wellnigh and 
too subtly for any eye to follow. The soul, which has no nature in 
her ground, the ground of love, where she is love, emerges from 
this nature where she is stored in God. Whatever enters this being 
has much the same being. At the coming of the bride he devotes 
himself to her and works with all his might within his ground, in 
his innermost, where naught exists, where activity stops altogether. 
The tree of the Godhead grows in this ground and the Holy Ghost 
sprouts from its root. The flower that blossoms, love, is the Holy 
Ghost. In this Holy Ghost the soul flowers with the Father and 
the Son, and on this flower there rests and reposes the spirit of the 
Lord. He could not repose had he not rested first upon the Spirit. 
The Father and the Son rest on the Spirit, and the Spirit reposes 
upon them as on its cause, What is rest ? St Augustine says, 
rest is complete lack of motion : body and soul bereft of their 
own nature. One philosopher says, God’s idiosyncrasy is im- 
mutability. That is, all creatures. Man as transcending motion. 
‚Jesse means a fire and a burning ; it signifies the ground of divine 
love and also the ground of the soul. Out of this ground the rod 
grows, 2.e. in the purest and highest ; it shoots up out of this virgin 
soil at the breaking forth of the Son. Upon the rod opens a flower, 
the flower of the Holy Ghost. We beseech the Lord our God that 
we may rest in him and he in us to his glory. So help us God. 
Amen. 

LXII 
WHAT MANNER OF CHILD SHALL THIS BE? 

Puis puer iste erit? Etenim manus domini erat cum illo (Luc. 1gg)- 
‘What manner of child shall this be? The hand of the Lord is 
with him.’ The hand of the Lord means the Holy Ghost, for two 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 155 

reasons. First, because work is wrought with the hand; and 
next, because it is one with the arm and with the body. All 
human actions start in the heart, extend to the limbs, and are 
done by the hand; so the seat of the soul being chiefly in the 
heart, in the heart is the mainspring of her energies. Likewise it 
is the Father who is the fount and origin of all divine activity, and 
the Son is represented by his arm; as it says in the Magnificat, 
‘he hath shewed strength with his arm.’ Divine power proceeds 
from the body via the arm to the hand, whereby is signified the 
Holy Ghost, even-as the soul which courses through the body and 
in material things proclaims her ghostly properties. Wherefore 
we argue that the Holy Ghost is meant by the hand which wrought 
in this child. 

Now mark the state of the soul wherein God is apt to work. 
He speaks of a child, suggesting pure joy, an unblemished state. 
The soul God works in must be pureand clean. A master says, ‘ The 
eternal wisdom tarries in Zion, her rest is in that pure city’; Zion 
meaning a height and a watch-tower (or resting-place). Again, 
she must be withdrawn from mortal, impermanent things. And 
thirdly, she must be on the watch for coming hindrances. God 
comes out of kindness because of the love he bears to the soul. 
He has endowed her with a godly light, the reflection of himself, 
so that he may be able freely to energise in her in his own likeness. 
Love cannot be without finding or making alike. Suppose I have 
bidden a man, unless he have gotten some liking for me, he will 
never willingly follow me. And so with the soul which follows 
' God; God’s members must all do his bidding whether they 
want toorno. If they do it reluctantly, then it is painful to him ; 
no work is ever pleasant that is done without liking. 

No creature can do more than in her lies. The soul makes 
headway solely by the light that God has given her, that being 
her own, presented her by God as a bridal gift. God comes in love 
with intent that the soul may arise, that in love she may energise 
above herself. For love cannot be without finding her like or. 
making alike, except in as far as God works in love passing soul. 
Soul does not ply the work of grace (since that is not her nature) 
till she is gotten yonder, where God is plying himself, where the 
work is as noble as the worker, his own nature, to wit. As with 
light, for example. In wood it produces its like: heat and fire, 
and the harder the wind blows the fiercer the flame. Now put 
love for the fire and the Holy Ghost for the wind: the stronger 
breathes the Holy Ghost the more all-consuming its fire, albeit 
not sudden; it keeps pace with the growth of the soul. If the 
whole man were consumed at once it would not be well, for one 
might live a thousand years and still go on waxing in love. Light 

156 MEISTER ECKHART 

acts upon flowers, making them grow and bear fruit; in living 
creatures it makes for life; in man it makes for happiness. This 
comes by the grace of God which raises the soul to a higher power ; 
for if the soul is to be like God she must transcend herself. Amen. 

LXIII 
ATONEMENT 

Manete in me (Joh. 15,); beatus vir, qui in sapientia morabitur 
(Eccl. 14,,). ‘ Abide in me,’ says our Lord Jesus Christ in the 
gospel; and the other text from the epistle says, ‘ Blessed is the 
man that shall continue in wisdom.’ Both mean exactly the same 
thing. Mark then what is required of a man to dwell in him, 2.e. 
in God. He requires three things. First, to renounce himself 
and all things, not cleaving to aught that is grasped by the senses 
within nor abiding in any creature existing in time or in eternity. 
Again, he must love neither this good nor that good: he must love 
good for good’s sake, since nothing is good or desirable except in 
so far as God is therein. We ought to love things no whit more 
than just as much as we love God in them ; nor is it right to love 
God for his heaven’s sake nor for the sake of anything at all 
except the good he is in his own self. Whoso loves him for aught 
abides not in him, but abides in the thing he is loving him for. 
If then ye desire to dwell in him, ye must love him for naught but 
himself. Thirdly, he must take God not as good nor as right, but 
he must apprehend him in his pure and virgin substance where he 
is apprehending himself. Goodness and right are the garment of 
God which is covering him. Do thou then strip God of all cover- 
ings: discover him in his vestibule bare, just in his naked self. So 
shall ye abide in him. 

Whoso abides in him thus has five things. First, betwixt him 
and God there is no difference at all, they are one. Angels are 
many, beyond number, they can do nothing without number ; 
they are numberless because of their simplicity. The three 
Persons in God, who counts as three, they, again, have number. 
But betwixt man and God is not alone no difference but no multi- 
plieity: nothing but one. The second is, that he is conceiving 
his happiness in that same virgin nature where God is conceiving 
himself and conserving himself. Thirdly, his knowledge is one 
with God-knowledge, and this knowing consists in co-operation and 
con-science in God’s operation and science, to wit, the actual 
energy and gnosis at work towards the end that God may be ever 
being born in man. 

How is God ever being born in man? Look you. Suppose a 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 157 

man hews out and brings to light the divine form which God has 
wrought into his nature, then God’s image in him stands revealed. 
Birth must be taken in the sense of revelation, the Son being said 
to be born of the Father because he reveals the Father as father. 
So the more and the more clearly God’s image shows in man the 
more evidently God is born in him. And by God’s eternal birth 
in him we understand that his image stands fully revealed. The 
fifth thing is that this man is ever being born in God. How can 
a man be ever being born inGod? Lo! by revealing this form in 
a man the man grows like unto God, for the form of man is the 
same as the image of God which is God in every respect. The 
more he is like God the more he is one. So man’s eternal birth 
in God we understand to mean ideal man refulgent in God’s image, 
which is God in form and matter, wherewith man is the same. 
This oneness of man and God is a matter of likeness of form, 
man being Godlike in form. So when we talk of man being one 
with God and take him to be one with God by nature, we refer 
to the exemplary element in him which is on a par with God, and 
not to his created nature. When we look at him as God we are 
blind to him as creature; remembering his deity we forget his 
creature-nature ; withal this same oblivion must not be construed 
to mean the negation of his created nature, rather the affirmation 
of God in him whom we are regarding as God. Christ, for example, 
who is both God and man: what time we are considering his 
manhood we disregard his Godhead ; not that we are denying 
him his Godhood, we simply ignore it for the nonce. And hence 
the explanation of St Augustine’s dictum, ‘What a man loves a 
man is.’ If heloves a stone he is that stone, if he loves a man he 
is that man, if he loves God—nay, I durst not say more; were I 
to say, he is God, ye might stone me. I do but teach you the 
scriptures. Man being all meet for God is conformed to, in- 
formed with and transformed into, the divine uniformity wherein 
he is one with God. Allthis man gets by abiding within. 

Now mark the fruits borne by a man when he is one with God: 
together with God he is bearing all creatures and big with beatitude 
for every creature in virtue of being one with him. 

The other text from the epistle says, ‘ Blessed is the man that 
continues in wisdom.’ He says, ‘in wisdom,’ wisdom being a 

‘feminine noun and feminine nouns denote passivity. Now in God 
we posit both action and passion, for the Father is doing and the 
Son is suffering, this being characteristic of born natures. Eternal 
born wisdom, wherein all things stand distinct, is the Son, and that 
is why he says, ‘ Blessed is the man that continues in wisdom.’ 
‘Blessed is the man,’ he says. Now as I have often told you, 
there are two powers in the soul : one is the man and the other is 

158 MEISTER ECKHART 

the woman. He says, ‘Blessed is the man.’ The faculty of 
soul we call the man is the chief power of the soul, wherein God is 
a naked light ; for nothing but God enters into this power and this 
power is ever in God: the man who has gotten all things in this 
power has gotten them not as being things, he has them as being 
in God. We ought to abide all the time in this power because in 
this power allthings arethesame. Thus abiding in all things alike 
and knowing them all in God as the same, man possesses all things ; 
he has discarded their grossest part and has gotten them now in 
their good and desirable nature. In this wise he possesses them 
yonder for God in his own nature is unable to forbear, he is obliged 
to give thee everything he ever made and his own self to boot. 
Blessed is the man who abides all the time in this power, he is 
ever-abiding in God. May we abide at all times in God, So help us 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 

LXIV 
THE SWIFT RIVER 

Fluminis impetus letificat civitatem dei: sanctificavit tabernacu- 
lum suum altissimus (Psalm 45,;). ‘The sudden or swift river 
makes glad the city of God.’ Here we must note three things. 
First, the swift stream; next, the city it serves; thirdly, the 
benefit it brings. 

The prophet knows not how to stem the torrent of the Holy 
Ghost. The Holy Ghost flows into the soul as fast as she is 
poured forth in humility and so far as she has gotten the capacity. 
He fills all the room he can find. Consider, next, what city it is it 
flows through. It is really the soul. A city is something enclosed 
and centred within. And so must the soul be whereinto God 
flows. She must be safe from outside alarms, her forces assembled 
within. According to St John, the twelve apostles were gathered 
together when they received the Holy Ghost. Even so the soul 
must be gathered and brought to herself in order to welcome this 
divine stream which fills to the full her cup of delight. 

I sometimes say, beginners of the virtuous life should do as he 
does who describes a circle: the starting-point once fixed, he 
keeps it so and then the trace is good. In other words, learn first 
to fix the heart on God, on good and on good works. Great 
deeds performed with shifting heart profit but little if at all. 
There were once two doctors. One of them declared that the 
good man cannot be moved. The other disagreed. What I say 
is, the good man may forsooth be moved, but he cannot be 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 159 

changed for the worse. Itrow the good man is not easily hindered. 
But if aught can worsen him he is not perfect. 

Thirdly, the good of it. Which is, the prophet says, that 
“God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved.’ , It is the soul 
he means. Soul would not that God wrought with her aught that 
is mixed with creature. Some things God does with help of 
creature and some unaided. If the grace which is a help and which 
is coming through my words could enter your heart without 
means, as though spoken by God, your soul would forthwith be 
converted and she could not help it. By pronouncing God’s 
word I become a co-worker with God and grace is mingled in me, 
God speaking it through me, and since I am to you as the means, 
it is not received intact in your soul. But the grace which is 
uttered by the Holy Ghost itself is received direct and imprinted 
unaltered in the soul what time the soul is recollected into the 
single power which has intuition of God. Grace springs up in 
the heart of the Father and flows into his Son, and in their mutual 
love it proceeds from the wisdom of the Son into the gift of the 
Holy Ghost and in the Holy Ghost is sent into the soul; and this 
grace is the face of God and is sealed in the soul by the Spirit of 
God, without means and unchanged, making the soul like God. 
This God does by himself unaided by creature. 

No creature is noble enough to help in this work ; God has not 
graced their nature with such excellence. But he can do it easily 
enough in his own perfect nature. God will not let a creature 
assist him in this work, so for the nonce he elevates the soul to a 
much higher level than her natural habitat, where she is out of 
reach of any creature. It were well within the compass of an 
angel’s noble nature, provided God would let an angel serve. - But 
that would offend the soul for in that hour she disdains the slightest 
taint of creature ; even the light of grace wherein she is atoned 
would be flouted by the soul did she not know she cannot pass 
it by. After all, it is not natural to her, it is quite supernatural, 
her flouting at that moment everything that is not God, for God 
leads forth his bride out of creaturely values into himself and 
speaks with her in her heart, that is, he makes her like himself 
in grace. For this exalted act the soul must recollect herself. 

The powers of the soul are filled full of delight by this pure 
infusion of grace. Grace is to God as the shine to the sun; it 
is one with him and it carries the soul into God and makes her 
exactly the same as God and as such she enjoys God’s perfection. 
To the soul that has gotten and enjoyed divine perfection all 
that is not God has a bitter, nauseous savour. Then again, the 
soul wants the highest of all,.so she cannot abide aught above her. 
I say, aye, and I durst maintain, she cannot even bear God being 

160 MEISTER ECKHART 

above her and I can prove it thus. For if the soul were spirited 
away far beyond things to perfect freedom from them and came 
in touch with God in his abstraet divinity, natheless she would 
never rest till, thrusting into that, he shall have drowned her in 
"himself and drowned himself in her alone. What though God be 
far above her in nobility of nature, she cannot rest till she has 
gotten God, so far as it is possible to creature to conceive him. 
The greatest happiness in earth or heaven lies in likeness to God, 
which divine nature makes in the highest degree : to wit, the image 
of itself. And this is what the soul is striving for seeing no soul 
can throughly follow God without having in her the image of 
God. It is for us to see whether the grace we have received is 
every whit divine, whether it smacks of God’s perfection, whether 
it is in common with and is emanating in his grace into whatever 
can receiveit. Even so ought man to be flowing out into whatever 
can receive him. So help us God. Amen. 

LXV 
THE JUST LIVE FOR EVER 

Justi autem in perpetuum vivent et apud dominum est merces eorum 
(Sap. 5,,). ‘The just (or righteous) live for ever and their 
reward is with God.’ Let us look at this carefully. : It sounds quite 
trite and commonplace, whereas it is, in fact, a most remarkable 
and precious dictum. ‘The just live.’ Who are the just? One 
scripture says, That man is just who gives to each his own. So 
the just are they that give to God his due and to the saints and 
angels theirs and to his fellow what is his. God’s is glory. Who 
are they that glorify God ? Those who having gone out of them- 
selves seek not their own in anything whatever it may be, or 
great or small; who look for nothing over them nor under them 
nor yet beside them; not mindful of possessions, of honours, 
comfort, pleasure, nor inwardness nor holiness nor of reward nor 
heaven. They have finished with all that is theirs. God glorifies 
them and they truly glorify God and render him what is his due. 

We ought to give the saints and angels joy. Wonder of wonders ! 
Can a man in this life give joy to those in life eternal? Aye, 
surely. Marvellous, incredible to tell, every saint rejoices, takes 
ineffable delight in each virtuous deed, each good desire or inten- 
tion ; their joy no tongue is able to express nor any heart conceive, 
as I have said. And why? Because their love to God is so 
immeasurably great, they hold him so right dear, that his glory 
is to them more than their happiness. Not alone the saints and 
angels, but very God himself is as much pleased thereat as though 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 161 

it touched his own felieity and was vital to him, to his own delight 
and satisfaction. Remember then, even if we serve God for no 
other reason than for the exceeding joy of those in life eternal and 
of God himself, yet we ought to do so gladly and with all diligence. 
Also, we ought to help those that are in hell and succour those still 
living. 

A man of this sort is in one way just, but in another sense the 
just are they that take everything alike from God no matter what 
it is, big and little, good and bad, all the same, no more nor less, - 
but one thing like another. If one thing is to thee of more moment 
than another then thou art unjust. Thou must be rid of own-will 
altogether. : 

I was thinking just now: if God does not will what I do 
then I must will what he does. Some folks always want their 
own way; that is bad, that way lies sin. Those others are a 
trifle better who would like to dé God’s will and have no mind to 
go against it, yet when they are sick they wish God would choose 
to make them well. These people would have God, then, con- 
forming to their will rather than they to his. We condone this 
although it is wrong. The just have no will at all: whatever 
God wills, it is all one to them, regardless of the hardship. 

The just are so set on justice that were God not just they 
would not care a fig for God; they are so staunch to right, so 
perfectly indifferent to self, they reck not of the pains of hell nor 
of the joys of heaven nor anything whatever. Were all the 
pangs of those in hell and all the pain borne or to bear on earth 
to be the fruits of justice, they would not mind one jot, so true 
they are to God and right. To the just man nothing gives more 
pain, there is no greater hardship, than what is contrary to just- 
ness, equipoise.—How so ?—If one thing can cheer and another 
can depress, you are not equable ; to be cheerful one moment and 
less or not at all so in the next is uneven-tempered. But the devotee 
of right is so stable that what he loves is his very life, nothing 
can upset him, nor does he care for aught beside. St Augustine 
says, Where the soul loves there she is, rather than where she 
gives life——Our text sounds plain and commonplace enough, but 
there are few who realize the actual meaning of it. One who 
grasps the import of justice and the just will understand all I have 
to say. 

é The just live.’ There is nothing in the world so dear as life 
or so desirable. No life so bad or hard but man would go on 
living. It is written, the nearer to death the greater the pain. 
But however distressful life is there is still the desire to live. 
Why dost thou eat? Why sleep? To live. Why long for 
good or glory? That knowest thou right well. But a 

162 MEISTER ECKHART 

live? For the sake of living, albeit thou ignorest for what 
reason thou dost live. Life is so desirable in itself, we want it 
for its own sake. Those who are in hell in eternal pain have no 
desire to lose their life, whether fiend or soul ; their life is such a 
noble thing, flowing as it does straight from God to them. That 
is the reason why they want to live. What is life? God’s exist- 
ence is my life. If my life is God’s existence then God’s being is 
my being and God’s is-ness is my is-ness, neither more nor less. 
They live eternally with God, on a par with him, not below him 
nor above. All their works are wrought with God and God’s with 
them. St John says, ‘the Word was with God.’ It was exactly 
like and side by side with him, neither under nor over but equal. 

When God created man he took the woman out of the man’s 
side that she might be his equal.. Not out of his head nor out of 
his feet did he make her, i.e. neither man nor woman, but his 
peer. So the just soul is like to God, by the side of God, on a level 
with him, not under nor yet over. 

Who are they that are his like? They that are nothing like, 
they alone are Godlike. God’s essence nothing is like, therein is 
no image nor form. Those souls who are his equals, to them the 
Father gives as. equals withholding nothing from them. All the 
Father has to give he bestows upon this soul, provided she is just 
and no more to ‘herself than to another. Her own honour, her 
own profit, aught of hers, she neither wants nor thinks of more 
than any stranger’s. Personal belongings are repugnant to her, 
-alien and remote, be they bad or good. All love of this world is 
based on love of self. Leave this and thou hast left the world. 

In eternity the Father is bringing forth his Son just like himself. 
“The Word was with God and the Word was God ’: the same in 
the same nature. I say, moreover: he has brought him forth in 
my soul. Not merely is she with him and he equally with her but 
he is in her: the Father gives birth to his Son in the soul in the 
very same way as he gives him birth in eternity, and in none other. 
He must do, willy-nilly. The Father is begetting his Son un- 
ceasingly, and furthermore, I say, he begets me his Son, as his 
very own Son. Moreover I declare, not only does he beget me 
his Son, he begets me himself and himself me: me his essence and 
his nature. In his nethermost deep I come welling up in his 
holy Breath, where there is one life, one being and one act. God’s 
activity is one; he begets me his Son then without difference. 
My bodily father is not my real father except for one small 
portion of his nature and I am different from him: he may be 
dead and I alive. My heavenly Father is my real father; I am 
his and all I have I get from him; I am the son of him and of 
none other. Since the Father performs a single act therefore he 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 163 

makes me his Son without any distinction. As St Paul says, 
“We are wholly transformed into God and changed.’ 

Take an illustration. In the sacrament the bread is changed into 
the body of our Lord, and however much bread there is it becomes 
no more than the one body. Likewise were the bread to be 
changed into my finger it would make no more than the one finger. 
But suppose my finger is changed back to the bread, then the 
one is as much as the other ; for when one thing changes to another 
it is identical therewith. Even so if I be changed into him and he 
makes me one and the same with himself, then by the living God 
it is also true that there is no distinction. The Father gives 
birth to his Son without ceasing. Once the Son is born he takes 
nothing from the Father, for he has it all; but while in the act 
of being born he is receiving from the Father. 

The moral of this is that it’is not right of us to ask from God as 
from a stranger. ‘I call you not servants but friends,’ said our 
Lord. The servant asks, the master pays. I was wondering 
lately whether I am willing to ask or to accept anything from God. 
I must take earnest counsel with myself, for by accepting anything 
from God I make myself inferior to God, like a servant to his 
master, in respect of giving. That is not the case with us in 
eternal life. 

I once said here, and it is very true: When a man goes out of 
himself to find or fetch God, he is wrong. I do not find God 
outside myself nor conceive him excepting as my own and in me. 
A man ought not to work for any why, not for God nor for his 
glory nor for anything at all that is outside him, but only for that 
which is his being, his very life within him. 

Some simple folk fondly imagine they are going to see God as 
it were standing there and they here. Not so. God and I are one 
in knowing. When I take God into me in loving I am going into 
God. Some say that happiness does not lie in knowledge but in 
will alone. They are wrong ; if it were merely a matter of will it 
would not be one. Working and becoming are the same. When 
the carpenter stops working the house will stop becoming. Still 
the axe and stop the growth. God and I are one in operation: 
he works and I become. Fire changes to itself the fuel cast upon 
it, which is converted to its nature. The wood does not assimilate 
the fire, the fire assimilates the wood. ‘ We shall be changed into 
God so that we shall know him as he is,’ says St Paul. And the 
manner of our knowing shall be this, I him as he me, not more or 
less: just the same. ‘ The just live eternally, and their reward 
is with God’: identity with him, as I have said. Let us love 
justice for its own sake and God without a why, So help us God. 
Amen. 

7 

164 MEISTER ECKHART 

LXVI 
PUBLISH THE WORD 

Predica verbum (2 Tim. 4,). St Dominic says, translating the 
words of St Paul, ‘ Publish, proclaim, bring forth and propagate 
the Word.’ It is remarkable that anything should come forth and 
at the same time stay within. That the Word should come forth 
and still remain within is very wonderful ; that all creatures should 
come forth and remain within is very wonderful; what God 
gives and promises to give is most wonderful, it is incomprehensible, 
incredible. That is as it should be ; if it were comprehensible and 
credible it would not be appropriate to him. God is in all things. 
The more he is in things the more he is out of things: the more 
he is;within the more he is without. I have often said, God is 
creating the whole world now this instant. Everything God made 
six thousand years ago and more when he made the world, God 
makes now all at once. God is in all things; but as God is divine 
and intelligible, therefore God is nowhere so much as in the soul, and 
the angels if you will, in the innermost soul, in the summit of the 
soul. And when I say the innermost I mean the highest and when 
I say the highest I mean the innermost. In the depths, at the 
summit of the soul, they are both the same. Where time has never 
entered and no form was ever seen, at the centre, the summit, of 
the soul, there God is creating the whole world. All God’s creation 
of six thousand years ago, all his creation of a thousand years to 
come, if the world lasts so long, is wrought by God in the innermost 
recesses, at the apex of the soul. All the past and future is con- 
trived by God at the summit of the soul. The Father bears his 
Son in the innermost recesses of the soul and begets thee with his 
only Son, no less. But if I am Son then I must be Son the same as 
he is Son, and in no other way. If I am a man I am a man man- 
fashion. If I am the Man I am the Man Man-fashion. As 
St John says, ‘ Ye are God’s sons.’ 

‘Speak the Word, tell it abroad, pronounce it, bring forth and 
propagate the Word.’ ‘Tell it forth!’ What is spoken in from 
without is a gross, objective thing. ‘Tell it forth!’ That implies 
that thou hast it in thee. The prophet says, ‘ God spake one and 
I heard two.’ True, God did speak but once. His utterance is 
but one. In his Word he speaks his Son and the Holy Ghost and 
the whole of creatures, all of which are but one utterance in God. 
But, ‘I heard two,’ the prophet says. Meaning, I understood it 
to be God and creature. Yonder where God speaks it it is God ; 
but here it is creature. People fondly think that God became man 
yonder. No; God was made man here as well as there, and he 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 165 

as made man for one purpose only : to beget thee his one-begotten 
on. 

Yesterday I quoted from the Paternoster the words, ‘ thy will be 
done.’ Better his will than mine. That I should do it, is what 
the Paternoster means. First, by being (oblivious or) asleep to 
things, ignoring time and images and creatures. Philosophers 
will tell you that being in deep sleep a man might pass a hundred 
years oblivious of creatures, time and images and yet aware of 
God at work within him. As the soul says in the Book of Love, 
“I sleep, but my heart waketh.’ So when all creatures are asleep 
in thee thou durst be awake to God’s doings in thee. 

* Labour in all things’ says our text, and this is open to three 
interpretations. It means, turn all to good account, or, see God 
in everything, for God is everywhere. St Augustine says, God 
created all things not that he might leave them and go on his 
own way : no, he is still in them. People imagine they have more 
if they have things plus God than if they have God without the 
things. They are mistaken. All things plus God amount to 
nothing more than God alone ; and he who fondly weens that if 
he has the Son and the Father with him he has more than if he 
had the Son without the Father, is mistaken too. The Father 
plus the Son is no more than the Son is by himself and the Son 
plus the Father is no more than the Father by himself. ‘To find 
God in all things is a sign that he has begotten thee his only Son, 
no less. 

Again, turn everything to good account, means, love God the 
same in poverty as wealth, hold him as dear in sickness as in 
health ; as dear in trials and in sufferings as in immunity from 
sufferings. The heavier to bear the lighter to bear: like two 
buckets, the heavier the one the lighter the other, and so the more 
one gets rid the easier the riddance. The God-lover parts with the 
world as cheerfully as with an egg. The more he gives up the 
easier it grows. 

Thirdly, ‘labour in all things’ means: where thou findest 
thyself about manifold things, at variance with pure and simple 
essence, let that be thy work: ‘ work in all things’ and ‘ fulfil 
thy destiny.’ It also means, lift up thy head, and this is twofold in 
its implication. The first meaning is: part with all that is thine 
and appropriate God ; then God will be thine as he is his own ; 
he will be God to thee as he is God to his very self, no less. What 
is mine I get from no one. If I get it from another it is not mine 
but his from whom I got it. The other meaning is, dedicate all 
thy acts to God. Many people cannot understand this, and I am 
not surprised ; to ‘know the meaning of it the soul must be in 

166 MEISTER ECKHART 

great detachment and uplifted over all these things. May we 
attain to this perfection, So help us God. Amen. 

LXVII! 
THE POWERS OF HEAVEN SHALL BE MOVED 

Virtutes celorum movebantur (Luc. 21,,). This is a gospel- 
saying of our Lord, and the translation runs, ‘The powers of 
heaven shall be moved.’ Heaven is suggestive of some mysterious 
or hidden thing, God being so mysteriously concealed by the 
light of his divine splendour that no man may by dint of his own 
intellect attain to the beatific vision of his godly countenance. 
As Job exclaims, ‘ Who can by searching find out the things in 
heaven?’ As though to say, no one in the world. The sage 
laments this, crying, ‘ Alas! O Lord, thou art a hidden God!’ 
According to St Augustine, ‘ God hides in the recesses of the soul, 
disguised in the workings of grace wherein he shows himself to 
the soul covertly, so that none may know except the soul wherein 
he is thus privily concealed.’ And St Paul says, ‘ Everything, 
which is in the soul, is hidden.’ The soul then is the godly heaven 
and ghostly where in unbroken stillness God does his perfect work. 
As God spake by the prophets, ‘ Behold, I create in you a new 
heaven.’ - 

It is the stirring of the powers of these incarnate heavens by the 
light of God’s glory shining on them which Christ refers to when he 
says, * The powers of heaven are shaken.’ These words betoken 
to us the good works of the soul whereto she is wont what time 
God being hid in her makes her the heaven of his incomprehensible 
divinity. For every act proceeds from power and power proceeds 
from essence. So from these words we learn three things about 
the noble nature of the soul. First, her transcendent being. 
(Thus he speaks of heaven.) Next, her powerful faculties. (Hence 
the word powers.) Thirdly, her fruitful operation. (Hence the 
word moved.) 

Now to begin with let us note that if the soul has got a heavenly 
being she must possess three heavenly properties. First, the 
innate eternity of heaven. Secondly, its motion in a circle. 
Thirdly, its overflowing into creatures underneath. These three 
things I demonstrate as follows: The first, that heaven is eternal, 
Texplain in this way. The heavens have an incorporeal, immaterial 
nature in corporeal guise. No outside semblance is admitted. 
Colour is excluded, and no variable force can ply therein, hence 
its state is one of fixed abiding. Then the circular motion of the 

1 See also Spamer’s Teste, A. 6, for a longer version. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 167 

heavens is argued thus. Anything that travels in a circle comes 
back to its start; and anything that comes back to its start 
travels in a circle. Now the philosopher says the mover of the 
heavens is in the East where the sun rises. We see with our own 
eyes that every day the sun dawns in the East and sets into the 
West to rise again next day at the place where, the philosopher 
says, the mover resides. It returns each day to its start. Ergo, 
the sun goes round. This is not to be confused with the sun’s 
own period of revolution. The starting-point of its own path is 
not reached in one day: it takes it a whole year, three hundred 
and sixty-five days, that is to say. Rather we must take this as 
referring to the heavens altogether, with the sun in their train. 
The sun doing yearly what they accomplish daily. Thirdly, the 
heavenly downpour into creatures I argue from the fact that 
everything subject to birth and decay is unstable and lacking in 
celestial power. As the philosopher observes in the book of 
The Celestial Nature, ‘ Heaven is to all inferior things the influx 
of being and of life.’ 

Now for the soul to be this ghostly heaven she must return to 
her eternal being, to the circular motion of her cause and to her 
highest nature streaming down into her lower powers. First and 
foremost let me say that as she goes it does behove the soul to 
turn to her eternal being and diligently note how by God’s grace 
she is immortal in her nature which he has rendered meet to 
share in his eternal bliss. She is an incorporeal nature in corporeal 
guise, spirit not following body in its fleshly birth, so no extrane- 
ous semblance can invade her, provided she is ever on her guard 
against the fading of her own exemplar wherein she is reflecting 
and manifesting God in his own proper nature. Nor may she 
brook the entrance of any naughtiness to oust her from her 
heavenly perfection and cast her into suffering, for she suffers 
without suffering in the power of God whereby she is fortified in 
suffering. Withal no other power can ply in her; she is so secure 
in God who is immutable stability that neither death nor life nor 
‘depth nor height nor any creature can part her from his fixed and 
changeless deity. So with King David she may say, ‘In cleaving 
to God lies the gift of immortal felicity.’ 

Secondly, the soul progresses in a circle, for she rises with the 
rising sun, in her eternal nature, to wit, in her heavenly Father’s 
heart, where there is ever dawning the true Son, his self-begotten 
Son, the light and shine of his eternal sufficiency. And she 
returns into the Father’s mind where she is spoken in celestial 
wise, as the prophet ‚hath it, ‘God fashioned the heavens in his 
understanding.’ This intelligible heaven means the soul returned 
intact to God as to her source. For he speaks into her his eternal 

168 MEISTER ECKHART 

Word, and confirms her in all heavenly perfection ; as the prophet 
cries on becoming the heaven of the Deity, ‘ By God’s Word are 
the heavens fixed and established.’ 

Thirdly, this spiritual heaven of the soul drips divine grace and 
consolation. Just as the angel-mover rolls the heavens round and 
gives them energy, furnishing the heavens with the power of his 
might for heaven to pass on and thus supply all things with their 
being and activity and life, even so God dispenses to the soul his 
godly power with all its grace, which wells up in the Father’s 
heart, so giving her the means of growing vigorous and strong in 
his own proper motion wherein she gives her being and activity 
and life to all her lower powers, to the members of her body and 
to all their operations, till they, grown living in God’s eyes, do 
bring forth fruit of life eternal. This was the draught the prophet 
craved when, mindful that the Holy Ghost was troubling the deep 
waters of his heart and that his highest power was receiving and 
conceiving the dearest power of divinity, Isaias cried, * Drop 
dew, ye heavens from above,’ meaning to say, pour into all my 
_ powers, all my members, all my works, the sweet celestial dew 
which ye have gotten into you from God.’ 

Further we must note how he has decked the natural heavens 
with seven planets, seven noble stars which are nearer to us than 
the rest. The first is Saturn, then comes Jupiter, then Mars and 
then the Sun ; after that comes Venus and then Mercury and then 
the Moon. Now when the soul becomes a spiritual heaven our 
Lord will deck her with these same stars ghostly, as John saw in 
his apocalypse when he espied the King of Kings seated upon the 
throne of the majesty of God and having seven stars in his hand. 
Know that the first star, Saturn, is the purger ; Jupiter, the 
second, the well-wisher ; the third one, Mars, is him of wrath; 
the fourth, the Sun, the light-giver ; the fifth one, Venus, is the 
lover ; the sixth one, Mercury, the winner; the seventh is the 
Moon, the runner. ; 

In the heaven of the soul Saturn becomes angelic purity, bring- 
ing as reward the vision of God, as our Lord says, ‘ Blessed are 
the pure in heart for they shall see God.’ After him comes 
Jupiter, the gracious, whose reward is the possession of the earth ; 
not the one we wear by way of body, nor that we tread on with 
our feet ; but the one we are in eager search of : that earth which 
is flowing with the milk of humanity and the honey of divinity. 
It is of this our Lord declares, ‘ Blessed are the meek in heart 
for they shall inherit the earth.’ Next follows Mars, of grim, 
determined nature and passionate suffering for God, bringing 
reward of the kingdom of heaven, as our Lord says, ‘ Blessed are 
they that suffer persecution for God’s sake for the heavenly 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 169 

kingdom is theirs.’ And after him the sun of light bringing as its 
‚guerdon to the soul, with knowledge of the truth the habit of 
right-doing and of giving unto everyone his own; and she being 
God’s by creation and adoption does therefore give herself to God 
withal. According to the words of our Lord, ‘ Blessed are they 
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be 
filled.” Then comes Venus, the lover, bringing reward of union 
with God ; as our Lord said, ‘ He that loveth me is beloved of my 
Father ; such come unto him and abide with him.’ From her, too, 
comes reward of consolation, since love sets the loving heart 
lamenting and mourning for her love. As our Lord says, ‘ Blessed 
are they that mourn for they shall be comforted.’ After her 
comes Mercury, the winner, directly the soul forgoes everything 
for God, bearing as his prize the palm of deity, including the 
kingdom of heaven. According to the words of our Lord, ‘ Blessed 
are the spiritual poor for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’ Last 
comes the Moon, the runner, with her meed of happiness attained, 
as St Paul says, ‘So run that ye may obtain.’ Now the soul 
attains God best by running to him with a tranquil heart, for his 
abode is in peace. Our God chooses peace for his children, and his 
child is heir to his eternal bliss, as our Lord says, ‘ Blessed are 
the peaceful for they shall be called the children of God.’ 

Beyond these planetary stars there is the heaven where the - 
fixed stars are which shine by night, the signals of the works 
wrought by the soul. In the night of the shadow of this world 
these shine before men, according to the words of our Lord, ‘ Let 
‘your light so shine before men that they may see your good works 
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.’ The other stars all 
get their light from the radiance of the sun. Venus as well, the 
love-star, which shines brightest of them all. Accordingly, the 
works we do are pregnant most with power and brightest light 
when we have wholly gotten us the nature of the amiable Venus, 
star of love, whose nature is receptive to the sunshine of the true 
and intelligible Deity. 

LXVIII? 
THE POWERS OF THE SOUL 

Igitur perfecti sunt celi et terra et omnis ornatus eorum (Gen. 2,)- 

‘ Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the adorn- 

ment of them.’ Even so the heavens of the inner man are finished 

and all the ornaments thereof. In the passage where Christ 

speaks of ‘ the powers,’ we construe these to mean the sovran powers 

ofthe soul. For the soul has got three powers in her spiritual mind 
1 No. 67 (2) in Pfeiffer’s text. 

170 MEISTER ECKHART 

which are heavenly inasmuch as they are capable of doing heavenly 
work, for every heavenly power is of the breath of the mouth of 
our God. 

The first power receives, the second sees, the third loves. What 
time,the soul is occupied in entertaining God, in self-recollection 
and intellectual contemplation, the love of her will transports her 
right into God. ‘Then occurs that movement of the heavens, in 
the act of fecundation, which is latent in eternity. For the end of 
all motion is rest. As saith Isaiah the prophet, ‘ The heavens are 
moved and the earth withal and after the motion comes rest.’ 
Now there is not perfect rest in intellectual vision, for in mental 
operations there is a certain motion of external things towards 
the soul, in virtue of which movement the forms of these same 
things are drawn into and pictured in the soul, starting a psychic 
_ motion in the isness of the soul and the real being of the things 
appearing in the picture; and this motion extends to the will 
which is not at rest any more. 

Hence we see that in the starry heavens, the revolving heavens, 
God is none other than the mover, the starter, the source of energy 
whence the heavens get their power and their spin. And so too 
in this life he is present in the soul as the mover of our free will 
towards himself and towards good works, he being the fount of 
grace, which, from his godly heart, flows down into the soul. 

Beyond this heaven there is the motionless heaven, and’ this 
firmament is the abode of the blest. In this heayen God is in all’ 
his felicity, engaged in the personal act of his eternal divinity. 
For the Father goes on begetting his Son in himself without ceasing, 
and Father and Son breathe forth with equal power their holy 
Breath, both Son and Holy Ghost abiding with the Father in the 
essence, and in the vision of this Trinity of Persons lies the whole 
happiness of creatures which are able to participate in his divine 
felicity. So the soul, having conquered thé multiple heavens and 
possessed herself of their mysterious power, is plunged into the 
unity of the motionless heaven, called fire or the empyrean, 
not because it is burning but because it is enlightening, all who 
are in this heaven being ablaze with the cherubic light of divine 
love. The soul becomes the heavenly habitation of the eternal 
Deity, and he performs his godly work in her, whence she receives 
the nectar which is denied to such as have not reached this fiery 
celestial mind. For her heavenly Sire begets in her his Son whom 
she lures out of his Father’s heart, and Father and Son breathe 
into her their holy Breath, the Son never leaving his Father’s 
heart but proceeding forth from his Father in such fashion that 
he ever abides in his Father’s heart. Thus the Father dwells in 
the soul; he clasps the soul to his breast, and in this embrace of 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 171 

the Father she conceives within her his Son as a proceeding Person 
and at the same time is aware of his presence with the Father in 
his essence. For thus saith the Father, ‘I will lead her into the 
wilderness, into the solitude, and will speak into her heart.’ His 
leading her into the desert, into the solitude, means making her 
void, deserted of creatures ; he empties her of corruptible things 
and says all he can to her heart. He can speak but one word, and 
that Word is eternal: it is his only-begotten Son. That is the 
Word he speaks to the soul, giving birth to his Son in her, and in 
this birth the Father and Son inspire her with their Holy Ghost. 
which teaches her all things. 

Thus the soul gets all things from the Father and has gotten all 
things in the Son and knows all things in the Holy Ghost and so, 
possessed of all things, she is resting in God without end. 

LXIX 
THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS AT HAND 

Scitate, quia prope est regnum dei (Luc. 21,,). Our Lord says, 
The kingdom of God is at hand. Yes, the kingdom of God is 
within us, and according to St Paul our salvation is nearer than we 
think. In what sense is the kingdom of God near at hand ? Let 
us consider this carefully. Supposing I were king all unbeknowest 
to me, then I should be no king. But suppose I have the firm con- 
viction that I am the king and everyone maintains, and insists 
upon it with me and I know for certain that all the world is of 
the same opinion, in that case I am king and all the king’s treasure 
is mine. Failing any one of these three things I can be no king. 
Even so our happiness depends on our knowledge, our awareness 
of the sovran good, which is God himself. I have one power in 
my soul fully sensible of God. I am as certain as I live that | 
nothing is so close to me as God. God is nearer to me than I am 
to my own self; my life depends upon God’s being near me, present 
in me. So is he also in a stone, a log of wood, only they do not 
know it. If the wood knew of God and realized his nearness like 
the highest angel does, then the log would be as blessed as the 
chief of all the angels. Man is more happy than a log of wood in 
that he knows and is aware of God, how near at hand God is. 
The better he knows it the happier he is and the worse he knows 
it the more unhappy he is. He is not happy because of God’s 
being in him and so near him or because of having God, but 
because he is aware of God, of his nearness to him; because 
he is God-knowing and God-loving, and such an one knows that 
God’s kingdom is at hand. 

172 MEISTER ECKHART 

Thinking upon God’s kingdom, often I am dumbfounded at its 
grandeur ; for God’s kingdom is God’s self in all his fullness. 
God’s kingdom is no little thing: all imaginable worlds God 
might create, these make not up his kingdom. The soul God’s 
kingdom dawns in, who is conscious of God’s fullness, her none 
durst counsel nor instruct: she is by it instructed and assured of 
life eternal. He who knows, who is aware, how near God’s king- 
dom is can say with Jacob, God is in this place and I knew it not. 

God is just as near in creatures. The wise man says, God has 
spread his nets and lines all over creatures, and we can find and 
know him in any one of them if only we will look. 

A philosopher says, ‘ That man knows God aright who is equally 
aware of him in all things’; and, ‘To serve God in fear is good; 
to serve him in love is better, but he who is apt to behold love in 
fear does best of all.’ A life of rest and peace in God is good; 
a life of pain in patience is still better; but to have peace in a 
life of pain is best of all. One may go in the fields and say one’s 
prayers and be conscious of God or go to church and be conscious 
of God ; if we are more conscious of God by being in a quiet place, 
that comes of our own imperfection and is not dueto God, for God is 
the same in all things and all places and just as ready to vouchsafe 
himself so far as in him lies; and that man knows God aright 
who ever finds him the same. 

St Bernard says, ‘Why does my eye see sky, and not my foot ? 
Because my eye is like the sky, more than my foot.’ For my soul 
to see God then, she must be heavenly. What makes the soul 
alive to God in her, aware how close to her he is? I answer: 
Heaven permits no alien intrusion, no mortal lack can pene- 
trate therein to do it outrage. And the soul that knows God 
is so firmly established in God that nothing can reach her, not 
hope nor fear nor joy nor grief nor good nor ill nor nothing that 
would bring her down to earth. 

Heaven is at all points equidistant from the earth. And 
likewise it behoves the soul to be equally remote from every 
earthly thing and no nearer to one than to another but equable 
in joy, in grief, in having and in wanting ; whatever it be she must 
be dead, dispassionate, superior to it. Heaven is clear and 
unsullied in its brightness, free from any taint of time and place. 
No corporal thing finds room therein. Not itself in time, incredible 
in swiftness is its revolution, its actual course being timeless 
though from. its course comes time. Nothing hinders the soul 
from knowing God so much as time and place. Time and place 
are fractions, God is an integer. So if the soul knows God at all 
she must know him above time and space, for God is neither this 
nor that as these manifold things are : God is one. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 173 

If the soul would see God she must not look at anything in time. 
While the soul is regarding time and place or any such idea she 
can never recognise God. Before the eye can see colour it has to 
be rid of all colour. Before the soul can see God it must have 
nothing in common with naught. The seer of God knows that 
creatures are naught. Comparing one with another, creature 
looks fair and is aught, but compare it with God, it is naught. 

Further I declare: any soul that sees God must have forgotten 
herself and have lost her own self ; while she sees and remembers 
herself she nor sees nor is conscious of God. But when for God’s 
sake she loses herself and abandons all things then in God does 
she re-find herself, for knowing God she is knowing herself and all 
things (which she rid herself of) in God in perfection. To know 
the sovran good and the eternal goodness, really, I must know 
them in the good itself, not in partial goodness. To know real 
being I must know it as subsisting in itself, that is, in God, not 
parcelled out in creatures. 

In God alone exists the whole of godhood. Not in one man exists 
the whole of manhood, for in a single man exists not all mankind. 
But in God the soul finds perfect manhood and all things in their 
prime, for she knows them in their essential nature. The dweller 
in a richly furnished house must know far more about it than 
another person who, though full of information, has never been 
within. And by this same token I am as certain as I live, and as 
God lives, that the soul who knows God knows him above time 
and place. In this God-conscious state the soul perceives how near 
God’s kingdom is, namely, God in all his fullness. There is much 
discussion among doctors at the School as to the possibility of the 
soul knowing God. Not by reason of his harshness does God 
exact so much from man but out of his great kindness, wanting 
the soul to be more capacious, big enough to hold the largesse he 
is anxious to bestow. 

Let no one deem it difficult to arrive at this however hard may 
seem, and be, indeed, to start with, the parting from and dying to 
all things. Having once got into it no life is more easy, more 
delightful or more lovely. God is so very careful to be always 
with a man to guide him to himself in case of his taking the wrong 
way. No man ever wanted anything so much as God wants to 
make the soul aware of him. God is ever ready, but we are so 
unready. God is near to us, but we are far from him. God is in, 
we are out; God is at home, we are strangers. The prophet says, 
© God leads the just by a narrow path to the high road out into 
the open,’ that is, to the true freedom of the spirit become one 
spirit with God. Ours to follow his lead and let him bring us to 
himself. So help us God. Amen. 

174 » MEISTER ECKHART 

LXX 
THIS IS A SERMON ABOUT OUR LORD’S BODY 

This is a sermon on our Lord’s body by Brother Eckhart. He 
says that the bread of our Lord’s body has many names, but three 
special ones are given it in holy writ. In the first place it is called 
the heavenly bread, in the second it is called the bread of angels, 
and thirdly the bread of lamentation. And whoso would worthily 
receive this bread of our Lord’s body must have these three things. 
First, none can enjoy the heavenly bread who is not a heavenly 
man. This means that as the heavens with the sun and moon and 
the entire system are above all earthly, temporal things, so man in 
his desires, his senses and his thoughts must be lifted up to celestial 
things. Secondly, no man can enjoy the bread of heaven except 
he be an angelic man, for no creature was ever so perfect as an angel. 
This man must be at all times perfectly pure in heart and body. 
Thirdly, it is called the bread of lamentation ; this no man enjoys 
except he be a man of sorrow, one, that is to say, who pondering 
our Lord’s martyrdom shall rue the treatment meted out to our 
Lord on earth. Whoso has not this rue shall not enjoy the bread 
of sorrow. So, then, a man must have three things before he can 
approach this bread. First, having gotten to the excellent 
condition of knowing good and ill, he must choose the good and 
worthy and reject the foul and evil. Next, with his heart divorced 
from worldly loves, this man must go in godly love and all godly 
things. Thirdly, he must order all his activities. 

LXXI! 
2 
BOETHIUS SAYS: HE WHO WANTS TO SEE TRUE 

' Boéthius says, “He who wants to see true in this light I speak 
of let him relinquish four things,’ which are set down. He must 
relinquish the joys of the world and care and want and fear; 
while these are in thee it is dark and clouded therein. St Paul 
says God dwells in light inaccessible. Anything approaching this 
light the light consumes and turns to its own divine nature, even 
as I said of the divine essence: what is taken into the essence 
is changed into essence. Speaking of understanding: as it is 
characteristic of God to subsist unmoved in his pure and virgin 
essence, his own being, so is this property imputed to understand- 
ing, which is so noble as to be self-subsistent. 

1 For No. 71 (1) see Jostes, No. 15, of which it forms a part. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 175 

I have told how understanding has to break through the image 
of the Son ; as he himself declares, ‘ I‘am the light of the world ; 
no man cometh to the Father but through me.’ As the wise man 
explains in the Book of Wisdom, when the soul is borne into God 
by his divine wisdom, she is clarified and sublimed in light and in 
grace, all that is foreign to the soul being detached and shelled 
away together with a portion of herself. Further, I related how 
_ the soul, now throughly purged of soul accretions, is carried up 
and flows back into the Son as pure as she flowed out in him. 
The Father created the soul in the Son, so if we are ever to get 
into the ground of God, into his innermost heart, we must take the 
lowest place in our own ground, in our own innermost self, in abject 
lowliness. When the soul enters into her ground, into the inner- 
most recesses of her being, divine power suddenly pours into her, 
producing much activity, both manifest and secret, and the soul 
grows big and high in favour with God. This is and must be in 
the soul who, rightly disposed in the ground of humility, ascends, 
borne aloft in the divine power: she never stops until she gets 
right into God and coming to absolute rest in him, abides wholly 
within without looking out, subsistent in his pure essence; for 
even therein is the soul. God is pure being. The philosopher 
says that nothing at all can get into God, who is pure being, but 
what is also pure being. Ergo, the soul is pure being who has 
gotten therein, soaring right up into God. Amen. 

LXXII! 
THE PROPHET SAYS: LORD BE MERCIFUL 

The prophet said, ‘Lord be mereiful to the people that is in 
thee.’ The Lord replied, ‘ All that enter in will I make whole 
and love much.’ 

I take the words of the Pharisee who besought our Lord to dine 
with him and our Lord’s injunction to the woman, vade in pace ! 
It is good to pass from restlessness to calm: praiseworthy but 
imperfect. ‘Go in peace,’ be not disquieted : God implies that 
we ought to enter into peace and continue in peace and end in 
peace. God said, ‘In me ye have peace.’ So far in God so far 
in peace. Is aught in God, it is in peace ; is aught out of God, it 
is without peace. St John says, ‘ Whatever is born of God over- 
cometh the world.’ What is born of God seeks peace and ensues 
it. He that pursues the even tenor of his way and is at peace 
is a heavenly man, Heaven constantly rotates, in its motion 
seeking rest. 

1 See also Jostes, No. 10. 

176 MEISTER ECKHART 

The Pharisee besought our Lord that he would dine with him. 
The food a man eats is changed in him into his body, like the body 
by the soul. Body and soul are one in being, not in act, thus 
my soul is united with my eye in one mode, that ofseeing. Even 
so the food a man consumes mingles with his nature as regards 
its essence but not its activity ; and the great atonement we are 
destined to with God shall be of essence not of operation. Hence 
the Pharisee’s request that God would eat with him. 

Pharisee signifies a solitary, one who knows no end to detach- 
ment of soul. The more noble the powers the more they liberate. 
Some powers are far higher than the body and sufficiently aloof 
to shell off and detach completely. As the philosopher well says, 
What once moves mortal things never enters into them. Again, 
by being free and unattached the unlettered man may in love and 
longing receive wisdom and impart it. And thirdly, having no 
end means having no finality, no ultimate security until one is at 
rest and all unwitting of disquiet: until the soul-powers being 
fixed on God are wholly unattached. As the prophet cries, ‘ Lord 
be merciful to the people that are in thee.’ 

One master says, ‘ Of all the exalted works God has ever wrought 
in creatures mercy is the most familiar and the most mysterious, 
his work in the angels not excepted.’ In it the work of mercy is 
exalted to mercy as it is in itself and as it is in God. Of God’s 
activity the first outcome is mercy ; not in the sense of his for- 
giving man’s sins nor of one man’s forgiving another ; his highest 
work is mercy in the sense that he initiates the soul into the 
highest and most perfect thing she can conceive in this world. 
In his bottomless ocean God is productive of mercy. 

The prophet said, ‘ Lord be merciful to the people that is in 
thee.’ What people is in God ? St John says, ‘ He that dwelleth 
in love dwelleth in God and God in him.’ St John says, ‘ Love 
unites, love initiates into God.’ Haply it is accessory. Love does 
not unite, not in any wise. Satisfaction (or, enough) is not what 
holds together, binds together. Love unites in act and not in 
essence. The best authorities aver that intellect strips every- 
thing off and grasps God bare as pure being in itself. Intellect 
penetrates goodness and truth, and, lighting on virgin essence, it 
seizes God in the abstract as being without name. Neither 
_ knowledge nor love unites aught. Love takes God only as being 
good and God escapes from name. Good, love goes no further 
than that. Love takes God under a veil, under a garment. 
Not so understanding : understanding takes God as he is known in 
itself ; it can never comprehend him in the sea of his own un- 
fathomable nature. Above both these perceptions is merey : God 
energises as mercy at the summit and perfection of his activity. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 177 

A philosopher says, There is something in the soul, intimate, 
mysterious, far higher than the soul herself, whence emanate her 
powers of intellect and will. St Augustine says: Just as that is 
ineffable out of which the Son leaps from the Father in the first 
procession, so there exi8ts some occult thing behind the first 
procession of intellect and will. According to the philosopher 
who is our chief authority upon the soul, no human wisdom ever 
can attain to what the soul is. That requires supernatural wisdom. 
What the powers of the soul issue from into act, we do not know : 
about it haply we do know a little, but what the soul is in her 
ground no man knows. Any knowledge thereof that may be 

permitted to us must be supernatural; it must be by grace : 
God’s agent of mercy. 

LXXIII 
ST BENEDICT’S DAY 

Dilectus deo et hominibus etc. ( Eccl. 45,). In this passage 
from the Book of Wisdom the wise man speaks of (Moses), ‘ the 
beloved of God and men, whose memory is in benediction. God 
made him like the saints in glory.’ And this may well be said of 
the saint whose festival we keep to-day. His name is Benedictus, 
blessed, so that to him are especially appropriate the words used 
here, cujus memoria in benedictione est, i.e. whose memory is in 
benediction, the more so as of him also we read that a glory was 
revealed to him wherein he saw the whole world gathered up as 
it were into a ball, and our text says, ‘God made him like the saints 
in glory.’ 

As to this glory. St Gregory says that to a soul who is in this 
glory all things seem small and narrow. The natural light that 
God has poured into the soul is so splendid and so strong that God’s 
bodily creation is all poor and meagre to it. This light is more 
glorious than any corporal thing God ever made, withal the 
meanest, vilest corporal thing illumined by this light, which is 
intelligence, becomes exalted above mortal things. It is clearer 
and brighter than the sun and purifies things from both time and 
matter. This light is so far-flung it vaults the boundaries of 
space. Wider than space, it transcends the great and good as 
God transcends wisdom and goodness; for God is not either 
wisdom or good, but from God come wisdom and goodness. Intel- 
lect comes not of wisdom, nor intellect is not the outcome of truth 
nor is not gotten thereof as will is of goodness. Will wants what 
is good and is engendered thereby and (truth) is the issue of 
intellect not intellect of the truth. This light which flows out of 
the intellect is intelligence, which is like an outburst, an outflow 

12 

178 MEISTER ECKHART 

or a stream as compared to what intellect is in itself. And this 
outburst is as far removed therefrom as heaven is from earth. i 

There is another light, the light of grace, compared to which 
this natural light illumines a mere pin-point of the earth, nay 
rather a mere pin-point compared with the whole heavens which 
are incredibly more vast than all the earth. God’s presence in the 
soul by grace is instinct with more light than any intellect can 
give: the light of intellect is but a drop in the ocean of this light, 
nay less a thousandfold. Hence to the soul who is in God’s grace 
all things, and whatever her mind can grasp, will appear small 
and mean. 

I was asked the reason why virtuous folk who are in the good 
graces of God are so zealous to serve him. I said it was because 
they had tasted God, and it were strange indeed if, once tasting 
and enjoying God, the soul could stomach aught beside. As the 
saint hath it, Once the soul tries God she finds the things that are 
not God repugnant and distasteful. 

Take the wise man’s words in another sense: ‘ Beloved of God 
and men.’ The verb is does not appear. He does not say: he 
is beloved of God and men, for he is not thinking of his changing 
and unstable temporal nature which the essence so far transcends. 
Essence is all-embracing and withal too transcendent ever to be 
touched by anything created. They that fondly think to have 
some knowledge of it know nothing whatsoever. As St Dionysius 
says, anything we know that we are able to impart or that we can 
define, that is not God; for in God is neither this nor that which 
we can abstract nor has he limitation. In him there is only one 
thing and that is himself. Hence for theologians there is the burn- 
ing question : how comes this motionless, this intangible, solitary 
essence to be common to the soul, to be within the purview of 
the soul ? and they are greatly exercised as to how the soul receives 
it. Ican only say that his divinity consists in the communication 
of himself to whatever is receptive of his goodness, and did he not 
communicate himself he would not be God. 

The soul God loves and to whom he does communicate himself 
must be so wholly free from time and from all taint of creature 
that God in her smacks only of himself. ‘In the middle of the 
night, when all things were asleep,’ the Scriptures say, ‘ thy word, 
O Lord, came down from thy royal throne.’ ‘In the night’ 
means when no creature peers into, appears in, the soul, and it is 
in this quiet, this inarticulateness of the soul that the word is 
spoken in her intellectual nature. This word is that of her own 
understanding : the expression of the Word as it is and abides in 
the intellect. 

Often I feel afraid, in discoursing about God, at how utterly 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 179 

detached the soul must be to attain to union with him. We durst 
not deem this unattainable: nothing is unattainable to the soul 
that possesses God’s grace. To none were things ever more easy 
to leave: to the soul that has gotten God’s grace things are all 
(easy) to eschew. Further I say, none ever had pleasanter task 
to perform : to the’soul with God’s grace all things are (pleasant) 
to leave because creature can cause her no pain. St Paul says, ‘I 
am persuaded that no creature can separate us from God; not 
fate nor life nor death.’ 

Look you. Nowhere is God so really God as in the soul. In 
every creature is somewhat of God, but in the soul God is divine, 
for she is his rest» According to one master, God loves nothing 
but himself: all his love is lavished on himself. Marry, a fool were 
he only to take a penny who at one stroke could seize an hundred 
pounds! God’s love in us is the blossoming forth of the Holy 
Ghost. One word more of this: God loves nothing in us but the 
good he does in us himself. In the words of the saint, ‘ Nothing 
is crowned by God excepting his own work that is wrought by 
him in us.” Let no one be affrighted at my saying that God loves 
none beside himself; it is all to our advantage, for therein he has 
in view our highest happiness. He purposes to lure us to himself, 
to get us purged and take us to himself, so that with himself he 
may love himself in us and us in him. So he must needs, so far 
as our love goes, attract us to himself by every means he can, 
pleasant or disagreeable. God, despite himself, is ever hanging 
over us some bait to lure us into him. I never give God thanks 
for loving me, because he cannot help it; whethershe would or 
no it is his nature to. What I do thank him for is for not being 
able of his goodness to leave off loving me. To know ourselves, 
to be installed in God, this is not hard, seeing that God himself 
must be working in us; for it is godly work, man acquiescing and 
making no resistance: he is passive while allowing God to act in 
him. Let us, waiting upon God, enable him to take us into him, 
so that becoming one with him he may be able to love us with 
himself. So help us God. Amen. 

LXXIV 
THE PROMISE OF THE FATHER 

Convescens precepit eis ab Jerosolymis ne discederent etc. (Act. 1,). 
This passage which I have quoted in Latin comes in the Mass for 
to-day. St Luke records how our Lord being about to depart to 
heaven was in company with his disciples whom he ‘ commanded 
that they should not leave Jerusalem but should wait for the 

180 MEISTER ECKHART 

promise of the Father which they had heard from his mouth for they 
should be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.’ 

He speaks of the promise or pledge of the Father. To us as 
well was given this pledge of baptism in the Holy Ghost and of 
being received thereby to dwell above time in eternity. Not 
in the things of time is the Holy Ghost bestowed. When a man 
turns from temporal things and goes into himself he notices a 
heavenly light, a light that comes from heaven. Though heaven- 
descended it is under heaven. There is no satisfaction in this 
light, for it is mortal, they say that it is matter. Now iron, which 
by nature falls, will rise, against its nature, and hang suspended 
to a loadstone in virtue of the master-force,the stone receives 
from heaven. Wherever the stone turns there the iron goes with 
it. Even so the mind, unsatisfied with this infernal light, will 
scale the firmament and search the heavens to find the breath that 
spins them, the heavens by their revolution causing all things on 
earth to grow and flourish. Its spirit never rests content until 
it pierces to the coil, into the primal origin where the breath has 
its source. This spirit knows no time nor number: number does 
not exist apart from the malady of time. Other root has none save 
in eternity, where there is no number except one. This spirit, 
transcending number, breaks through multiplicity and is trans- 
fixed by God, and by the fact of his piercing me I pierce him in 
return: God leads this spirit into the desert, into the solitude of 
its own self, where it is simply one and is welling up in itself. This 
spirit has no why, for if it had a why the unity would also have its 
why. This,spirit is in unity and freedom. 

Doctors declare this will is free in the sense that none can bind 
it excepting God alone. God does not bind the will, he sets it 
free, free to choose naught but God himself, and this is real freedom. 
For the spirit to be incapable of willing aught other than God’s 
will is not its bondage but its true liberation. Some people say, 
If I have God and the love of God then I am at liberty to follow 
my own will. They labour under a mistake. So long as thou art 
capable of anything against the will of God and against his law 
thou hast no love of God though thou cozen the world that 
thou hast it. One who is in God’s will and in God’s love is fain 
to do the things God likes and leave undone the things God hates, 
and he can no more leave undone a thing that God wants done 
than he can do a thing that God abhors ; just like a man whose 
legs are tied together, he cannot stray and neither can he err who 
is in the will of God. Someone once said, ‘God may command 
me to do evil and shun virtue, but I am incapable of sin.’ No one 
loves virtue without being virtue. He who abandons himself and 
everything, who seeks not his own in any wise but does all he does 

em SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 181 

for love and without why, that man being dead to all the world 
is alive in God and God in him, 

Here someone may object, It is all very well for you to tell us 
these things, but we ourselves know nothing of them.— That I 
also rue. This knowledge is so noble and so common, it is not to 
be purchased for a farthing or a penny. A just mind and a free 
will, have but these, and it is thine. To abandon all things on this 
lower plane where they exist in mortal guise is to recapture them 
in God where they are reality. Everything that is dead here is life 
yonder and all that is dense matter here is spirit there in God. 
If you pour fresh water into a clean basin and, all being clear and 
bright, stand it in a quiet place, then, holding your face over 
it you see it at the bottom as it really is. That is because the 
water is free from impurity and still. It is the same with people 
who in a state of freedom and interior calm envisage God in peace 
and quiet, and when they are able to see him just as well in turmoil 
and disquiet there is perfect equanimity ; but if a man enjoys him 
less in trouble and unrest, that argues him not equable (unjust). 
St Augustine says, ‘ When the days are weary and the time is long 
a man should turn to God, where no such thing as long exists and 
things are all at rest.” The lover of justice is possessed with justice, 
and he is this virtue. 

Our Lord said, ‘I have called you not servants, I have called you 
friends, for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth.’ And 
so may my friend know something that I ignore, yet have no 

mind to tell me. But our Lord says, ‘ All that I have heard of 

my Father I have made known unto you.’ I marvel how some 
priests, and these with pretensions to eminence and learning, 
allow themselves to be misled into interpreting these words to 
mean that he shows us of the path only the bare minimum needful 
to our happiness. That is not what I hold; there is no truth in 
it. _Why was God born man? That I might be born God himself. 
God died that I might die to the whole world and all created things. 
And it is in this sense that we must understand the saying of our 
Lord, ‘ All that I have heard of my Father I have revealed unto 
you.’ What does the Son hear of his Father? The Father can 
only beget ; the Son can only be gotten. All the Father has and 
that he is, the whole basis of God’s essence and God’s nature, he 
brings forth once for all in his one-begotten Son. This the Son 
hears from his Father, this he makes known unto us, we being 
this same Son. All the Son has he has from his Father: essence 
and nature, we are this only Son. No one has the Holy Ghost 
except he be the only Son. Father and Son expire their holy 
Breath, and once this sacred breath inspires a man it remains in 
him, for he is essential and pneumatic. 

182 MEISTER ECKHART = 

True, thou mayst receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, the likeness 
of the Holy Ghost, but it abides not with thee ; it is impermanent. 
Just as a man may blush for shame, or blench, it is an accident and 
passes. But one by nature fair and ruddy is so always. So with 
this man, as being the only Son his holy Breath is of the nature of 
him. As it is written in the Book of Wisdom, ‘This day have I 
begotten thee in the reflection of my eternal light, in the fullness 
of the Godhead and the glory of all saints.’ He is begetting him 
now, to-day. There is childbed in the Godhead, there are they 
baptized in the Holy Ghost according to the promise of the Father. 
‘ After these days which are not many,’ or a few, then comes the 
“fullness of the Godhead,’ where there is neither day nor night; 
where things a thousand leagues away are as near me as the ground 
whereon I stand: that is the fulfilment, the full enjoyment of 
Godhood ; that is oneness. While the soul sees any difference she 
is unjust ; as long as aught looks out, looks in, there is no unanimity. 
Mary Magdalene sought our Lord within the tomb; seeking one 
dead man she found two living angels, but still was unconsoled. 
Said the angel, “Why art thou cast down? Whom seekest thou, 
woman ?’ As though to say, ‘ Thou dost seek one dead and hast 
found two living.’ Whereto she might have answered, ‘ That is 
the burden of my discontent, that I find two where I sought one 
alone.’ 

While anything created can make a clear impression on the 
soul she is disconsolate. I say, as I have often said before, so far 
as the soul’s created nature goes there is no such thing as truth. 
I declare that there is something beyond the soul’s created nature. 
But certain priests cannot understand how there can be anything 
so nearly kin to God, so much the same as he is. It has naught 
in common with naught. Anything made or created is naught, 
but this is alien and remote from the made and the created. It is 
something self-contained, taking nothing from outside. Our Lord 
departed to heaven, beyond all light, beyond all understanding, 
beyond all human ken. He who is thus translated beyond light 
of any kind dwells in the unity. As St Paul says, ‘ God dwells in 
the light that no man can approach unto,’ which is in itself the 
perfect one. A man then must be dead, must be dead indeed, 
devoid of any being of his own, wholly without likeness, like to 
none, to be really Godlike. For it is God’s character, his nature, 
to be peerless, incomparable. May we be the same in the oneness of 
God himself. So help us God. Amen. 

* «SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 183 

LXXV 1 
ASCENSION DAY 

Expedit vobis etc. vado parare vobis locum etc. (Joh. 16,,-14,). 
When he was about to depart from this world to his heavenly 
Father, Christ said to his disciples, ‘ It is expedient for you, it is 
for your good, that I should go, for while I am with you the Holy 
Ghost the Comforter will not come unto you.’ With these words 
our Lord consoled his disciples knowing full well that they were 
troubled because he had warned them of his ascension. Our Lord 
will not suffer his lovers to be troubled, for fear is painful. And 
St John says, ‘ Love casteth out fear.’ Love is incompatible with 
fear and pain, for the waxing of love is the waning of fear, and 
when love is perfect all fear is gone. But at the beginning of the 
virtuous life fear is of use to man, providing him a thoroughfare 
for love. As the bodkin or the awl makes a passage for the thread 
and the shoe is stitched with thread, not with the iron ; and as the 
bristle’s part towards the thread is to put it in as fastening while 
the bristle is withdrawn ; so, to begin with, fear makes room for 
love and love binds to God, whereas fear passes out. 

Leaving now this argument we turn to the words of my Latin 
quotation, the words of our Lord, ‘ I go to prepare a place for you.’ 
Here we notice two things taught and proved by our Lord in his 
ascension. The first one is that the soul is by nature heir to heaven. 
God is her lawful heritage, for no one generates the soul but God. 
God made her without any intervention. Some doctors will 
maintain, perhaps, that the divine light pouring into the angels, 
the whole creaturely idea that God reflects into the angels before 
it is exemplified in divers creatures, that this divine light, this 
image in the angels, is what makes the soul. Notso. The soul 
does not permit of any meddling, any interference in God’s 
activity towards her, but fresh and pure as this flows out of God 
in one unbroken stream, so does the soul proceed from God. Most 
privily has God embarked and launched forth the soul, so that 
no one knows for certain what she is. One philosopher calls her 
a light, and that is well said; for like the light streaming out of 
the sun and shining into all creatures so is the soul sent straight 
from God. St Augustine says, Since the soul is emitted from 
God she is nowhere at rest except in God. Another master says 
she is a spirit, and this is true in a certain sense; God is a spirit, 
and the soul is made like to God, so she may well be called spirit, 
being to God as spirit to spirit. A third master dubs her a fire, 
speaking the truth in symbol, for fire is most lofty in its nature, 

1 See also Wackernagel, No. 65. 

184 MEISTER ECKHART 

most theurgie in its. operation, and it never rests until it licks the 
heavens. It envelops all the elements for being much wider and 
higher than the air, or than water or the earth, it must be sur- 
rounding all the rest. It comes next of all to heaven and revolves 
therewith. The air goes with it, partially, because of being dense, 
while water, which is altogether grosser, is unable to keep pace and 
runs behind. The soul is called a fire because, in her desire, she 
does keep pace with God, like fire with the heavens, for the soul 
cannot rest except in God. Some souls which are rather dense 
follow haltingly, as air lags after fire, And some, again, being 
downright gross, are, like water, earth-bound and incapable of 
keeping up with God but run behind ; for seeing or hearing some- 
thing good will stir them with desire to be good, so they do follow 
after ; like water drifting to and fro without a change of level, so 
are these people moved while abiding of the same mind as before. 
A fourth doctor calls her a spark of God’s celestial nature, and 
this jumps with our theory of her heavenly origin. Where one 
clod falls, there, generally speaking, all earth would fall as well ; 
a single clod reveals the ground to be its resting-place. And 
whither one spark flies to from the fire, that place is revealed as 
the resting-place of fire. 

Now we have sent one spark to heaven, the soul to wit of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, which shows the common resting-place of souls 
is nowhere but in heaven ; and herein we have proof of the entire 
soul being heavenly. The body, on the other hand, is made of 
the four elements, so its habitat is naturally earth. But the soul 
is in intimate union with the body, and they must ever stay 
together despite that the body is of earth and the soul a denizen’ 
of heaven. God found a wise solution of this problem, himself 
becoming man and going in his proper power to heaven, so that 
in him we have already sent one clod of earth to heaven. And 
the whole earth likewise must belong to heaven, for Christ’s resting- 
place is nowhere but in union with his Father; and as God is three 
in Person so is he one in nature, they having one being and one 
life. Thus our Lord Christ shows us that our being and our life 
are eternal in divine union. 

The second thing our Lord has taught and proved by his ascen- 
sion is how we must prepare ourselves to follow after him in 
pursuance of his words, ‘I go to prepare a place for you.’ Just as, 
on those four grounds, the soul is called light, spirit, fire or a spark 
of God’s celestial nature, even so man is lifted up or gotten ready 
also by four things finely symbolised of old in the prophet Moses, 
of whom we read that he gathered his flock together and drove 
- it into the wilderness, ‘into the backside of the desert,’ and there 
upon the mount of God he saw a bush burning but unconsumed. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 185 

Moses wished to turn aside and see this wonder, the burning bush 
which would not burn away. But the Lord called to him out of 
the bush, and said, ‘ Draw not nigh; put off thy shoes,’ under 
which figure we are taught four precious lessons. 

First, in the name Moses, for Moses being interpreted means, 
one taken from the water. So shall a man be rescued from 
instability, from out the tempests of this world. 

Next, that man’s animal passions and desires must all. be 
herded up into the highest power of kis soul. Unless the soul is 
gathered up and lifted out of created things the Holy Ghost 
cannot enter in nor energise in her. All divine work done by God 
is wrought by him in spirit, above time and place, for mortal 
things are fatal to the flow of God. Divine light shed on spiritual 
creature will engender life, but if it falls on mortal things it fades, 
either dimmed or extinguished altogether. That is why our Lord 
declared, * It is expedient for you, it is for your good, that I should 
go away.’ For his disciples loved him as a man and mortal. 
Now there can be no doubt that our Lord was nobler than anything 
God ever made. If he then was a hindrance to his followers it is 
unquestionably true that other things we love, which are inferior 
to God, will hinder us much more. Ergo, the soul must transcend 
the world if she wants God to ply his godly work in her. And 
St Augustine says explicitly, we can transcend the world in love 
and knowledge, and that lacking love and knowledge we are nothing, 
i.e. in the world. 

In the third place we learn, that man can see and know God’s 
work, but that while in this body he must needs stop short of 
actual attainment, just as Moses saw the burning bush but could 
not go right up to it; he wanted to, however: a case-of the love 
which does not consume the body and has no spiritual potency. 

Fourthly, putting off the shoes signifies the freeing of the soul’s 
desire, its withdrawal from all mortal and perishable things. To 
this and things still higher, O God help us. Amen. 

LXXVI 
ASCENSION DAY SERMONS 

1 

Expedit vobis ut ego vordam etc. (Joh. 16,). We read in the gospel 
how our Lord said to his disciples, ‘ It is expedient for you that I 
goaway. For if I go not away ye cannot receive the Holy Ghost.’ 
And this by reason of three hindrances which beset three kinds of 
people. First, sinners who let creatures hinder them, using them 

186 MEISTER ECKHART 

ungodly for their pleasure. These people are wandering in God’s 
way, for creatures are a way of God. Hence St Augustine’s 
dictum, ‘ Cursed be they that wander in the way of God.’ I will 
say no more of these; following their animal passions they are 
divorced from God. Also, there are good people who are over- 
busy with their material wants and take too much pleasure in 
externals. Concerning them God said, ‘ He that loveth his soul 
shall lose it’ (loveth carnally, that is: over-fondness, for it will 
lose a man his soul) ‘and he that hateth his soul shall keep it 
unto life eternal.’ Meaning those that follow not their inordinate 
pleasures and desires. 

A second hindrance blocks the path of other good and truly 
pious people. Namely, the seven sacraments. Sacramentum 
means a sign. That man never gets to the underlying truth who 
stops at the enjoyment of its symbol ; and the seven sacraments 
all point us to the same reality. Marriage (for example) is a 
symbol of divine and human nature and also of the union of the 
soul with God. To rest in the illusion means delay in the attain- 
ment of real oneness. Ye durst not think of marriage as the 
mating of a man and a woman with each other for the indulgence 
of their outward passions and for the leading of a life of pleasure. 
That is not real marriage. Marriage means obedience to the 
marriage rule with its seven times and its works of mercy. Again, 
some pious souls are hampered with scrupulosity in the matter of 
repentance and confession ; they boggle at the symbol and neglect 
the thing itself. Our Lord says of these, ‘He that has bathed 
needs. but to wash his feet.’ Which is as good as saying, Once 
purged by heartfelt rue and throughly shriven, a man needs not 
to re-confess old sins though he must ‘ wash his feet,’ that is, his 
will and conscience: them let him cleanse by confessing daily 
faults. 

Also, some of the devout hinder themselves by over-occupation, 
outwardly, with the blessed sacrament of God’s body, to the detri- 
ment of their receiving it; these cultivate the rites at the cost of 
the reality, for the thing itself is inside not in its outward show. 
Wherefore they receive not God’s body worthily. The sacra- 
ments all point us to the one and only truth, so we ought not to 
dally with the symbols but penetrate to the actuality. Those 
who follow the spirit of God’s truth will worship him in spirit and 
in truth. So said Christ himself to the woman drawing at the 
well at Samaria when she asked him where to pray, whether on 
the mountains where her fathers used to pray or where the Jews 
then worshipped. Quoth our Lord, ‘ The hour cometh and is now, 
when true worshippers’ shall worship not only on the mountains 
and in the Temple but in spirit, in the place of God.’ The moral of 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 187 

which is that we ought to pray to God not only on the hill-tops and 
in churches, but we ought always to be praying, at all times and 
everywhere. St Paul says, * Rejoice evermore; in everything 
give thanks; pray without ceasing.’ Even so pray they whose 
every deed is done like-mindedly for the love of God ; who, careless 
of their personal pleasure, bow themselves humbly before God and 
leave him alone to act. The prayer of the lips was enjoined by 
holy Christendom for the recalling of the soul from her outward 
senses wherein she dissipates herself in a multiplicity of perishable 
things. Being recollected thence into her highest power (i.e. know- 
ledge and memory and will) she is turned to spirit, and when the 
spirit is Joined to God in perfect unity of will, it is turned to God. 
Then, not till then, he is in true prayer, when he has reached the 
goal of his creation ; for we were created solely to be God, and that 
is the reason why we were fashioned like him. Whoso does not 
attain to being one with God in spirit is not a really spiritual man. 
Good, pious souls are hindered too from their proper object by 
lingering with holy joy over the human form of our Lord Jesus 
Christ ; and by the same token, over-reliance upon visions is a 
pitfall to some people; they see things pictured in the mind, it 
may be man or angel or the humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and give credence to their ghostly messages. They hear, perhaps, 
that they are best-beloved or about the faults or virtues of another ; 
or they may hear that God is doing something for them. In this 
they are deceived. God never does a single thing for creature 
but only by reason of his kindness, for he is the end of every 
Christian prayer: ‘Do this, O Lord, for the sake of thy only 
Son Christ Jesus.’ He himself said to his disciples, ‘ It is expedient 
for you that I should go away.’ Here he was addressing not alone 
his then disciples but all his disciples of the future who purpose 
‘to follow him to high achievement. To them his manhood is a 
hindrance so long as they still cling to it with mortal pleasure ; 
they ought to follow God in all his ways and not keep solely to 
his way of manhood who reveals to. us the way of Godhood ; for 
verily Christ said, ‘I am the way, the truth and the life. No 
man cometh to the Father but by me, and he who would enter 
by any other door the same is a murderer and deserves eternal 
death.” Such are those who claim that they themselves are 
capable of good or that God does things for them, whereas Christ 
even, stated he was not from himself: the Eternal Wisdom said 
about itself, ‘ He that created me reposes in my tent,’ who withal 
is uncreated, for God is unborn wisdom. We may take this as 
referring to eternal wisdom’s birth, for the Son proceeded forth 
by way of birth, where birth is the same thing as creation. The 
eternal wisdom was born of the power of the Father. He andthe 

188 _ MEISTER ECKHART 

Son, his wisdom, and the Holy Ghost, his goodness and their mutual 
love, these (three) are one in nature and distinct in Person. And 
what is this tent that Wisdom talks of? : That is the manhood of 
Christ Jesus, wherein the Father reposes with his Son, they being _ 
of one nature, God in their Person as well as God by nature. This 

tent of humanity let us adore only in its oneness with the Godhead : 

for man is truly God and God is truly man. Let us not encumber 

‘ourselves with any creature excepting Jesus Christ, who only is 

our help and the way to his Father. When, taking leave of 
creatures, we enter the true path, which is Jesus Christ, we are not 

wholly blest albeit within sight of the divine reality ; for while 

we are in sight of, we are not yet one with, what we see. While 

we notice any thing we are not one with it. Where there is 

no more than one no more than one is seen : God is not seen except 

by blindness, nor known except by ignorance, nor understood 

except by fools. According to St Augustine, no soul can get to 

God who goes not without creature and seeks not God without 

likeness. And that is the meaning of Christ’s words, ‘Cast out 

first the beam out of thine own eye and then wash the mote out 

of another’s eye.’ For you must understand that anything created 

is likened to a beam in the eye of the soul, preventing divine 

oneness by the fact of being creature. And because the soul is ° 
creature she has to cast herself out of herself; she must cast out 

all the saints and eke our Bädy, for all of them are creatures. She 

must be quite naked and wholly unnecessitous. Thus the soul 

enters the union of the Holy Trinity. She is further blest by 

becoming one with the naked Godhead whereof the blessed Trinity 

is the self-revelation. In the abstract Godhead there is no 

activity : the soul is not perfectly beatified until she casts herself 

into the desolate Deity where neither act nor form exists and 

there, merged in the void, loses herself: as self she perishes, and 

has no more to do with things than she had when she was not. 

Now, dead to self, she is alive in God and the dead perish (in the 

tomb). Even so is naughted the soul entombed in God. 

Some people fondly ween that they have gotten into the Holy 
Trinity who have never got beyond themselves. Loath to leave 
themselves, they keep their selfish interests and pleasures and 
interior sweetness, all of which they have forsworn, just the same 
in thought and will. These are no disciples of our Lord Jesus 
Christ who never looked for sweetness in anything he did; on 
the contrary, he said, ‘My soul is sorrowful even‘ unto death.’ 
Meaning his most lofty soul, and he was thinking also of his bodily 
life. This was ‘sorrowful even unto death,’ until a term was put 
to the conditions of our exile, until our death was dead. And our 
soul too is ‘ troubled even unto death,’ until there dies within us 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS . | 189 

whatever is alive there of own will, own interests and multitudi- 
nous will. When the soul is dead as to the life of her desires and 
selfish interests and is buried in God, then, hidden and unknown to 
any creature, she can never be troubled any more. 

Now mark the signs whereby a soul is known to have been 
taken into the Holy Trinity. First, it is vouchsafed to her that at 
the sight of the Holy Ghost her sins are blotted out and she forgets 
herself and things. In the next place, she has gotten a conception 
of the Godhead, namely the eternal wisdom of the Father, the 
knowledge and discernment of all things; and she is bereft of 
opinion, hypothesis, belief, for now she knows the truth; and 
whereas hitherto she has taken things on trust and learnt by 
wordy arguments and hearsay, now things presented to her, 
whether by men or angels, she need ask none about, like those 
with no notion of reality, who, when an abstract truth is revealed 
to them, will try to grasp it with their finite mind: a thing that 
is beyond angelic understanding. Whereupon they question others 
on the subject, propounding it in the material form in which they 
have conceived it, and these take it as they hear it, in a concrete 
sense, and so pronounce it wrong and contrary to the Christian 
faith. It is false to them, because they accept it at face-value, 
which they are unable to see through. In this they are mistaken. 
Furthermore, the soul who is in truth translated into the Holy 
Trinity is immediately endowed by the Father’s power and strength 
with the ability to do all things. As St Paul says, ‘I can do all 
things in him that strengtheneth me.’ Now the soul works not, 
knows not, loves not; but God is working in her, perceiving 
himself in her. According to the words of Jeremiah, ‘ Verily ye 
are God’s in divine knowing and loving.’ God help us to this 
truth. Amen. 

2 

I GO TO HIM THAT SENT ME 

‘Vado ad eum qui misit me (Joh. 16;). ‘Igo to him that sent me.’ 
These words have a threefold meaning. In the first place, Christ 
went to his Father in his manhood. In the second place, the soul 
of Christ went in the light of grace. In the third place, the soul 
of Christ went in his Godhead. 

About this saying, Thomas, Origen, Damascenus and Richardus 
hold the same opinion, and I hold it with them. What we say is, 
that Christ in his manhood went first through our manhood ; he 
has known all the wants that flesh is heir to, for he has been through 
every creature and set creature lower than mankind : the humanity 
of Christ has carried our humanity beyond the realm of creature, 
-exalting our nature above the angelic nature in the unity of God 

190 MEISTER ECKHART 

and man. The manhood of Christ went also by itself without 
impediment of creature, for he alone was ever perfect in virtue 
at every point of time. ; 

In the second place, the soul of Christ went without means in 
the light of grace. In the light of grace the soul of Christ received 
four gifts which Mary his mother never did receive nor did any 
of the saints. The first gift of Christ’s soul was wisdom, the 
knowledge of his end. The second gift was understanding, which 
his soul received on achieving virtue as distinct from means. 
The third gift Christ’s soul received was that in all she did she 
remained unchanged. The fourth gift was that of doing nothing 
except in virtue of the love of God. 

In the third place, the soul of Christ went in his godhood ; he 
went, that is to say, in the personality of the eternal Word, for 
this eternal Person is essentially the vehicle of human nature. 
He also went the way of the three Persons of whom he is one 
Person. He went in his own nature to the Father-nature in the 
understanding of them both. And he went in the work of the 
Person of the Holy Ghost, who effects the union of human 
nature and divine Person. Touching Christ’s words, ‘I go 
to him that sent me,’ Lincolniensis and Master Henry "Augus- 
tiniensis tell us what he means by ‘go.’ I hold with Thomas 
and Gilbertus that by this word he meant to say, ‘ I go to release 
you from the straits whereto ye have been brought by Adam’s 
transgression ; I go to set you free from the bonds of creature ; 
I go to him that sent me, in my understanding wherein I take you 
straight to him; I go the way of my own nature, the way of my 
lordship, wherein alone I keep unto myself what creature has no 
part nor lot in. He went in essence and in nature; he went to 
' reveal in his own Person the essence and the life to creatures in 
separation ; for the Persons are God in their personal divinity 
according to their nature’s unity. 

Here arises the question, Is the Person of the nature or the nature 
ofthe Person? In answering this it must be borne in mind that it is 
the nature of the Persons to manifest the fruits of their own nature. 

The soul too goes to the Father. First, in the fixed intention 
to cumber herself no more with creature unless with the objective 
form of Christ. Secondly, she goes in responding to whatever 
calls God may make upon her. Thirdly, she goes in the sweet 
savour of divine love wherein suffering is no suffering to her. 
Christ ascended into heaven; he ennobled his humanity by 
withdrawing it from time and establishing it in eternity. Lifting 
up his soul he gave her his essential self, the essence he is ever 
making manifest in his personal works. Further, the soul ascends 
flying with the feathers of the virtues, wisdom, prudence, strength 

ad 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS © 191 

and justice namely, for on these four virtues the soul is able to 
wing her way past time and past all creatures which exist in time. 
And she flies as well in the three godly virtues of faith, hope and 
charity, resting in the love that is God, wherein we behold the 
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 

Now it must be remembered that three kinds of men see God. 
The first see him in faith ; they know no more of him than what 
they can make out through a partition. The second behold God 
in the light of grace but only as the answer to their longings, as 
giving them sweetness, devotion, inwardness and other such-like 
things which are issuing from his gift. The third kind see him in 
the divine light. Christ’s disciples beheld God as the satisfaction 
of their longings, but they did not see him as one who longs to 
love. Philip said to Jesus, ‘ Lord, show us the Father and satisfy 
us,’ as though to say, Lord, show us thyself as transcending 
creature, as the immediate entry to the soul which thou dost 
nature in her proper nature. Jesus answered, ‘ He that seeth me 
seeth my Father,’ as though to say, Whoso seeth me unchanging, 
as well disposed towards them that would wound as towards 
them that show the wish to please me ; whoso seeth me apart from 
my humanity as the door into the soul, the same beholds my 
Father as energising in his personal power and I in personal 
wisdom and the Holy Ghost in personal goodness: having God 
means having all these three in the one essence of their nature. 

3 
THE SOUL’S PLACE! 

Our Lord said to his disciples, ‘ It is expedient for you that I 
should go away, for while I am with you the Holy Ghost will not 
come unto you.’ With these words our Lord comforted his 
disciples after supper on the eve of his departure, knowing full 
well that they were sorrowful at finding he was going to leave 
them. Our Lord will not long suffer his lovers to be troubled. 
Fear is cruel and therefore incompatible with love. As a man 
gains in love he loses his fear. But at the beginning of conversion 
fear goes through the soul as the awl goes through the shoe in 
making a passage for the thread ; and even so the heart is pierced 
with fear of sin which is then followed and chased out by love. 
Our Lord’s words to his disciples, ‘ I go to prepare a place for you,’ 
teach us two valuable lessons of which we have the proofs in his 
ascension. 

The first one is, that the soul is by nature made for heaven and 
God is her lawful heritage. For God brought forth the soul 

1 A variant of LXXV. In Pfeiffer’s text it is part of (2). 

192 MEISTER ECKHART 

alone in lineal descent and no man knoweth what she is. They 
say she is a light, for as the sunlight is poured forth in beams upon 
all creatures, even so the soul is the immediate product of the 
light of God. St Augustine says, the soul proceeds from God and 
returns to God, so she is not at rest except in him. The soul is 
a spirit formed in the likeness of God and agreeable to him as 
one spirit is to another. Philosophers, again, compare the soul 
with fire, a thing most lofty in its nature, most theurgie in its 
operation, which never stops until it licks the heavens. Fire 
encircles all the elements; spreading much wider and higher 
than the air or than water or the earth it envelops all of them. 
It comes next to heaven and revolves therewith; the air goes 
rather slower because it is more dense, and water being denser 
still is unable to keep pace and runs behind. The soul is called 
a fire because in her desire she can keep up with God like fire with 
the heavens, nor has she any rest except in him. Also, the soul is 
called a spark of God’s celestial nature, and this jumps with our 
theory that the soul is intrinsically heavenly. For where one 
clod falls there earth in general would fall as well; and thus a 
single clod of earth will betray the resting-place of the earth itself ; 
so too the spark which shoots out of the fire will indicate the 
resting-place of fire. Now we have sent a spark to heaven, namely 
the soul of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shows the resting-place 
of souls is nowhere else than heaven ; yonder they belong. But 
the resting-place of body, made up as it is of the four elements, 
is by nature upon earth, and yet God joins these twain to one 
another and fates them to remain together: soul and body for 
their mutual uses. Of this God found a wise solution, himself 
becoming man and going in his proper power to heaven, the 
resting- place of Jesus Christ being in union with his Father. 
And since God is threefold in his Persons and simple in his nature, 
they having one common life and being, it follows that the place 
our Lord Jesus Christ prepares for our life and being is that of 
eternal union with God. 

The other thing Christ taught by his ascension is what prepara- 
tions we must make for following him, pursuant to his words, 

‘I go to prepare a place for you.’ Just as it is upon four grounds 
that soul is called light, spirit, fire and a spark of God’s celestial 
nature, so we must be prepared in four particulars. When Moses 
would have gone and looked at the burning bush upon Mt. Sinai 
God told him to put off his shoes, which teaches us four lessons. 

The first is in the name Moses, which means, taken from the 
water, and so shall we be taken out of instability, rescued from the 
storm of the world-flow. Next, all our animal passions, with their 
agitations, must be herded up into the very topmost, the ghostly 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 193 

power of the soul. Unless the soul is raised to a higher power, 
from temporal to celestial things, the Holy Ghost cannot enter 
in to do its work in her. The work God does is wrought by him 
in spirit, and any temporal or mundane thing obstructs the flow 
of God. On this account Christ said to his disciples, ‘ It is expe- 
dient for you that I should go away,’ for his disciples loved him as 
a man and mortal, so that despite his being the most perfect good 
God ever sent or that could become, yet he was a hindrance to 
his followers by his bodily presence ; how much more then must 
gross temporal things be hindrances to us? The soul must rise 
above herself and above this time if she wants God to do his work 
in her. However well we see and understand the act of divine 
love we cannot in this body perfectly attain thereto any more than 
Moses could reach the burning bush. But we must regulate our 
lives so as to get to Christ our Lord when time is done. 

4 
HINDRANCES 

When the disciples knew their Lord was leaving them he said, 
“ It is expedient for you that I should go away, for unless I go away 
ye will not receive the Holy Ghost.’ Three kinds of people are 
hindered from so doing. 

First, sinners who by using creatures at their godless pleasure 
hinder their soul’s beatitude. These are wanderers in the way of 
God. Concerning them St Augustine says, ‘ Accursed are they 
that wander in God’s way.’ I will not here discuss them further ; 
following their animal passions they turn their back on God. 
Also, there are some who are over-fond of ministering to their 
outward wants. Touching these our Lord Jesus said, ‘He that 
loveth his soul shall lose it’ (or, in other words, to pander to the 
body is to lose the soul), ‘and he that hateth his soul shall keep 
it’ (meaning those that follow not their own inordinate desires). 

Secondly, a number of good people are hindered by the seven 
sacraments. Sacramentum means a sign, and anyone who rests 
content merely with the sign will never get to the interior truth. 
But the seven sacred rites all point us to the unique reality. 
Marriage, for example, is a symbol of divine and human nature, 
an earnest of the union of the soul with God. And anyone who 
lingers in the mere illusion is kept from the eternal fact. It is 
no true marriage when a man and woman indulge their sensual 
passions and live according to their fleshly lusts; married life 
involves keeping the marriage rule with its seven times and its 
works of mercy. 

Thirdly, many pious souls are hindered by scrupulosity in 
13 

194 MEISTER : ECKHART 

confession and repentance, the outward forms thereof, but they 
take no trouble about the truth itself. Jesus says of these,‘ He 
that has bathed needs but to wash his feet ’; once cleansed, that 
is, by genuine sorrow and confession, no man has need to re-confess 
old sins ; but he should wash the feet of his desire and purify his 
conscience by shriving from new faults. And devout souls are 
hindered too from spiritual attainment by indulgence in sheer 
physical enjoyment of the humanity of Christ. When our Lord 
said to his disciples, ‘It is expedient for you that I should go 
away,’ he was addressing not them only but all who in the days 
to come should try to follow him to high achievement. For 
these there is a hindrance in his manhood if, regardless of his 
Godhood, they content themselves with that. We ought to 
follow God in all his ways, not keep to his humanity as distinct 
from his divinity. 

The Lord Jesus said, ‘I am the way, the truth and the life, no 
man cometh to the Father but by me, and whoso shall enter by 
any other door the same is a thief and a robber.’ He also said 
he was not from himself. The Eternal Wisdom said, ‘ He that 
created me is resting in my tent ’ and withal is uncreated. Christ 
is the born wisdom and power of the Father. His wisdom is the 
Son and his goodness is the Holy Ghost, they being of one nature 
and distinct in Person. And this tent that Wisdom speaks of is 
the humanity of Christ wherein the Father reposes with his Son 
and with the Holy Ghost who are alike in nature and are God in 
Person. Wherefore let us worship this tent of his humanity 
solely in its oneness with his deity. For man is truly God and God 
is truly man. Nor ought we to encumber ourselves with any 
creature excepting Jesus Christ, who is our saving way to his 
heavenly Father and apart from whom there is no other way. 
But albeit we have taken leave of creature and entered the true 
path, which is Jesus Christ, we are not wholly blest. Though we 
are in sight of the divine reality we are not yet the same as what 
we see. St Augustine says, No soul can get to God who goes not 
minus creature to find God minus likeness. And this finds 
warrant in Christ’s words, ‘ Cast out first the beam out of thine 
own eye then thou canst take the mote out of thy brother’s eye.’ 
Whence we draw the moral that any temporal thing is a beam in 
the eye of the soul and prevents divine oneness. It follows that 
the soul will have to cast herself out of herself and stand all bare 
of creature and wholly unnecessitous, for so she puts herself upon a 
par with God who,'naked and unindigent of things, goes absolutely 
free from matter. Thus at length the soul enters the union of the 
Holy Trinity to be wholly blest when, casting hersélf into the 
desert of the Godhead where neither act nor form exists, she is 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 195 

lost to self’ in the rapture of reunion : as self she comes to naught 
and has no more to do with things than she had when she was 
not. Now dead to self she is alive in God. But the dead perish 
inthetomb. So perishes the soul as such, entombed in the desert of 
the Godhead. Of such St Paul declares, ‘ Ye are dead, and your 
life is hid with Christ in God.’ According to Dionysius, burial 
in God is nothing but the crossing over into uncreated life. This 
crossing is beyond the ken of multitudinous knowledge. 

Such is the nature of the soul that where she is she is entire : 
where this nature exists it exists as a whole in each member; and 
by the same token, God is in all places and in every creature, for 
what lives in the soul is none other than God. So leaving every- 
thing to him let her depart from all that is not God nor rest until 
she grasps the uncreated God. So help us our Lord Jesus Christ 
who, as though to-day, ascended into heaven and sitteth on the 
right hand of the Father with whom and with the Holy Ghost he 
is the working of the Deity. Amen. 

LXXVII! 
THE IMAGE IN THE SOUL 

Faciamus hominem ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram 
(Gen. 1,,). God said, ‘Let us make man in our image.’ What 
is God’s speaking ? The Father observing himself with impartible 
perception perceives the impartible purity of his own essence. 
There he sees the image of creatures as a whole, there he speaks 
himself. His Word is his clear perception and that is his Son. 
God’s speaking is his begetting. 

-God said, ‘Let us make.’ Theologians ask: Why did not 
God say, ‘Let us do’ or ‘Let us work?’ Doing is an outward 
act beseeming not the inward man. Work comes from the outward 
and from the inward man, but the innermost man takes no part 
in it. In making a thing the very innermost self of a man comes 
into outwardness. 

When God made man the innermost heart. of the Godhead was 
concerned in his making. A heathen philosopher says, God made 
all things with wisdom. The Doctor says, ‘ The Son is the wisdom 
or love of the Father wherewith he made all things.’ 

God said, ‘ Let us make man.’ Why did God not say, * Let us 
make manhood,’ for it was manhood that Christ took ? Man 
and manhood differ. Talking of man we mean a person ; talking 
of manhood we mean human nature. Philosophers define what 
nature is. It is the thing that essence can receive. Hence God 
assumed manhood and not man. It is written in the book of 

1 See also Greith, pp. 99-104, etc. 

196 MEISTER ECKHART 

Moses, Adam was the first man that God ever made. And I 
say that Christ was the first man God made. How so? The 
philosopher says, what is first in intention is last in execution. 
When a carpenter builds a house his first intention is the roof and 
that is the finish of the house. 

God said, ‘Let us make man.’ Whereby he gave it to be 

understood that he is more than one: three in Person, one in 
essence. St Augustine relates that when he was looking for the 
image in the soul he sought it in the outward man, and there he 
found four likenesses and three links and two faces. He found 
nothing of the image. Then he hunted for it in the inner man, and 
there he found one thing which answered to the simple essence 
in its simplicity and to the various Persons in its trinity of powers. 
He found two faces to it. One working downwards and the other 
upwards. With the lower face she knows herself and outward 
things. The upper face has two activities; with one she knows 
God and his goodness and his emanation ; with this she loves and 
knows him to-day and not to-morrow. I love God to-day and 
not to-morrow. Now the image will not lie in her three powers, 
by reason of their instability. Another power is in the highest 
face, which is concealed ; in this concealment lies the image. 
.' The image has five properties. First, it is made by another. 
Secondly, it answers to that same. Thirdly, it has emanated 
from it; not that it is the divine nature but it is a substance 
subsisting in itself; it is the pure light that emanates from God 
and only differs from him in understanding God. Fifthly, it 
tends towards what it came from. Two things adorn this image. 
One is, it is according to him; the other, there is somewhat of 
eternity therein. The soul has three powers: the image does 
not lie in them ; but she has one power: the actual (or active) 
intellect. 

Now St Augustine and thé New Philosophers declare that in 
this lies impartible memory, intellect and will, and these three 
are inseparate, t.e. the hidden image answers to God’s essence. 
The divine being (God) is shining straight into this image, and the 
image shines straight into God with nothing between. 

May God come into us and we into him and be united with him, 
So help us God. Amen. 

LXXVII 

THE SPECULATIVE INTELLECT 

St Paul reminds us that we being planted in the likeness of God 
may attain to higher and truer vision. For this St Dionysius 
says we require three things. The first is, possession of one’s 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS ~ 197 

mind. The second is, a mind that is free. The third is, a mind 
that can see. How can we acquire this speculative mind ? By 
a habit of mental concentration. 

The soul has a ghostly spot in her where she has all things 
matter-free just as the first cause harbours in itself all things 
immaterially. The soul has also a light in her with which she 
creates all things. When this light and this spot coincide so that 
each is the seat of the other, then, only then, one is in full posses- 
sion of one’s mind.. What more is there to tell? It means our 
outward man’s farewell to all satisfaction in creatures and the 
inner man’s being so meet for God that nothing arises within 
him that he would have changed : then, not till then, a man is 
self-possessed. This cannot happen here for, as the Doctor says, 
when this that we are speaking of befalls, the highest power of 
the soul sees God in her own power. As St Dionysius puts it, 
Then the soul is not called soul, she is the sovran power of God. 

The second thing is a free mind. Freedom means not being in 
any way bound ; our being as free and clear and unalloyed as we 
were in our first emanation when we were loosed in the Holy 
Ghost. 

The third is the speculative mind. Herein the soul sees God. 
What does the soul see when she sees God ? Dionysius says she 
sees the one power. This unique power makes her one with it. 
She sees in him also the good passing good, embracing all good 
things. He wants to entice us out of ourselves, to make us 
unwilling to stay in ourselves. As the heathen philosopher says, 
The arch delight, all delights excelling, attracts the soul out of 
all enjoyments into the sovran truth where all things end. And 
the same master says, Why are we unaware of this? Because 
we are bent on lower things. Supposing that we find ourselves. 
desirous of God before all else, then God has touched this highest 
power. By this touch she is moved out of herself and into him ; 
not that she is moved by grace as one thing moves another, for 
she has no body to her deity. St Dionysius says that the 
‘motion of the soul is as in a circle, since she never varies from 
her centre. 

He says too, God is splendid, and this by reason of three things. 
He is clear, he is a mutual illumination, he is one and the same. 
What does clear mean ? Free from admixture of body ; persisting 
in his purity or light-nature. According to the scriptures, the soul 
is sevenfold clearer than the sun. The sun is clear albeit a corporal 
thing. But I declare the soul to be an hundredfold clearer than 
the sun, for the sun is bodily whereas the soul is ghostly. And 
her surpassing clarity is due to the ascendency of spirit over matter. 
Now if the soul is clear like this then God must be infinitely 

198 MEISTER. ECKHART 

clearer, for he created her, and the cause is more than its creature 
has. 

He is also a mutual illumination, for all that is in God is God. 
And St Augustine says the Father and the Son shine into each 
other in the Holy Ghost, who is the tie between them. And the 
three hypostases, which are the three Persons, have one nature, 
like three lights with one shine. So too with us there should be 
unanimity, all multiplicity focussed to the highest power and this 
sovran power cast into God there to abide without reflection. 

Thirdly, he is one and the same, this being characteristic of 
divinity, which is the same as unity. This is not said of creature, 
for it cannot be maintained of any creatures that it is from them- 
selves they have their being. St Paul says, ‘What we have we 
have received from the unique good, God namely, from whom 
are all good things.’ Things are not from themselves. That 
which is from itself and from which all things are, is God. It is 
expressly taught that God is one and the same. And it is for us 
to be like him. When we have parted from ourselves then we 
are not-being rather than being. May we, being planted in the 
likeness of God, attain to higher and truer vision, So help us God. 
Amen. 

LXXIX 
THE SON OF THE WIDOW 

Adolescens, tibi.dico: surge (Luc. 7,4). To-day we read in the 
gospel about the widow with an only son who had died. And our 
Lord came to him and said, ‘ Young man, arise!’ And he sat up. 

By the widow we understand the soul; her husband was dead, 
so her son was dead also. Her son we take to mean her intellectual 
nature. Our Lord, sitting by the well, said to the woman, ‘ Go 
home and fetch me thine husband.’ Not hers that living water 
which is the Holy Ghost; that is vouchsafed alone to those who 
are quickened in their understanding. Intellect is the summit of 
the soul. ‚It has fellowship and intercourse with the angels in 
angelic nature. Angelic nature no time can touch, nor can time 
touch the intellectual nature. Unless she lives in this her son will 
die. She was a widow. No creature lives but has some good and 
some shortcomings. She was a widow in this sense: intellect 
ae dead in her, and with it perished also the fruit of it, the 

on. . 

Widow, in another sense, suggests abandonment, one who is 
forsaken. Even so must we abandon creatures and forsake them 
utterly. The prophet says, ‘The woman who is barren, more in 
number are her children than hers who is fruitful.’ So with the 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 199 

soul who travails ghostly: manifold are her offspring, instantly 
does she bear fruit. The soul that has gotten God is bringing 
forth fruit all the time. God must needs accomplish his work. 
God is ever at work in the eternal now, and his work is the beget- 
ting of his Son; he is bringing him forth all the while. In his 
birth all things have proceeded forth, and so great is his pleasure 
in this birth that he spends his whole energy upon it. God 
bears himself out of himself into himself; the more perfect this 
birth is the more does it bear. I say that God is all one, he knows 
nothing but himself alone. God cannot know himself without 
knowing all creatures. God gives himself birth all at once in his 
Son; he says all things in him. He says, ‘ Young man, arise!’ 

God exerts all his power in his Son so as to quicken the soul 
back to God. And hell-torment really means the frequent 
lapsing of the soul from the purpose of God’s effort, which is, to 
bring the soul to life again. God makes all creatures in a word, 
but in order to vivify the soul the whole of his power is expended 
in his Son with intent for the soul to be brought back therein. 
In his birth she comes to life, and God bears his Son into the soul 
so as to quicken her. God speaks himself in his Son. In the word 
wherein he speaks himself in himself he speaks himself into the 
soul. It belongs to all creatures to be born. A creature without 
birth would not be at all. According to one master, it is a sign 
of the divine birth that all creatures are wrought in it. Hence 
his words, ‘ Young man, arise ! ’ 

The soul has nothing God can speak into excepting her intelli- 
gence. Some powers are too vile for God to speak to. He could 
of course address them, only they would not hear. Will as will is 
not receptive, not in any wise: will consists in aspiration. So he 
says, ‘Young man, arise!’ The powers of the soul age not, 
they say. Not so the corporal faculties, which flow past and 
decay. The more a man knows the better he knows, and this 
ennobles the soul. But the corporal powers do not have this 
result, so his words, ‘ Young man, arise!’ have reference to the 
“ noble powers of the soul. 

Philosophers define as young things which are near to their 
beginning. Man has perennial youth in his intellectual nature ; 
the more he is in his active (intellect) the nearer he is to his birth, 
and a thing near its birth is young. The first issue of the soul is 
her intellectual nature, next follows will and then all the rest 
of her powers. Now he says, ‘Young man, arise!’ The soul 
herself is one indivisible work ; what is wrought by God in the 
impartible light of the soul is more lovely and fair than the whole 
of his work in creatures. Yet foolish folk take bad for good and 
good for bad. To him who understands aright the unique work 

200 MEISTER ECKHART 

of God in the soul is better and nobler and higher than the whole 
world. y 

Above this light comes grace. Grace enters neither into 
intellect nor will. For grace to enter into intellect and will, 
intellect and will must transcend themselves. A master says, 
‘There is I know not what, wholly mysterious, above them,’ 
meaning the spark of the soul, the only part of her which is God- 
receptive. Here in this minute spark, called the spirit of the soul, 
there occurs true union between the soul and God. Grace never 
did any virtuous work: it has never done any work at all albeit 
good works are the outcome of it. Grace does not unify by works. 
Grace is the inhabiting and co-habiting of the soul in God. Work 
of whatever kind, external or internal, is beneath it. All creatures 
are searching for the Godlike. The more vile they are the more 
they search outside. Air and water, for example, flow away, but 
heaven steadily goes round and in its course is bringing forth all 
creatures ; therein being godlike so far as in it lies. Moreover, in 
its motion it is seeking rest. Heaven never condescends to serve 
inferior creatures. And in this it is very much like God. God’s 
birth of himself in his Son is denied to creatures. But heaven is 
striving after this act which God performs in himself. And if 
heaven does this, and also other creatures much baser than the 
soul, then it is thankless and shameful of her to make such scant 
effort to compass such things as resemble the works God does in 
eternity. 

According to philosophers, the soul can give birth to herself in 
herself and bear herself out of herself back into herself. In her 
natural light she works wonders; she is able to separate one. 
Fire and heat are one : in her intellect she divides them. Wisdom 
and goodness are one in God: in her intellect wisdom is never 
envisaged as goodness. Why? Because wisdom enters more into 
God. The soul brings forth in her God out of God into God; 
she is with young in her very self, and this by dint of her nearness 
to God, of her being the image of God. 

As I have often said, image as image, 7.e. as a reflection, is an 
inseparable thing. Soul as living in the reflection of God has 
real union no creature can sever. Not God himself, not angels, 
nor any sort of creature is able to disjoin the soul who is in the 
image of God. That is true union, and therein lies true happiness. 
Various philosophers are in search of happiness. My verdict is, 
that happiness lies neither in intellect nor will : happiness lies above 
them both, and it is there as happiness and not as intellection, 
and God is there as God and soul as the image of God. May he 
unite us to him in this sense, So help us God. Amen. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 201 

LX 
THERE IS ONE POWER IN THE SOUL 

Adolescens, tibi dico: surge (Luc. 7,,). We read in St Luke’s 
gospel about a youth who was dead. And our Lord came and 
took compassion on him and touched him and said, ‘ Young man, 
I say unto thee, I command thee, Arise ! ’ 

Now you must know that in all good people God is present all 
at once and there is something in the soul wherein God lives and 
something in the soul where the soul lives in God, and if the soul 
turns outwards towards external things she dies and God dies 
also in the soul. But he does not die in himself at all and he is 
alive to himself. Just as, when the soul leaves the body the 
body dies and the soul lives on in herself, so God may be dead to 
the soul and be alive to himself. Andknow, there is one power in the 
soul wider than wide heaven, which is so incredibly extensive that 
we are unable to define it, and yet this power is much vaster still. 

Mark now. In this exalted power the Father is saying to his 
one-begotten Son, ‘ Young man, arise!’ It is God, and the 
closeness of its union with the soul is past belief, for God is so lofty 
in himself that nothing whatsoever can attain thereto by under- 
standing. It is wider than the heavens, aye than all the angels, 
albeit one angelic spark is the cause of all the life on earth. Desire 
is far-reaching, limitless. All that mind can conceive, all that 
heart can desire, that isnot God. Where desire and understanding 
end, in the darkness, there shines God. 

Quoth our Lord, ‘ Young man, I say unto thee, Arise!’ If I 
am to hear God speaking in me I must be wholly estranged from 
all that is mine, as strange as I am to things under the sea, and 
especially from time. The soul is as young in herself as when she 
was made, for age as relating to her is an affair of the body, affecting 
her use of its senses. As one philosopher observes, an old man with 
the eyes of youth would see just as well as a boy. I made a 
statement yesterday which seems almost incredible, I said that 
Jerusalem is as near my soul as the ground I stand on now. ‘ Aye, 
in good sooth, a thousand leagues beyond Jerusalem is every 
whit as nigh my soul as my own body is, of that I am as sure as 
of my being a man, and to any learned clerk it is not hard to 
understand.’ Know then that my soul is as young as-when I 
was created, aye, much younger. And I tell you, I should be 
ashamed were she not younger to-morrow than to-day. 

The soul has two powers which have nothing whatever to do 
with the body, namely intellect and will, which function above 
time. Oh, if only the soul’s eyes were opened so that her under- 

202 MEISTER ECKHART 

standing might behold the truth! Then it would be as easy to a 
man to give up everything as to give up peas and lentils, aye 
upon my soul, to him all things would be but vanity. There are 
some who give up things for love albeit greatly prizing what they 
leave. But to this man who knows in truth, it matters not one 
whit that he should leave himself and everything, for anyone who - 
takes this course has all things for his own in truth. 

There is one power in the soul to which all things are alike 
sweet; the very worst and the very best are all the same in this 
power which takes things above here and now. Now meaning 
time and here meaning place. This place I am in now, suppose I 
went out of myself and were entirely empty, why then I ween the 
heavenly Sire would bear his only Son within my mind so clearly 
that my spirit would bear him back again. Verily, were my spirit 
as ready as the soul of our Lord Jesus Christ then would the 
Father energise in me as perfectly as in his one-begotten Son, 
no less, seeing that he loves me with the selfsame love wherewith 
he loves himself. 

St John said, ‘ In the beginning was the Word and the Word was 
with God and the Word was God.’ Now to hear this Word in the 
Father (where it is absolutely silent), a man must be quite quiet 
and wholly free from images, aye, and forms as well. A man 
must be so true to God that nothing whatever can gladden him 
or sadden him. He must see all things in God, as they are there. 

He says, * Young man, I say unto thee, Arise!’ Meaning to 
effect this thing himself. If someone tells me to carry one stone he 
may as well tell me a hundred if he is going to do it himself. If 
he orders a hundredweight load he may just as well make it a 
thousand if it is for his own back. And God will do this work 
himself if only we will wait and not resist. If the soul would but 
stay within, she would have everything there. There is one power 
. In the soul and that not merely power but being; and not 
merely being: it radiates life, and is so pure, so high and so 
innately noble that creatures cannot live in it; none but God can 
abide therein. Nay, even God himself is forbidden there so far 
as he is subject to condition. God cannot enter there in any 
guise: God is only there in his absolute divinity. 

Then, the fact of his speaking the words, ‘ Young man, I say unto 
thee.’ What is God’s speaking? It is his working, and God’s 
work is so noble, so sublime, that God alone can do it. You must 
understand then, that our whole perfection, our entire happiness, 
will lie in traversing and transcending all creatureliness, all time 
and all limitation and getting into the cause which is causeless. 
We pray thee O Lord, that we may be one and indwelling. So 
help us God. Amen. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 203 

LXXXI 
I HAVE CHOSEN YOU 

_ Ego elegi vos de mundo (Joh. 15,,). These words which I quote 
in the Latin are from the gospel of to-day, the feast of one of the 
saints, Barnabas by name, who is commonly referred to in the 
scriptures as being an apostle. Our Lord says, ‘I have elected 
you, selected you, chosen you out of the world, from all created 
things, that ye should bring forth much fruit and that your fruit 
should remain,’ for it is very good to bring forth fruit and for the 
fruit to remain, and the fruit does remain if we dwell in love. 
At the end of this gospel our Lord says, ‘ Love one another as I 
have ever loved you; my Father hath loved me eternally and so 
have I loved you; keep my commandments, so shall ye remain in 
my love.’ 

All God’s commandments come from love, from the kindness of 
his nature; did they not come from love they would not be God’s 
law, for God’s law is the goodness of his nature and his nature his 
benignant law. Whoso dwells in love dwells in the goodness of 
his nature: he dwells in God’s love, and love is without why. 
Suppose I had a friend and loved him for benefits received and 
because of getting my own way, I should not love my friend, I 
should be loving my own self. I ought to love my friend on his 
own account, for his virtues, for his own intrinsic worth: I love 
my friend aright loving him like this. And so with the man 
abiding in God’s love, seeking not his own in God nor in himself 
nor in any thing but loving God simply for his kindness, for the 
goodness of his nature, for what he is in himself: that is true love. 
Love of virtue is the flower, the ornament of virtue, aye, the 
mother of all virtue, all perfection and all happiness: it is God, for 
God is the fruit of virtue, and it is this fruit which remains to man. 
When a man works for fruit and the fruit remains to him he rejoices 
greatly. Suppose he has a vineyard or a field and makes it over 
to his man to work while keeping all the produce; he may give 
into the bargain all the things thereto belonging and still be 
much rejoiced to have the fruits remain in payment. Even so a 
man rejoices in the fruit of virtue ; he has no worries, no vexations, 
because he has made over himself and everything. 

Our Lord says, ‘ Whoso shall leave anything for me and for my 
name’s sake, to him will I restore an hundredfold and eternal life 
to boot.’ But if thou leave it for that hundredfold and for the sake 
of eternal life, thou art leaving nothing ; nay, so thou leave it for 
a thousandfold reward thou art leaving nothing: leave thyself, 
give up self altogether, that is real riddance. A man once came 

204 MEISTER ECKHART 

to me (it was not long ago), and told me he had given up a quantity 
of land and goods to save his soul. Alack! I thought, how paltry, 
how inadequate, the things thou hast resigned. It is blindness and 
folly so long as thou dost care a jot for what thou hast forsworn. 
Forswear thyself, that is true resignation. 

The man who has resigned himself is so impartial, this world 
will have none of him, as I said here not long ago. The devotee of 
justice is given up to justice, seized of justice, identified with 
justice. I once wrote in my book: The just man serves neither 
God nor creature: he is free; and the more he is just the more 
he is free and the more he is freedom itself. Nothing created is 
free. While there is aught above me, excepting God himself, it 
must constrain me, however small it be or however (great); even 
love and knowledge, so far as it is creature and not actually God, 
confines me with its limits. The unjust man, whether he would 
‘or no, is the servant of illusion : serving the world and creature he 
is the bondman of sin. 

I was thinking lately : that I am a man belongs to other men in 
common with myself; I see and hear and eat and drink like any 
other animal ; but that I am belongs to no one but myself, not to 
man nor angel, no, nor yet to God excepting in so far as I am one 
with him. All God’s work he puts into his one replica of him- 
self, and though radically differing in their operation, (creatures) 
all tend to reproduce themselves. In my father nature took its 
normal course. In the course of nature I should be a father 
like himself. The tendency is ever towards self-repetition, towards 
the preservation-of the species: it is every man’s intention that 
his work should be himself. Any shifting or hindering of his 
nature and the result is woman: thus where nature stops God 
begins to work and to create ; for without woman there would be 
no men. The child as conceived within its mother’s womb has 
shape and colour and material being; so much is wrought by 
nature. That lasts for forty days and forty nights, and on the 
fortieth day God creates the soul in much less than the twinkling 
of an eye. Now ends the work of nature, all nature can contrive 
in colour, form and matter. The activity of nature goes out 
altogether, and as the natural energy is finally withdrawn it is 
restored intact in the rational soul. This then is the work of 
nature and the creation of God. In created things (as I have 
said repeatedly) there is no truth. 

There is something, transcending the soul’s created nature, 
not accessible to creature, non-existent; no angel has gotten it, 
for his is a clear (intelligible) nature, and clear and overt things 
have no concern with this. It is akin to Deity, intrinsically one, 
having naught in common with naught. Many a priest finds 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 205 

it a baffling thing. It is one; rather unnamed than named, 
‚rather unknown than known. . If thou couldst naught thyself 
an instant, less than an instant, I should say, allthat this is in itself 
would belong to thee. But while thou dost mind thyself at all 
thou knowest no more of God than my mouth does of colour or 
my eye of taste: so little thou knowest, thou discernest, what 
God is. 

Plato, that great priest, who occupied himself with lofty matters, 
makes reference to this thing. He speaks about a light which 
is not in this world; not in the world and not out of the world ; 
not in time nor in eternity: it has neither in nor out. God the 
eternal Father, the fullness and the sink of all his deity does he 
give birth to here in his one-begotten Son, so that we are that very 
Son, and his birth is his presence within and his abiding within 
is his bringing forth. That remains ever the same which comes 
welling up in itself. Ego, the word I, is proper to none but to 
God himself in his sameness. Vos, the word implies your collective 
unity, so that ego and vos, I and you, stand for unity. May we 
be the unity itself, unity abiding, So help us God. Amen. 

LXXXII 
THE FEAST OF MARTYRS: 

In occasione gladii mortui sunt (Hebr. 11;,). We read of the 
blessed martyrs, whom we commemorate to-day, that they were 
slain with the sword. Quoth our Lord to his disciples, ‘ Blessed 
are ye when ye suffer for my name’s sake.’ And according to the 
scriptures these martyrs suffered death for Christ’s name, being 
put to the sword. 

Here we learn three things. First, that they are dead. Man’s 
sufferings in this world have an end. St Augustine says pain and 
the work of pain is finite and the reward is infinite.—Secondly, 
that, seeing this life is mortal, we have no need to fear all the pain 
and travail falling to our lot, for it will end. Thirdly, that it 
behoves us to emulate the dead in dispassion towards good and 
ill and pain of every kind. The philosopher says heaven is 
immoveable. Referring to the soul as being the heavenly man who 
is imperturbable. One master enquires, If creatures are so vile, 
how comes+it they so easily distract the soul from God: is not 
the soul at her vilest better than heaven and all creatures? The 
Doctor says it comes of minding too little about God. Were 
we to pay due heed to God it would be nigh impossible to 
lapse. From which we draw the moral that we ought in this world 

206 MEISTER ECKHART 

to emulate the dead. According to St Gregory, no one gets so 
much of God as the man who is throughly dead. _ 

The fourth point is the weightiest. He speaks of their being 
dead. Death givesthem being. A philosopher says, ‘ Nature never 
breaks but to mend.’ Air to fire, for instance, is a change for the 
better ; but air to water were destruction and untowardness. If 
this is nature’s way much more is it God’s: he never destroys 
without providing something ‘better. The martyrs died: they 
lost their life and found their being. The philosopher says, 
‘Most precious is being and life, and knowledge is higher than life 
and nobler than being, for in knowing we have life and being.’ 
Yet life is nobler than being in the sense that a tree has life whereas 

_a stone has being. Again, take being pure and simple, as it is in 
itself, and being transcends both knowledge and life, for in that it 
is being it is both knowledge and life. They have, I say, lost 

‚their natural life and have acquired being. The philosopher says 
|there is nothing so like God as being: in so far as it is real being 
it is the same thing as God. The philosopher says, Being is pure, 

' exalted: all that God is is being. God knows nothing but being, 

j he is conscious of nothing but being; being is his ring. God 
‚loves naught save his being, he thinks of naught save his being. 
"I say, all creatures are being. One master says some creatures 
‘are so nigh to God and so instinct with divine light that they 
give being to other creatures. That is not the case: being is too 
pure, too high, too much the same as God, for anyone but God to 
‚be able to give being. God’s idiosyncrasy is being. The philo- 
‚sopher says one creature is able to give another life. For in being, 
, mere being, lies all that is at all. Being is the first name. Defect 
means lack of being. Our whole life ought to be being. So far 
beta so far it is kin to God. There is no life so feeble but 
taking it as being it excels anything life can ever boast. I have 
‚no doubt of this, that if the soul had the remotest notion of what 
being means she would never waver from it for an instant. The 
‘most trivial thing perceived in God, a flower for example as 
espied in God, would be a thing more perfect than the universe. 

| he vilest thing present in God as being is better than angelic 
knowledge. Sunes 

When angels turn to creaturely knowledge, then it grows dark. 
St Augustine says, When angels know creatures in God, twilight 
falls ; when the soul knows God in creatures it is eventide. But 
knowledge of creatures in God is the dawn. And when she knows 
God in himself as pure essence, that is high noon. It should be 

the soul’s desire to see, as ae in non- seer this most noble 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 207 

us up to being which is better than life: the being _our.life-subsists 
in, wherein-our life is. quickened.into- actuality. We ought to face 
death willingly and die in order to obtain a better resurrection. 

I said on one occasion that a bit of wood is more precious 
than gold, a surprising statement. But a stone is nobler (having 
being) than God and his Godhead without being, if such a thing 
is possible as to abstract his being. That must be a vigorous 
life in which dead things revive, in which even death is changed to 
life. To God naught dies: .all.things-are-living-in-him. They 
being IeKTTESTthe seriotuires say about the martyrs) are quickened 
into life eternal, into the life where living is real being. We 
must be so throughly dead as to be moved by neither good nor . 
ill. What we know we must know in its cause. We never really 
know anything in itself till we know it in its cause. There is no 
understanding it until we apprehend it in its origin. Just as life is 
never perfected till it returns to its original source, wherein life is 
real being. The thing that keeps us from remaining there is, as 
the philosopher explains, our being in contact with time. What 
time can touch is temporal and mortal. The philosopher states 
that the heavenly progression is eternal; true, it gives rise to 
time, and that makes it mortal. In its course it is eternal, all 
unwitting of time; in other words, the soul obeys the laws of 
abstract being. Another thing is its being full of opposites. 
What are opposites ? Good and bad, white and black are in 
opposition, a thing which has no place in real being. 

The philosopher says the soul is given to the body for her 
perfecting. Soul apart from body possesses neither intellect nor 
will: she is one with no attendant power of speech ; true, she‘has 
it in her ground, in its root as it were, but not in fact. The soul 
is purified in body by collecting things scattered and dispersed. 
The resultant of the five senses, when these are recollected, gives 
her a common sense wherein everything sums up to one. In 
the second place, she is purified by a saving habit, that namely of 
ascending into the unitive life. The soul’s perfection consists in 
liberation from the life which is in part and admission to the 

‘life which is whole. All that is scattered in nether things is 
gathered together when the soul climbs up into the life where there 
are no opposites. The soul knows no opposition when she enters 
the light of intellect. Anything short of this light falls into death 
and dies. Perfection of soul consists, thirdly, in absence of | 
sensible affection. What is prone to aught other shall die, it 
cannot last. We beseech thee Lord God to help us escape from 
the life that is divided into the life that is united. So help us 
God. Amen. 

208 MEISTER ECKHART 

LXXXII 
ST GERMANUS’ DAY 

In diebus suis placuit deo et inventus est justus (Ecel. 44,,). In 
these words which I quote in Latin we celebrate the saint, Ger- 
manus by name, whose virtuous life so much is written of and 
whose festival is kept to-day in holy Christendom. 

“In his days,’ that means there is more than one day. There 
is the soul’s day and God’s day. Days here, all that have passed 
for seven thousand years, are as near God’s day, to-day, as is 
yesterday. Why? Because time yonder is in the present now. 
The heavens revolve, hence time; day started when the heavens 
began to spin. Yonder the soul’s day is passing in the present, 
in her natural light where all things are, where there is perfect 
day, God’s day, day and night in one. Yonder in the day of 
eternity the soul is in the essential now; there the Father is be- 
getting his (one-begotten Son) in the here and now, there the soul 
is being reborn in God. As often as this birth takes place she is 
giving birth to the only Son. Full many are the sons of virgins 
born who travail in eternity, superior to time. But however 
many sons the soul gives birth to in eternity she has no more 
than the one Son, for it is supertemporal: it comes to pass in the 
eternal day. 

Just indeed is he who lives in virtue and in virtuous deeds; 
who seeketh not his own in any thing, neither in God nor creature. 
That man dwells in God and God in him. He takes delight in 
flouting and getting rid of things, in being done with things as 
far as that is possible. St John says, ‘God is love and love is 
God and he who dwells in love dwells in God.’ Doubtless he is 
well lodged as heir to God, and he in whom God dwells has a good 
lodger. One of the masters says, God gives the soul a gift which 
moves her to interior things. And it has been explained that the 
soul is moved directly by the Holy Ghost, for in the love wherein 
God loves himself, in that same love he is loving me, and the soul 
loves God in the same love wherein he loves himself; and were 
there not this love wherein God loves himself there would be no 
Holy Ghost at all. It is the heat, the blowing of his holy Breath 
that the soul loves God in. 

In one of the Evangelists we read, ‘ This is my beloved Son in 
whom I am well pleased.’ In another we read, ‘This is my 
beloved Son in whom all things please me.’ And in a third we 
find, * This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleasing to 
myself” Whatever pleases God is pleasing to him in his only: 
Son: whatever God loves he is loving in his only Son. So it 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS ~ 209 

behoves a man to live so that he is one with his only Son, so that 
he is his only Son. Between the only Son and the soul there is 
no difference. Between the servant and his lord there is no like 
love. As long as I am servant I remain unlike, remote from his 
only Son. If I could see God with my eyes the same as I see 
colours, that would not be right, for that which is visible is temporal. 
The temporal taken according to time is taken at its lowest 
value. Now is time and place in itself. While man has time and 
place, number and quantity, he is not as he should be, is not just, 
and God is remote and not his own. Our Lord says, ‘ Whosoever 
would be my disciple let him forsake himself,’ as though to say, 
no one can hearken to my teaching till he is rid of his own self. 
All creatures in themselves are naught, and that is why I counsel 
you to abandon naught and enjoy the perfect state where the 
will is just. His own will once relinquished man relishes my 
doctrine and can listen to my word. One master says, All creatures 
have their being straight from God, therefore by nature God must 
love them better than they do themselves. Did the soul know its 
own detachment it would not stoop to any thing. 

We say about this bishop, ‘ He was well-pleasing to him in his 
days.” The soul’s day and God’s day are different. In her 
natural day the soul knows all things above time and place; 
nothing is far or near. And that is why I say, this day all things 
are of equal rank. To talk about the world as being made by 
God to-morrow, yesterday, would be talking nonsense. God 
makes the world and all things in this present now. Time gone 
a thousand years ago is now as present and as near to God as this 
- very instant. The soul who is in the here and now, in her the 
Father bears his one-begotten Son and in that same birth the soul 
is born back into God. It is one birth; as fast as she is reborn 
into God the Father is begetting his only Son in her. 

I have spoken about one power in the soul ; in her first issue she 
lays hold of God not as being good nor yet as truth: delving 
deeper still she grasps him in his loneliness, in his solitude ; she 
finds him in his desert, in his actual ground. But being still 
unsatisfied, on she goes in quest of what it is that is in his Godhead, 
of the special property of his peculiar nature. They say no 
property (or, union) is closer than that of the three Persons being 
one God. And next they put the union of the soul with God. 
When the soul, being kissed by God, is in absolute perfection and 
in bliss, then at last she knows the embrace of unity, then at the 
touch of God she is made uncreaturely, then, with God’s motion, 
the soul is as noble as God is himself. God moves the soul afte 
his own fashion. God contemplating creature gives it life; crea- 
ture finds life in contemplating God. The soul has ra 

Er 

210 MEISTER ECKHART 

noétic being, and therefore where God is there is the soul and 
where the soul is there is God. 

Of this saint we say, ‘ he was found just.’ Just means equable, 
alike in joy and sorrow, in bitter and in sweet; one to whom 
nothing comes amiss, whom nothing keeps from feeling himself 
one in righteousness. Like to like. Love loves its like alway 
and God loves the just man like himself. May we find that we are 
in this case in the time, in the day of understanding, in the day of 
wisdom, in the day of beatitude. So help us O undivided Trinity. 
‚ Amen. 

LXXXIV! 
LIKE THE MORNING STAR 

Quasi stella matutina in medio nebule etc, (Eccl. 50,). ‘ Like 
the morning star in the midst of a cloud and as the moon at the 
full and as the sun in his glory, so did he shine in the temple of 
God.’ These words are commonly applied to all the saints and 
teachers who in their virtuous lives and knowledge of God have 
been a shining light to worldly hearts which, caught with creatures 
in the fog and cloud of darkness or ignorance, are straying like 
blind men from the way of eternal liberation, but more especially 
do they apply to the holy father we celebrate to-day, St Dominic 
by name, a mainstay of Christendom and founder of the Preaching 
Order which he started and established to propagate God’s word 
and to help poor sinners. : 

He shone like the morning star in the temple of God. What is 
God and what is the temple of God? Four and twenty doctors met 
together to settle what God is, and they could not doit. Thereafter at 
a time appointed again they came together bringing each his verdict. 
Of these I will pick out two or three. One says: God is something 
to which all changing, temporal things are nothing; all that has 
being is from him and is insignificant compared with him. Another 
says: God is somewhat that transcends being, that in itself 
needs none and that all things need. A third says: God is the 
intelligence which occupies itself solely in understanding itself. 

Passing over the first and the third I will speak of the second : 
God transcends being. Nothing that has being, time or place is 
proper to God, he is above them ; his being in all creatures shows 
him superior to them, for that which is the same in many things 
must be prior to them. According to some doctors, the soul is 
in the heart alone. Not so; it is an error some eminent Scholas- 
tics make. The soul is whole and undivided at once in foot and 
_ eye and in each member of the body. Again, I take a span of 
1 Sermon on St Dominic’s Day. See also Jostes, No, 31. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 211 

time, which need not be to-day or yesterday. But if I take the 
now that includes all time. The now wherein God made the 
' world is as near this time as the now I am speaking in this moment, 
and the last day is as near this now as was yesterday. 

One of the doctors says : ‘ God is impartible, eternally energising 
in himself, immanent, unindigent of instrument or aid, in need 
of none but what all things need and to which all things tend as 
to their final goal.’ To this goal there is no way, it is beyond 
all ways, debouching in the open. St Bernard says, * Divine love is 
a wont without a way.’ The physician who sets out: to make a 
sick man whole has no particular mode of health in view ; he has 
a mode whereby he hopes to make him well, but how well he hopes 
to make him is not specified : he will make him as well as he can. 
How shall we love God then? As well as we can; without 
measure. Each thing works after its own fashion; things do 
not work in natures superior to their own; fire, for example, only 
works in wood. God works above all natures, in the uncondi- 
tioned ; wherever he can stir he is at work in modeless mode. 
Before ever there was being God was working: he wrought in 
non-existent being. Advanced theology lays down that God is 
abstract being: he is as much above being as an angel is above 
a fly. I hold it is as wrong for me to say that God is being as to 
. say the sun is black or white. God is neither this nor that. As 
St Dionysius says, ‘ He who thinks that he sees God, if he sees aught 
sees naught of God.’ But when I say God is not being, is superior 
to being, I do not with that deny him being: I dignify and exalt it 
in him. If I find some copper in the gold, as existing there it is in 
a nobler being than itself. St Augustine says ; God is mode-free 
mode, power-free power, good-free good. 

In the elements of the Scholastic teaching, we find being 
divided into ten modes (or categories), all of which are denied to 
God. God is subject to none of these modes nor is he deficient 
in any. The first, which has most being of them all, wherein all 
things have being, is substance; and the last, which has least 
being, is called relatio, and in God it is the same as the first one is, 
which has most being. In God all things have the same form 
(idea), though this is the form of very different things. The 
most exalted angel, the soul, the fly, have all the same prototype 
in God. . God is not being nor yet goodness. Goodness cleaves 
to being and does not go beyond it: if there were no, being there 
would be no goodness. Being is purer than good. In God is 

no good nor better nor best. To say that God is good is to do 

him wrong ; as well say that the sun is black. But our Lord 
himself declares, ‘ None is good but God alone.’ What is good ? 
That which communicates itself. Him we call a good man who 

212 MEISTER ECKHART 

gives himself and is of use to people. And hence the dietum of 
a heathen doctor, ‘ A hermit is neither good nor bad, in the sense 
of giving himself and helping other people.’ God par excellence 
communicates himself. No thing gives of its own being, for 
creatures are not of themselves. What they give they have 
gotten from another. Nor do they give themselves. The sun 
gives light, no more; the fire gives heat, the fire itself remains ; 
but God does give his own, for it is from himself he is and in all 
the gifts he gives he first and foremost gives himself. In all his 
gifts he gives himself: God, as he is, so far as the recipient will 
allow. St James says, ‘Every good gift comes down from above 
from the Father of lights.’ 

When we take God in his being we take him in the forecourt of 
his habitation, for quiddity or mode is the way into his temple. 
Then where is God in his temple ? Intellect is the temple of God 
wherein he is shining in his glory. Nowhere does God dwell 
more really than in the temple of his intellectual nature, where he 
is in his stillness by himself, all undisturbed. As one of the doctors 
says, God in his self-perception is perceiving himself in himself. 

Now turning to the soul, she has a drop of intellectual nature, 
a spark, a ray, and she has sundry powers which function in the 
body. One is the power of digestion, more active by night than 
in the day, whereby man grows and thrives. And the soul has 
a power in the eyes which makes the eye so sensitive and delicate 
and too fastidious to accept things in the coarse-grained mode 
they have themselves, but they must first be filtered and refined 
by light and air, owing to the presence in it of the soul. Another 
power in the soul is that wherewith she thinks. This power is 
able to picture in itself things which are not there, so that I 
can see the things as well as I see them with my eyes, or even 
better. I can see a rose in winter when there are no roses, there- 
fore with this power the soul produces things from the non-existent, 
like God who creates things out of nothing. 

A heathen philosopher observes that the soul who loves God 
takes him under the veil of goodness; and so far I have quoted 
mainly from the heathen doctors who know in the light of nature 
merely. I have yet to come to the sayings of the saints who see 
in a light far more exalted. He says then, that the soul in loving 
God is taking him under the veil of goodness. Intellect draws 
this veil from God and takes him bare, stripped of goodness, of 
being and of every name. 

At the School [the College of St Jacob] I used to teach that 

-intellect is higher than the will, both as belonging to this light. 
Another theologian at the other School put will before the intellect 
on the ground that will enjoys things as they are in themselves, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 213 

whereas intellect enjoys them as they are in it. That is quite 
true. The eye in itself is a better thing than the eye as painted 
on the wall. Nevertheless, I still maintain that intellect is higher 
than the will. Will takes God under the garment of good. Intel- 
lect seizes him naked, divested of good and of being. Goodness 
is a garment under which God is concealed and will takes God in 
this garment of goodness. If God had no goodness my will 
would repudiate God. It would be unseemly to robe a king in 
drab on his coronation day. I am not happy by reason of God’s 
goodness. Never should I think of asking God to beatify me with 
his goodness, for he could not do it. Goodness is his vesture. 
My beatitude lies wholly and solely in the fact that God is knowable 
and in my knowing him. A philosopher says, The intellect of 
God is what angelic being is suspended from. 

It is a question where the image really has its being: in the 
mirror or the object it proceeds from ? My image is in me, of me, 
mine. While the mirror faces me, it is my image in it; if the 
mirror falls it is my image which has been destroyed. Angelic 
being likewise depends upon the presence of God’s intellectual 
nature wherein he sees himself like a morning star enveloped in 
the mist. I always have before my mind this little word quasi, 
like: indeed, it is the burden of my entire teaching. What at 
school the ‘children call a mock, a by-word. 

The truest thing that man can predicate of God is word-and- 
truth. God calls himself a word. And St John says, ‘In the 
_ beginning was the Word,’ meaning that man is a word with the 
eternal Word. Like Venus, Fria’s star, which Friday is named 
after and which has many names. When it is earlier than the sun 
and is up before it then it is called the morning star; when it 
rises later than the sun and the sun sets first then it is called the 
evening star. Now it is above and now below the sun, but of all 
the stars it best keeps its distance from the sun, never going far 
away, and the moral of this is thatany man who would attain to 
God must stay by, in the presence of, God the whole time and 
refuse to let God be put out of his mind by fortune or misfortune 
or by any creature whatsoever. 

And he says, ‘ like the moon at the full in his days.’ The moon 
is the ruler of moist nature. The moon is never nearer to the sun 
than at the full, and then it gets its light at first-hand from the 
sun, but owing to the fact that of all the stars it is the nearest to 
the earth, it suffers from two drawbacks: being pale and mottled 
and also being liable to lose its light. It is never so potent as 
when it is furthest from the earth, and in that position it tells 
most upon the sea; when it is on the wane its effect gets less 
and less. And the higher the soul rises above earthly things the 

214 MEISTER. ECKHART 

more powerful she grows. Merely creature-lore will place a man 
beyond the need of sermons. For every single creature is a book. 
But anyone who means to get to that whereof we speak, to where — 
my arguments all tend, must be as the morning star: a man in 
the presence of God, always with him, equally near him and 
exalted above mundane things : a word by the Word. 

There is one word both thought and spoken: angels, the soul 
and all creatures. Another Word, thought but unspoken, I can 
conceive. And there is still another Word unthought of and 
unspoken which never proceeds forth but is eternally in him who 
speaks it: in the Father, for it is he who speaks it, it is eternally 
proceeding and abiding. Intellect is intrinsically active and more 
and more outwardly effective in proportion as it is directed 
inwards. God’s happiness consists in its operation. And here 
again the soul should be an ad-verb. As the intellect of the soul 
turns more inwards, the more closely, more minutely is it identified 
with what it knows. The more powerful it is the more clearly 
it reflects and is atoned with God. That is not the case with 
corporal things: the stronger they are the more external is their 
action. God’s happiness lies in the subjective working of the 
intellect wherein his Word abides. It is this eternal Word the 
soul should be a word with and, doing one work with God, she 
will find her happiness in self-perception: in the very thing that 
God is happy in. May we ever be a word with this Word, So 
help us the Father and this same Word and the Holy Ghost. 
Amen. 

LXXXV? 
A NEW COMMANDMENT I GIVE UNTO YOU 

Mandatum novum do vobis etc. (Joh. 13,4). In the Gospel of 
St John we find our Lord’s words to his disciples, ‘A new com- 
mandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have 
loved you. By this shall all know that ye are my disciples, if 
ye love one another.’ 

We know of three kinds of love that our Lord had, and in this 
we must be like him. One is natural, the second gracious and the 
third divine. In God there is nothing not God; in ourselves, 
however, we may consider them as an ascending scale, from good 
to better and from better to perfection. But in God is neither 
more nor less, he is just the simple, pure, essential truth. 

The first love God has, in this we learn how his divine goodness 
has constrained him to create all creatures, wherewith he has been 
_ big eternally in his ideal preconception, intending them to enjoy 
1 See also Wackernagel, No. 66. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 215 

his goodness with him. And among all his creatures he bears 
no more love to one than to another: as each is able to receive 
he pours his love therein. Were my soul as capacious, as roomy, 
as a Seraph’s, who has nothing in him, God would pour out into 
me the same as he does into that angel. If you describe a circle, 
a ring of dots with one point in the middle, from this point all the 
dots will be equidistant ; for one dot to get nearer it will have to 
be displaced, for the middle point is constant at the centre. So 
with divine being: it is not questing round about but abiding 
altogether in itself. In order to receive from it a creature must 
infallibly be moved out of itself. And when we talk of man we 
are talking of all creatures; Christ himself exhorted his dis- 
ciples, “Go forth and preach the gospel to all creatures,’ for crea- 
tures all culminate in man. Not but what, as being, God is 
pouring himself out into all creatures, to each as much as it can 
take. Which is a lesson to us to love all creatures equally with 
what we have received from God (though some are nearer to us 
by kinship or by natural friendship), as we are favoured equally 
with the boon of divine love. I sometimes seem to like one better 
than another, and yet I have the same goodwill towards that 
other person’ whom I have never seen, only, by asking more of 
- me, this one enables me to give him myself more. God loves crea- 
tures all alike and fills them with his being. And we too should 
pour forth ourselves in love upon all creatures. We often find the 
heathen arriving at this amiable state in virtue of their natural 
understanding. As the heathen philosopher observes, man is by 
nature a kindly animal. 

The second love of God, the spiritual, he is flowing with into 
the soul and into the angels, and it is by this light which is super- 
natural that, as I was saying, creature is rapt away out of itself. 
Creatures are so enamoured of their own natural light, it needs a 
strong inducement to take them out of it into. the light of grace. 
In his natural light man enjoys himself, but the light of grace, 
which is unspeakably more powerful, robs him of his self-enjoy- 
ment and draws him into itself. As the soul says in the Book of 
Love, ‘ Draw me after thee in thy sweet savour.’ 

Now we cannot love God without first knowing him, but the 
essential point of God is in the centre, equally far from and near 
to all creatures, and the only way of getting closer to it is for my 
natural intellect to be displaced by a light more intense than 
itself. Supposing, for example, that my eye were a light and strong 
enough to bear the sunlight in its glory and unite therewith, its 
interior state would then be due not to itself alone but to the 
sunlight as well. So with the mind. The intellect is a light, 
and if I turn it right away from things and in the direction 

216 MEISTER ECKHART 

of God then, since God is perennially flowing with grace, my 
mind is illumined and united with love and therein knows and 
loves God as he is in himself. Here we have the explanation of 
how God is flowing out into rational creatures in his light of grace 
and how we with our intellect approaching this gracious light are 
rapt out of ourselves and ascend into the light of God himself. 

The third love of God : in this it is granted us to learn how God 
has been begetting his one-begotten Son and is giving birth to 
him, as the Doctor says, now and eternally, he, like any woman, 
being brought to bed in every virtuous soul who has embarked 
on the interior life. This birth is his understanding, perennially 
up-springing in his paternal heart, wherein he has gotten all his 
bliss. All he has to give he expends on understanding : it is his 
progeny, his only pride. His entire happiness is centred in his 
Son ; he loves nothing but his Son and all he finds in him ; his 
Son is the light that has been for ever burning in his paternal 
heart. 

To enter there we shall have to climb by way of natural light 
into the light of grace and therein wax into the light that is the 
Son himself. There in the Son we are loved by the Father with 
his love (his Holy Spirit) which has its eternal source in him and 
having blossomed forth to his eternal birth (namely the second 
Person) is wafted by the Son back to the Father as the love of 
both. The Doctor says, I sometimes think of what the angel 
said to Mary, ‘ Hail, full of grace!’ what is the good to me of 
Mary’s being full of grace if I am not full also? What does it 
profit me the Father’s giving his Son birth unless I bear him too ? 
God begets his Son in the perfect soul and is brought to bed 
therein that she may bring him forth in all her works. Thus we, 
by the love of the Holy Ghost, being unified into his Son, shall 
know the Father with the Son and love ourselves in him and him 
in us with their mutual love. 

Whoever would achieve this triple love must needs have four 
things. The first is, real dispassion towards creatures. The 
second, the true life of Leah, that is to say, the active life which 
is set in motion in the ground of the soul by the action of the Holy 
Spirit. The third thing is, the true life of Rachel, the contempla- 
tive life. The fourth is, an aspiring soul. A master was once 
questioned by his pupil about the angelic order. He answered 
him and said, Go hence and withdraw into thyself until thou 
understandest : give thy whole self up to it, then look, refusing to 
see anything but what thou findest there. It will seem to thee at 
first as though thou art the angels with them and as thou dost 
surrender to their collective being thou shalt think thyself the 
angels as a whole with the whole company of angels. The pupil 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 217 

went away and withdrew into himself until he found all this in 
truth in his own ground. Then returning to his master he gave 
him thanks and said: It was as you foretold. On giving my 
whole mind to the subject of the angels and aspiring to their 
estate, at first it seemed to me that I was all the angels with the 
angels. You see then, said his master, that as you draw a little 
nearer to the source, wonder after wonder is wrought upon the 
soul ; for while a man is still on the ascent and receiving through 
the medium of creatures, he has not come to rest. But once he 
has climbed up into God, there in the Son he will be receiving 
with the Son the whole of what God has to give. May we, ascend- 
ing in this way from one love to another, be united into God and 
there in bliss abide eternally. So help us God. Amen. 

LXXXVI! 
DETACHMENT HAS FOUR STEPS 

Detachment has four steps. The first breaks in and makes 
away with all a man’s perishable things. The second one deprives 
him of them altogether. The third not only takes them but makes 
them all forgotten as though they had not been, and all about 
them. The fourth degree is right in God and is God himself. 
When we get to this stage the King is desirous of our beauty. 

LXXXVII 
THE POOR IN SPIRIT 

Beati pauperes spiritu quia ipsorum est regnum celorum 
(Matt. 5,). Beatitude itself opened its mouth of wisdom and said, 
‘ Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’ 
Angels and saints and everything that was ever born, all must 
keep silence when the eternal wisdom of the Father speaks ; for 
the wisdom of the angels and all creatures is mere naught compared 
with the wisdom of God which is unfathomable. This wisdom has 
declared that the poor are blessed. 
_ There are two kinds of poverty....One-is outward poverty, and 
this is good and much to_be commended in him. who makes a 
voluntary practice of it for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
‘whose wont it was on earth. About this poverty I shall say no 
_ more. But there is another poverty, an interior-poverty, whereto 
refers this saying of our Lord, ‘ Blessed are the poor in spirit or 
poor of spirit.” And I would urge you now to be this same if ye 
1 Authorship doubtful. Excerpt only. 

218 MEISTER ECKHART 

would understand my argument, for I do assure you by the eternal 
truth, excepting ye are like this truth we speak of it is not possible 
for you to follow me. Several people have asked me what poverty 
is? This we will now try to answer. 

Bishop Albertus says, ‘ By a poor man is meant one who is not 
satisfied with anything God ever made,’ and this is well said. 
But, taking poverty in a higher sense, we say better still, a poor 
__man is one _who_wills nothing, knows nothing, has nothing. It 
is on these three heads that I propose to speak. 

In the first place, a poor man wills nothing. Some folks 
mistake the sense of this ; those, for example, who win personal 
repute by: penances and outward disciplines (and are highly 
- esteemed, God ’a mercy, though knowing so little of God’s truth !). 
To all outward appearance these are holy, but they are fools within 
and ignorant of the divine reality. These people define a poor 
man to be one who wills nothing. Explaining this to mean that 
he never follows his own will at all, but is bent on carrying 
out the will of God. In this they are not bad ; their intention is 
good, and we commend them for it: God keep them in his mercy. 
But I trow that these are not poor men nor are they the least like 
them. They are much admired by those who know no better, 
but I say they are fools with no understanding of God’s truth. 
Peradventure heaven is theirs by good intention, but of the 
poverty in question they have no idea. 

Supposing someone asked me, What then is a poor man who 
wills nothing ? I should answer this. As long as it can be said of 
a man that it is in his will, that it is his will, to do the will of God, 
that man has not the poverty that I am speaking of, because he 
has a will, to satisfy the will of God, which is not as it should be. 
If he is genuinely poor a man is as free from his created will 
as he was when he was not. I tell you by the eternal truth, as 
long as ye possess the will to do the will of God and have the 
least desire for eternity and God, ye are not really poor : ans poor 
man wills nothing, knows nothing, wants nothing. 

While I yet stood in my first cause I had no God and I was my 
own ; I willed not, I wanted not, for I was conditionless being, 
the knower of myself in divine truth ; then I wanted myself and 
wanted nothing else ; what I willed I was and what I was I willed. 
I was free from God and all things. But when I escaped from 
my, free will to take on my created nature, then I got me a God ; 
for before creatures were, God was not God : he was that he was. 
When creatures became and started creaturehood, God was not 
God in himself but he was God in creatures. Now we contend that 
‘ God as God is not the final goal of creature nor such great riches 
as the least creature has in God. If a flea had intellect and could 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 219 

intellectually plumb the eternal abysm of God’s being out of which 
it came, then, so we maintain, not God and all God is could fulfil 
and satisfy that flea. Wherefore we pray we may be quit of God 
and get the truth and enjoy eternity, for the highest angel and the 
soul are all the same yonder where I was and willed that I was and 
was that I willed. Thus shall a man be poor of will, as little 

‘ willing and desiring as he willed and wanted when he was not. 

And in this wise a man is poor who wills nothing. 

Secondly, a poor man is one who knows nothing. We have 
sometimes laid it down that a man ought to live as though he 
lived not, whether for himself, or truth, or God. But now we 
change our ground and declare withal, that a person in this 
poverty has gotten all he was when he lived not in any wise, not 
to himself, nor truth, nor God: he is so quit, so free of any kind 
of knowledge that no idea of God is alive in him; for while man 
stood in the eternal species God, there lived none other in him: 
what lived there was himself. And so we say this man is as free 
from his own knowledge as he was when he was not ; he lets God 
travail as he will while he himself stands idle as when he came 
from God. | 

Now the question is, Wherein does happiness lie most of all? 
Some masters say it lies in love. Others, it lies in knowledge and 
in love, and these come nearer to the mark. We, again, contend 
it neither lies in knowledge nor in love, but there is in the soul one 
thing from which both knowledge and love flow and which itself 
does neither know nor love like the powers of the soul. Who 
knows this knows the seat of happiness. This has no before 
nor after nor is it expecting anything to come, for it can neither 
gain nor lose. It is wanting, in the sense that it knows nothing 
about working in itself; but, it just is itself, enjoying itself God- 
fashion. And in this sense I say man ought to be idle and free, 
all unwitting, unaware, of what God is doing in him, that is the 
way to be poor. According to the masters, God is being, intel- 
lectual being which knows all things. But I say, _God..is.not 
being nor yet intellect_nor_knows not this nor that. .God is 

“exempt from all things and he is all things. Being poor in spirit 

means being poor_of.all_particular knowledge, even as one who 
wots not anything, not God nor creature nor himself. Here 
there is no question of a man desiring to know or recognise the 
way of God. In this wise may a man be poor in knowledge of 
himself. 
Thirdly, the poor man has nothing. It has been often said that | 
perfection means not -having the mortal things of earth, and 
haply this is true in one particular case, namely, when it is volun- 
tary. But this is not the sense I mean it in. I have already 

220 MEISTER ECKHART 

said, the poor man is not he who wants to do the will of God but 
he who lives in such a way as to be free from his own will and from 
the will of God, even as he was when he was not. Of this poverty 
we say, it is the deepest poverty. Secondly, we say, that man is 
poor who has no knowledge of God’s work in him. Being as free 
of knowing and perceiving as God is of all things is the barest 
poverty. But the third poverty, the straitest I am about to tell 
of, i.e. having nothing. 

Here I would remind you how I have often said, and eminent 
authorities have said the same, that one must be devoid of things 
and of activities, both inwardly and outwardly, if one would be. 
a fitting place for God to work in. Now we say something else. 
Granting a man is bare of everything, of creatures, of himself, of 
God, yet if it is still in him to provide God with the room to work 
in, then we do affırm : as long as this is in the man he is not poor 
with the strietest poverty. God does not purpose in his work 
that man should have in him the place God does his work in; 
poverty of spirit means freedom from God and all his works, so 
that if God chooses to travail in the soul he must be his own 
workshop, as he likes to be. Finding so poor a man, then God is 
his own patient and he is his own operating room, since God is in 
himself the operation. Here in this indigence man is obeying 
his eternal nature, that he has been and that he is now and that 
he shall be for ever. ” 

There is the question of those words of St Paul, ‘ All that I 
am I am by the grace of God.” Here the argument soars above 
grace, above understanding and above desire. The answer is 
that St Paul’s words are true; not that grace was in him; the 
grace of God wrought in him perfecting him to unity and then the 
work of grace was done. Grace having done its work there re- 
mained Paul as he was. As we should say, he was a man too poor 
to have or:be a place for God to work in. To preserve place is 
to preserve distinction. Why I pray God:to rid me of God is 
because conditionless being is above God and above distinction : 
it was therein I was myself, therein I willed myself and knew 
myself to make this man and in this sense I am my own cause, 
both of my nature which is eternal and of my nature which is 
temporal. For this am I born, and as to my birth which is eternal 
I can never die. In my eternal mode of birth I have always been, 
am now, and shall eternally remain. That which I am in time 
shall die and come to naught, for it is of the day and passes with 
the day. In my birth all things were born, and I was the cause of 
mine own self and all things, and had I willed it I had never been, 
nor any thing, and if I had not been then God had not been either. 
To understand this is not necessary. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 221 

One learned doctor says, his breaking-through-is-nobler than his 
emanation. When I flowed out of God then all things said, 
_ There is-a-God. Withal this cannot make me blest, for in it I 
acknowledge myself creature ; but in my breaking-through, then as, 

standing passive in the will of God, free of the will of God and) 
all his works and eke of God himself, I transcend all creatures ~ 

_and_am_neither God nor creature: I am that I was and that 
I shall remain now and for ever. Then I receive an impulse 
which carries me above all angels. In this impulse I conceive 
such passing riches that I am not content with God as being 
God, as being all his godly works, for in this breaking-through 
I find that -God-and-I are both the same. Then I am what I 
was, I neither wax nor wane, for Iam the motionless cause that 
is moving all things. Now God can find no place in man, for 
man has gotten by his poverty that he has been eternally and ever 
shall abide. Here in the spirit God is one, that is the straitest 
poverty a man can know. 
Whoso is unable to follow this discourse, let him never mind. 
While he is not like this truth he shall not see my argument, for 
it is the naked truth straight from the heart.of God. May we so 
live as to experience it eternally. So help us God. Amen. 

LXXXVIII 
THE VIRGIN BIRTH 

Ave, gratia plena, dominus tecum! (Luc. 1,3). ‘Hail, full of 
grace, the Lord is with thee! The Holy Ghost shall descend into 
thee from above, from the lofty light-throne of the eternal Father.’ 
Here there are three things to be understood. First, the radiant 
nature of the angel; secondly, that he knew himself unworthy 
to behold God’s mother; thirdly, that he was speaking not alone 
to her but to a goodly multitude, to every virtuous soul desiring 
God. 

I say: had Mary not borne God in ghostly fashion first, he 
never had been born of her in flesh. The woman said to Christ, 
‘ Blessed is the womb which bare thee.’ To which Christ replied, 
* Blessed not alone the womb which bare me : blessed are they that 
hear the word of God and keep it.” It is more worth to God his 
being brought forth ghostly in the individual virgin or good soul 
than that he was born of Mary bodily. 

This involves the notion of our being the only Son whom the 
Father has eternally begotten. When the Father begat all 
creatures he was begetting me; I flowed out with all creatures 
while remaining within in the Father. Like what I am now saying ; 

», 222 MEISTER ECKHART 

ye 

it springs up within me, then I pause in the idea, and thirdly I 
speak it out, and all of you receive it: but really it is in me all the 
while. So am I abiding in the Father. In the Father is the 
‘exemplar of all creatures. This exalted nature has its intellectual 
prototype in God. And not merely intellectual but intellect 
“itself. The best God ever did for man was to be man himself. 
I will tell you a story to illustrate my point. Once upon a time 
there was a rich man and his wife. The lady by mischance did 
lose an eye whereat she grieved excessively. Then came her 
lord to her and said, ‘O wife, why so distressed?’ Quoth she, 
‘My lord, ’tis not my eye I mourne; I mourne for fear lest you 
should love me less.’—‘ Nay wife, I love thee,’ he replied. After- 
wards, not over long, he put out one of his own eyes, and going to 
his wife he said, ‘ Lady, so you may know I love you I have made 
myself like you: now I too have only one eye.’ 
According to the philosophers, creatures are all striving to 

'n@® bring forth and emulate the Father. Another doctor says that 

every active cause works solely for the sake of its result, to find 

_# =rest_and. peace in.its-end: This is mankind, who scarce could 

credit God’s great love for him till God did put out one of his own 
eyes by taking human nature. This was made flesh. 
Said our Lady, ‘ How shall this be?’ The angel replied, ‘ The 
Holy Ghost shall come down into thee from on high, from the 
lofty throne of the Father of eternal light.’ In principio. Unto 
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given.’ Child in his frail 
humanity, Son in his eternal deity. One philosopher declares 

aoe s that creatures are all striving-after_their primitive. pure_nature, 

u 
UM 

ee 

after their supreme. perfection. Fire as fire _does..not-burn : 
_it is too intangible, too pure to burn at all; it is the fire-nature 
which will burn, infusing into the dry wood its nature and its light 
according to its own most high perfection. God has done the same. 
He has made, the soul according to his own most perfect nature, 
pouring into her the whole of his own light in all its pristine purity, 
while he himself remains all undefiled. 
Now you must know that I lately said: When God created all 

be creatures he had surely gotten first something uncreated setting 
_}forth the general idea of creatures: to wit, the spark, which is 

‘so nearly God that it is a single, impartible one, bearing the 
‘form of all creatures, formless and above form. 

Yesterday in the schools there was a theological discussion. I 
said I was astonished at no one being able to give the solution of 
my question: If I am the only Son whom the Father has eternally. 
begotten, have I eternally been Son? I say, yea and nay. Son, 

yes, inasmuch as the Father has eternally begotten me; not 
Son in my unbegotten nature. In principio. We are given to 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS — 223 

understand ‚that“we are\the only Son whom the Father has been 
bringing forth for aye out of his arcane understanding of the 
eternal mystery of the first beginning of his primitive light-nature 
which is the end of all perfection. There I have been at rest for 
aye, asleep in the dormant understanding of the eternal Father, 
-immanent,-unspoken. I trow, seen in that light, any bit of stick 
would be an angel and would be intelligent, and not alone intel- 
ligent : it would be pure intellect in that first pure nature which 
is the perfection of enlightenment. Out of his light-nature he has 
been eternally begetting.me.his one begotten Son in the express 
image of his eternal Fatherhood to the end that I may be the 
Father and beget him of whom.Iam begotten. Like one who stands 
before some lofty peak hailing, ‘Art there?’ And echo answers 
back, ‘ Art there?’ He cries, ‘Come forth! ’—‘ Come forth!’ 
the voice replies. This is what God does: he begets his Son into 
the summit of the soul. By the fact of his bearing his Son into 
me I bear him back into the Father. It was nothing else, God’s 
virgin birth, than his getting his Son back again. 

I used to wonder (it is many years ago) whether I should be 
asked why one blade of grass is so unlike another; and as it 
happened I was asked why they are so different. I said, it is 
more marvellous they are so much alike. One philosopher says that 
the blades of grass are all different owing to the superfluity of 
the goodness of God which he pours out abundantly into all crea- 
tures the more to show his majesty. I said it is more wonderful 
how much the grass-blades are alike, explaining that just as all 
the angels are the same in their original pure nature so all the 

' grasses are the same and all things are identical. 

I was thinking as I came along that one might here in time 
succeed in mastering God. Supposing I were up on high and 
told him, ‘Come up hither,’ that would be difficult. But if I 
said, ‘ Bide down below,’ that would be very easy. That is what 
God does. If aman is lowly God is unable to withhold his goodness ; 
he is obliged to sink himself, to pour himself, into that lowly soul, 
on the lowest of the lowly bestowing himself most of all and 
bestowing himself wholly. What God bestows is his nature, and 
his nature is his goodness and his goodness is his love. All joy 
and sorrow come from love. 

I was thinking on the way as I was walking here, I should not 
have come were I not prepared to get wet for friendship’s sake. 
If you have all got wet let me get wet too. Good and ill both 
come from love. Man should not be afraid of God. Some fear 
is harmful. The right sort of fear.is the fear.of losing God. It 
behoves man to love God since God loves man consummately. 
The masters say that all things are in travail, labouring to beget 

224 MEISTER ECKHART 

themselves in the image of the Father. They talk of earth as 
“fleeing from the heavens ; of her fleeing down and reaching heaven 
downwards; of her escaping upwards to encounter the lowest 
of the heavens. Earth has no escape from heaven: flee she up 
or flee she down heaven still invades her, energising her, fructi- 
fying her whether for her weal or for her woe. God treats man the 
same: weening to escape him we run into his arms, for all corners 
are exposed to him. God will give birth to his Son in thee whether 
thou like it or loathe it ; whether thou sleepest or wakest God goes 
on with his work. That we have no sense of it is because our 
tongue is furred with the slime of creatures and possesses not the 
salt of divine affection. If we had godly love we should savour 
God and all the works God ever wrought and receive all things 
from God and be doing the same work as he does. In this sameness 
we are all his only Son. : 
[ God created the soul according to his own most perfect nature 
that she might be the bride of his only-begotten Son. He know- 
ing this full well decided to go forth out of the private chamber 
| of his eternal Fatherhood where he has slept for aye and be 
| proclaimed abroad while inwardly abiding in the first beginning of 
| his primitive light-nature. So lifting up the tent of his eternal 
_/ glory the Son proceeded out of the Most High to go and fetch his 
“, lady whom his Father had eternally given him to wife and restore 
her to her former high estate. For this reason he went forth 
and comes leaping like a love-impassioned swain. He came forth 
only to return again into his chamber, into the silent darkness of 
; his mysterious Fatherhood. He proceeded out of the supreme 
_ in order to go in again accompanied by his bride and show her the 
\ hidden mystery of his secret Godhead, where he is at peace with 
“himself and with all creatures. 2 

In principio signifies, in the beginning of all things. It also 
means the end of all things, since the first beginning is because of 
the last end. I trow that God himself is not at rest as being the 
first beginning : he is at rest where he is the end and cessation of 
existence, not that existence is then brought to naught: it is 
brought to its ultimate perfection. What is the last end? It is 
the mystery of the darkness of the eternal Godhead which is 
unknown and never has been known and never shall be known. 
Therein God abides to himself unknown, and the light of the 
eternal Father has been shining there for aye, and the darkness 
does not comprehend the light. May we find this truth, So help 

us the truth whereof we speak. Amen. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 225 

LXXXIX! 
1. THE WORD OF GOD. 

Christ said, ‘Blessed is the man who hears God’s Word and; | 
keeps it.’ The Father himself hears nothing, sees nothing, says 

nothing, begets nothing excepting his own Word, and in this Word. , ; ‘ | 

the Father sees and hears and brings forth himself, even_this 

Word and all things, his godhood in principle and himself in nature : 
this. Word with the same nature in another Personi Observe his 
mode of speech. The Father, fructifying, brings forth his own 
nature all at once, as understanding, in his eternal Word; not 
at will nor as an act of will. That which is done or spoken by 
the power of his will he can in that same power refrain from if he 
will. Not so with the Father and his eternal Word ; whether he 
would or no he is obliged to speak his Word, to procreate unceas- 
ingly: this is rooted, so to say, in the Father-nature as deeply 
as the Father is himself. The Father speaks his Word then, 
willingly but not from will, naturally, not from nature. In this 
Word the Father speaks my and thy and every individual human 

soul as this same Word. In this utterance thou and I are the. 

natural Son of God like the Word itself. As I have already said, 
the Father knows nothing but this Word and himself and all divine 
nature and all things in this Word, and everything he knows therein 
is like the Word and is the Word itself in nature and in truth. 

When the Father gives thee, reveals to thee, this gnosis, he is 
giving thee his life, his being and his deity, really and truly, all 
together. The human father shares his nature with his son but 
not his life or being. You can prove this by the fact that if the 
father dies the son may go on living or the son may die and the 
father go on living. With a common life and being they would 
live or die together. They are separate individuals as regards 
their life and being, and in this they differ from the heavenly Father 
and his Son. If I take a light from one place and put it in another 
these lights, as lights, are separate things, for one may go on 
burning while the other has gone out, and vice versa. Thus they 
are neither one nor yet eternal. 

But, as I was saying, the heavenly Father gives thee his eternal 

Word, and in that Werd-he-gives-thee his own life, his being and 

his godhood, all at once. for the Father and the Word are two 

Persons and one life, one being, undivided. When the Father 

finds thee mentally seeing into this same light, this light itself in 

its own proper nature, as he sees himself and all things in his 

paternal power in his Word this very Word in utterance and in 
1 Fragment. Pfeiffer’s text seems to be a compound of several sermons. 

15 

Dee” 

226 MEISTER ECKHART 

truth, then he gives to thee the power of begetting, with himself, 
thyself and all things and his own power in the shape of this same 
Word. Then with the Father thou art ever giving birth to thyself 
and all things in the here and now. In this light, as I have said, 
the Father sees no difference between thee and him; no more 
inequality, whether more or less, than between himself and his 
own Word. For in this light the Father and the soul and all 
- things and the Word itself are one. 
‘ 

2. THE WORD OF THE SOUL! 

—Which of the words my soul speaks is most like the eternal 
Word ? 

—There are two words which most fully reveal the eternal 
Word as well as the love that flows therefrom, so St Augustine 
says. One word is the Word of God and the other is the word of 
herself which the soul speaks. 

— How does she speak the Word of God ? 

— See, God is in all things, therefore God is also in thy memory ; 
and when the soul in her understanding gives birth to the image of 
God, as it lies in her memory, then God is the word of thy soul, 
and when this word proceeds into the will it becomes love therein. 
Thus God Father is in thy memory and God Word in thy intellect 
and God Spirit in thy love, though but one God. 

—May we say then, generally, that God speaks his own Word 
in the soul ? i 

— Yes, for when God speaks his Word in himself the Word 
acquires true distinction of Person ; but when our heart speaks the 
Word of God from memory, the word spoken by God does not 
acquire true distinction of real Persons, it is only a likeness and 
reflection of the eternal Word. 

—When the Word of God is born in him and his memory speaks 
this Word, how can it be said : God speaks his Word in the soul ? 
| —To say, God speaks his Word in the soul is true; and to say 
| the soul speaks this Word in her intellect is also true, for God and 
ıman speak the Word of God together in our life. As a woman 
cannot bear her child before she has conceived it, so memory 

must first be big with the child she bears. 

XC 
ELIZABETH’S FULL TIME CAME 

Elizabeth impletum est tempus pariendi et peperit filium (Luc. 1,7). 
* Now Elizabeth’s full time came that she should be delivered and 
1 See Greith, p. 102. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 227 

she brought forth a son and called him John. Then said the people, 
What manner of child shall this be, for the hand of the Lord is 
with him.’ One scripture says, ‘ The greatest gift is that we are 
God’s child’: that he begets his Son in us. The soul who is God’s 
child, in whom the Son of God is born, in her shall nothing else be 
brought to birth. God’s ultimate purpose is birth. He is not 
content until he brings his Son to birth in us. Nor is the soul 
content until the Son of God is born in her. It is thence grace 
springs. Grace is infused therein, grace doing nothing: its work 
is its becoming. It flows out of the essence of God and into the 
essence of the soul, not into her powers. 

When the time was fully come grace was born. Time is ful- 
filled when time is done. He who in time has his heart established 
in eternity and in whom all temporal things are dead, in him is 
the fullness of time. ‘ Rejoice in God all the time,’ says St Paul. 
He rejoices all the time who rejoices above time and apart from 
_ time. Three things prevent a man from knowing God at all. 
The first is time, the second body, and the third is multiplicity 
or number. As long as these three things are in me God is not 
in me nor is he working in me really. St Augustine says, ‘ Because 
the soul is greedy, because she wants to have and hold so much, 
therefore she reaches into time and, snatching at the things of 
time and number, loses what she already has.’ While there is 
more and less in thee God cannot dwell nor work in thee. These 
things must go out for God to come in; except thou have them 
in a higher, better way: multitude summed up to one in thee. 
Then the more of multiplicity the more there is of unity, for the 
one is changed into the other. 

I said on one occasion, unity unifies multiplicity but multi- 
plicity unites not unity. Once having gotten over things, every- 
thing in us raised up to a higher power, we shall never be cast 
down. If I minded God and God alone, had nothing over me but 
God, then nothing would be hard and surely nothing troublesome. 
St Augustine says, ‘ Lord, when I turn to thee, all hardship, suffer- 
ing and toil are taken from me.’ Once gotten beyond time and 
temporalities we are free and joyous all the time; then is the 
fullness of time, then the Son of God is born in thee. I once said 
that in the fullness of time God sent his Son. If aught is born in 
thee except the Son thou hast gotten nothing of the Holy Ghost 
and neither is grace working in thee. The origin of the Holy 
Ghost is the Son. Were there no Son there would be no Holy 
Ghost. The Holy Ghost does not proceed, it cannot blossom 
forth, except where the Father is in travail with his Son. Then 
he gives him all he has, natural and essential. It is in this giving 
that the holy Breath wells out. And it is God’s intention to give 

228 MEISTER ECKHART 

himself entirely to us. As fire, to consume the wood must pene- 
trate the wood, finding the wood unlike. That is a matter of 
time. First it makes it warm, then hot, then it smokes and 
crackles, on account of its unlikeness ; and the hotter the wood 
grows the quieter and stiller it becomes, and the liker to the fire 
the more peaceful it becomes till at last it turns to fire altogether. 
For fire to consume the wood there must be no unlikeness. 

In truth, which is God, if thou intendest aught but God or 
seekest aught but God alone, the work thou doest is not thine 
nor is it God’s. Thy intention in thy work that also is thy work. 
That which energises in me is my father and I am subordinate to 
him. It is impossible in nature that one should have two fathers : 
in nature one father is the rule. When other things are all ful- 
filled and done with, then there is this birth. A thing that fills 
is everywhere in contact with its boundary, nowhere falling short ; 
it has length, breadth, height and depth. If it had height and no 
length, breadth or depth it would not fill. St Paul says, ‘ Pray 
that ye may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the 
height, breadth, length and depth.’ 

- These three things stand for three kinds of knowledge. The 
first is sensible. The eye sees from afar what is outside it. The 
second is rational and is a great deal higher. The third corre- 
sponds to an exalted power of the soul, a power so high and noble 
it is able to see God face to face in his own self. This power has 
naught in common with naught, it knows no yesterday or day 
before, no mortow or day after (for in eternity there is no yester- 
day or morrow): therein it is the present now; the happenings 
of a thousand years ago, a thousand years to come, are there in 
the present and the antipodes the same as here. This power 
descries God in his vestibule. ‘In him, over him, through him,’ 
says the scripture. Jn means, in the Father; over him is in the 
Son; through him, in the Holy Ghost. There is no truth but 
contains the whole of truth, as St Augustine says. This power 
knows all things in the truth. From this power nothing is veiled. 
According to the scriptures, men’s heads should be bare, the 
women’s covered. The women are the lower powers, which are 
veiled. The man is the power which is bare and face to face. 

‘What wonders shall come from this child ? ’ Speaking lately 
to some people who are very likely here to-day, I said, nothing is 
so hidden but it shall be revealed. All that is naught shall be 
done away, hidden and not thought of any more. We shall know 
nothing of naught, shall have nothing in common with naught. 
All creatures are a mere naught. That which is not here or there, 
which is an oblivion of all creatures, that is fullness of being. 
I told them how nothing that is in us shall be hid, that we shall 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 229 

disclose and give up to God everything we find within ourselves, 
willing or unwilling, good or bad, whatever we are prone to we 
shall die to in the truth. If we discover everything to God he 
shall discover to us in return everything he has: he shall hide 
from us in truth absolutely nothing of all that he has gotten, not 
wisdom, truth nor holiness nor deity nor nothing whatsoever. 
As God lives this is in truth the case. If we disclose nothing to 
him, no wonder if he reveals nothing to us: we must both do the 
same, as we to him so he to us. 

It is lamentable how some people think themselves so far 
advanced, so one with God, although they have not yet abandoned 
self at all but hug themselves, like trivial things, in fortune and 
misfortune. They are precious far from what they think. They 
are full of notions and intentions. I sometimes say, if a man who 
seeks nothing finds nothing, what right has he to complain ? 
After all, he has found what he sought. To seek or purpose 
aught is to seek or purpose naught and to pray for aught is to 
get nothing. But a man with no ulterior motive, who sets his 
mind on God and God alone, to that man God unbosoms himself 
wholly and gives him all the things concealed within his heart and 
for his very own as they are God’s own, no more nor less, provided 
he is after God and not things in between. What wonder if a 
sick man does not relish meat and wine? He cannot taste the 
meat and wine ; his tongue wherewith he tastes is covered with a 
coating which is nasty and bitter by reason of the sickness of the 
man : he does not taste the proper flavour, everything tastes bitter. 
He is right : things are rendered bitter by means and hindrances. 
When the hindrance is removed he tastes things properly. As 
long as there is anything between, God will never taste like himself 
to us and life will seem very hard and bitter. 

I once said that virgins follow the lamb whereyer it goes, close 
behind. Some are virgins, some are not, whatever they appear. 
Wherever this lamb goes the virgins follow, some only while it 
leads them in the pleasant places that they like. When it takes 
them into suffering, travail and discomfort they turn back and 
refuse to follow, and these are not virgins for all they seem to be. 
Some say, Lord, I want to go in honour, riches, comfort. Well, 
if the lamb has led you by that way I wish you well in following 
his footsteps. True virgins will follow the lamb through the 
highways and byways, ‘whithersoever it may lead, and have no 
pity on themselves, befall what may. ‘In the fullness of time there 
was born John,’ that is, grace, as I have explained. May all things 
be fulfilled in us and grace be born in us, So help us God. Amen. 

230 : MEISTER ECKHART 

XCI 
’ REJOICE O HEAVENS 

Laudate celi et exultet terra (Is. 49,,). Ego sum lux mundi 
(Joh. 8,2). I quote two Latin texts: one from the lesson, the 
words of Isaiah the prophet, ‘Rejoice, O heavens and earth, 
God hath comforted his people and will have mercy on his poor 
ones.” The other comes out of the gospel. Our Lord’s saying, 
*T am the light of the world: he that followeth me walketh not 
in darkness ; he shall find and have the light of life.’ 

First take the words of the prophet, ‘ Rejoice, O heavens and 
earth.’ Verily, verily, by God, by God and as God liveth, at the 
least good deed, the least good will, the least good desire, all the 
saints in heaven as well as all the angels rejoice with such great 
joy as all the joys of this world cannot equal. With the saints, 
the higher the more joyful, and all their joy combined is but a 
speck to the delight that God takes in this act. God plays and 
laughs in this good work, whereas all other works, those which 
redound not to God’s glory, are dust and ashes in God’s sight. 
Therefore he cries, ‘ Ye heavens, rejoice! ' God has comforted his 
people.’ 

Consider the words, ‘God has comforted his people and will 
have mercy on his poor.’ ‘His poor,’ he says. The poor are left 
to God alone, for no one troubles about them. Anyone who has 
a friend, a poor one, if he does not forget him and if he has posses- 
sions and is wise, will say ‘Thou art my servant,’ and he is soon 
forgot ; but to the beggar he will fling, ‘God guard thee,’ and be 
ashamed of him. The poor are left to God: wherever they go 
they may come upon God and have God in all places; God takes 
them in charge, for they are abandoned to him. Wherefore he 
says in the gospel, * Blessed are the poor.’ 

Now take the words, ‘I am the light of the world.’ ‘I am,’ 
that touches the essence. According to philosophers, all creatures 
can say ‘I,’ for the word is common property; but the word 
sum, am, none can really,say but God alone. Sum signifies one 
thing which is big with good things as a whole, and it is denied to 
creatures that any one of them should have all human consolation. 
If I had my heart’s desire but my finger hurt me, then I should 
have it not, for with a wounded finger, while it hurts me, I lack 
entire comfort. Bread comforts a man when he is hungry, whereas 
if he is thirsty bread will give him no more comfort than a stone ; 
and the same with clothes, when he is cold, but being hot no clothes 
will comfort him ; and this applies to creatures, hence all creatures 
have a certain bitterness of heart. True, creatures have this 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 231 

comfort for their souls, that none can deprive them of their rights. 
Their property is all in God whatever possessions they may have in 
creatures. As it is written in the Book of Wisdom, ‘In thee all 
good belongs to my soul.’ Creature comfort is imperfect, it 
has innate defect. But God’s comfort is complete, with no 
shortcoming ; it is whole and perfect and he needs must give it 
thee, for he cannot work unless he gives thee himself first. God 
is foolishly in love with us, it seems he has forgotten heaven and 
earth and all his happiness and deity, his entire business seems 
with me alone, to give me everything to comfort me; he gives it 
to me suddenly, he gives it to me wholly, he gives it to me perfect, 
he gives it all the time and he gives it to all creatures. 

‘He that followeth me walketh not in darkness.’ Philosophers 
attribute three powers to the soul. The first power ever seeks the 
sweetest. The second ever seeks the highest. The third one ever 
seeks the best, and the soul is too noble ever to rest anywhere but 
in her source whence drops what goodness is made out of. Behold, 
so sweet God’s consolation, all creatures go in quest of him, 
hunting after him. Nay, I say more: it is creature’s life and 
being, this searching after God, this hunting for him. 

Peradventure ye will say, Where is this God all creatures are 
in quest of and whence they get their being and their life? (Fain 
would I speak of the Godhead whence comes all our happiness.) 
The Father says, ‘Son, this day do I beget thée in the reflection 
of the saints.’ Where is this God? Where the saints leave off 
there I begin. Where is this God? In the Father. Where is 
this God? In eternity. No man ever found God. As the wise 
man says, ‘ Lord, thou art a hidden God.’ Where is this God ? 
Suppose a man in hiding and he stirs, he shows his whereabouts 
thereby and God does the same. No one could ever have found 
God; he gave himself away. One of the saints has said, ‘I 
sometimes experience such sweetness in me that, forgetting 
creatures altogether, I dissolve right into thee. But when I 
try to embrace thee Lord, lo, thou art fled. What wouldst thou 
then ? Why draw me on only to run away ? If thou dost love 
me wherefore dost thou shun me? Nay, Lord, it is to make me 
more eager to obtain.’ The prophet says, ‘my God.’— Who told 
thee that I am thy God ? ’—* Lord, I cannot rest except in thee, 
I have no well-being but in thee.’ May we thus seek God and also 
find him, So help us God. Amen. 

232 MEISTER ECKHART 

XCII 
GOD-PARENTS AND GOD-CHILDREN 

Posui vos ut eatis et fructum afferatis (Joh. 15,,). Christ said to 
his disciples, ‘1 have set you to go and bring forth fruit.” God 
spake to them and to us all who are in darkness. Being in the 
dark we need a light to walk by. But Christ says: ‘I am the 
light of the world.’ If we keep in the true love of our head we shall 
be lighted by Christ. For a taper goes on burning at the tip 
in virtue of its contact with the flame which consumes the matter 
it supplies and changes it into itself. 

Observe. When Christ said to his disciples, ‘I have set you 
to go,’ he referred to our being taken up into the light of grace. 
The prophet says, ‘ I was sitting when he took me up into himself.’ 
Sitting, we stop groping and, in the light, can see our way. To 
wit, the way of virtue. That is-the meaning of Christ’s words, 
‘I have set you to go.’ Sitting is not going. We cannot go the 
right way without first sitting in the light of contemplation and 
making out the way to take; all our works must be a light to 
lighten our neighbour’s darkness. 

Now Dionysius says:+ ‘These, who have thus gone out of 
themselves and are living in the light of truth, these (I say) 
are the christened, they are god-children and godfathers.’ Bishop 
Albertus expounds this as follows: God-children are they who, 
reading or hearing the holy scriptures read, take them to heart 
and show them forth in good works whereby they ultimately 
find the truth in God. The christened again are dead in God, 
there is no longer anything alive in them but God. As St Paul 
says, ‘ We are dead and our life is hid with Christ in God.’ But. 
the most perfect of all are the godfathers, who are drowned in the 
unfathomableness of God ; not only does God live in them but 
they are alive in God and there is now in them the beginning of 
eternal life. 

Consider now those who are god-children. Comprehending the 
scriptures in the light of faith they come into the dew of grace and 
in this gracious dew inhale the fragrance of the path of life eternal. 
As saith the Bride in the Book of Love, ‘ Take me along with thee, 
out in thy desert, within in thy fastness.’ Out in the desert means 
detached from creatures; the inner fastness is the subjective 
certainty of truth which neither life nor death can alter. Such are 
these god-children, sons of power and wisdom and goodness. To 
them our Lord cries in the Book of Love, ‘ How beautiful are thy 
feet with shoes, O prince’s daughter!’ The slioes being the holy 
life put on the feet of love and knowledge in the desire to walk 

ö SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 233 

therein. But the christened are in mystical union with God and 
are actually leading the life of God. What shall I say of these ? 
In their eating and drinking, their sleeping and their entire wont 
there is nothing found but God, did we but know it. Burn them, 
they yield but the test of divinity, the sweetness of the Holy 
Ghost, wherein they are gotten fullofsap. But this none knoweth 
save the children of true light and him they dwell in, namely 
God. The children of darkness know it not, whose hearts are 
filled with the poison of everlasting death. Wherefore the light 
is turned to darkness in them and the eternal sweet to bitterness. 
God light us with the light we used to bask in in his Son eternally, 
so shall we escape from darkness into the true light ! 

But the third class, yclept godfathers, these climbing hill and 
mountain have followed the track of the true sons with will and 
knowledge, and the flaming heat of the Holy Ghost having burnt 
up all their matter, they show now only the one light in God. 
In this light they have come to rest, at peace after their labours, 
the peace of absolute consciousness, a peace which is never dis- 
turbed. Thought fails in speaking of these fathers, for they have 
received all good and perfect gifts from the Father of lights and 
have reached the goal of virtue. This goal set John, the soaring 
eagle, wondering in the Apocalypse. And Christ answered him, 
saying, ‘ I am the first without beginning and the last that has no 
end.’ Amen. 

XCIII 
THE CROSSING 

Exhibite membra vestra servire justitie in sanctificationem 
(Rom. 6,5). St Paul says, ‘ Yield your members servants to 
righteousness unto holiness, for the wages of sin is death but the 
reward of virtue is eternal life.’ The soul has but two members to 
offer for service of the sort acceptable to God, these are will and 
understanding. 

One master says, God exerts the whole force of his will in loving 
the soul. But my point is that God’s sole object in loving the soul 
is to make her love him in return. Again, I contend that God 
devotes his divine nature to pleasing the soul, to making her like 
him and enjoy his society and be friendly with him and love him. 
Thirdly, I hold that this love which comes up in the ground of the 
soul, sprouting out of the ground of the Godhead, that this (I 
say) is the self-same love wherewith God loves his one-begotten 
Son, and nothing less. And fourthly, if so be that man is planted 
in God as he is in creature, then I maintain it is in the very ground 

234 é MEISTER ECKHART 

of the Holy Ghost’s being and becoming, the very ground where 
the Holy Ghost is coming out in blossom. 

St Paul does well to say, ‘ Yield your members.’ For intellect, — 
albeit natural, is too exalted to be moved by mundane things. 
Yet, rendered to the source whence it proceeded forth it is absorbed 
in God, and that which absorbs it it becomes. Will, that is 
will proper, is as such omnipotent. But thousands die without 
acquiring this genuine will. Doubtless they had desires and 
inclinations like other animals. One man does something trifling, 
does it just once and sends it on the wings of praise and thank- 
fulness up to its source. Another one does some important work 
which occupies him long and constantly, and yet this little thing done 
once is more acceptable to God than the other man’s great work 
which cost him so much time and trouble. Why? I will tell 
you. Because the trivial act was carried up past time into the 
now of eternity, therefore it was to God’s entire satisfaction. 
Though one should live through all the time from Adam and all 
the time to come before the judgment day doing good works, 
yet he who, energising in his highest, purest part, crosses from 
time into eternity, verily in the sight of God this man conceives 
and does far more than anyone who lives throughout all past and 
future time, because this now includes the whole of time. 

One master says that in this crossing over time into the now, 
each power of the soul will surpass itself. The five powers must 
pass into her collective power (or common sense), and common 
sense will vanish into the formless power wherein nothing forms. 
Intellect and will are transcended. True, grace is a creature, but 
by no means altogether. The soul has no inherent grace excepting 
in her ground, and above this ground of the soul grace is indigenous. 
Therein grace does nothing, although it is effective in the uses of 
her powers; but in the ground of the soul grace, happiness and 
God’s ground are one and the same life wherein God is living. 
There the power behind the eye is as noble as the understanding ; 
there foot and eye rank equal. What the soul is in her ground has 
never been determined. But Paul says, ‘The grace of God is 
eternal life.’ Paul also says, ‘The wages of sin is death.’ The‘ 
deaths men die are all of them as nothing to the death of the 
soul who is divorced from God, from which may God preserve 
us. Amen. 

XCIV 
THE SOUL 

St Paul says, ‘ Put off self, put on Christ.” In abandoning our- 
self we initiate Christ and holiness and happiness and are ennobled. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 235 

The prophet marvelled at two things. First, at God’s doings with 
the sun and moon and stars. And secondly he marvelled at the 
soul, at the prodigious things God does and has done with her and 
for her sake, yet do what prodigies he may she still preserves the 
absolute dispassion which befits one of her noble lineage. Mark 
the nobility of her descent. I make a letter of the alphabet like 

the image of that letter in my mind, not like my mind itself. 
And so with God. God makes things in general like the universal 
image of them in himself, not like himself. Certain things he has 
specially made like emanations of his own, such as goodness, 
wisdom and other so-called attributes of God. But the soul he 
has made not merely like the image in himself nor like anything 
proceeding from himself that is predicated of him, but he made her 
like himself, nay, like he is, all told: like his nature, his essence, 
his emanating-immanent activity, his ground wherein he is 
subsisting in himself, wherein he is begetting his alone-begotten 
Son and where the Holy Ghost comes into flower : in the likeness 
of his in-dwelling out-going work did God make the soul. 

It is a law of nature that fluids run downhill into anything 
adapted to receive them ; the higher not receiving from the lower 
but the lower from the higher. Now God is higher than the soul, 
and hence there is a constant flow of God into the soul, which 
cannot miss her. The soul may well miss it, but as long as a man- 
keeps right under God he immediately catches this divine influence 
straight out of God. Nor is he subject to aught else, not fear nor 
pain nor pleasure nor anything that is not God. Put thyself 
therefore right under God and thou shalt receive his inflowing 
divinity wholly and solely. The soul does not receive from God 
as from a stranger, as the air does the light of the sun, which it 
takes as a foreign intrusion. The soul receives her God not as a 
stranger nor as inferior to God, for inferior is both different and 
distant. 

Philosophers say the soul receives as a light from the light, 
wherein is nothing foreign or remote. There is something in the 
soul wherein God simply is, and according to philosophers this is 
a nameless thing and has no proper name. It neither has nor is 
a definite entity, for it is not this or that nor here nor there; what 
it is it is from another wherewith it is the same ; the one streams 
into it and it into the one. Hence the exhortation ‘ Enter into 
God in holiness,’ for here is the source of the soul’s whole life and 
being. This (light) is wholly in God and her other without him, 
so in this one the soul is ever in God, provided she smother it not 
and extinguish it in her. 

Philosophers say this (light) is present in God and never goes 
out in him and God is ever in it. I say, God has ever been in it 

236 MEISTER ECKHART 

and of it eternally. The union of man and God is not a matter 
of grace (for grace is creature and creature has nothing to do with 
it), except in the ground of divinity, where the three Persons are 
one in nature and it (grace) is that nature itself. Wherefore an 
thou wilt, God and the universe are thine. That is, if thou wilt 
put off self and things : doff the habit of thy personality and take 
thyself in thy divinity. 

The philosophers say that human nature has nothing to do with 
time ; that it is deeper-seated and more firmly rooted in a man than 
he is in himself. God took on human nature and united it with 
his own Person. Thus human nature was God who donned man’s 
nature only, not any individual man. Would’st thou be very 
Christ and God ? Put off, then, whatever the eternal Word did 
not put on. The eternal Word never put on a person. So do 
thou strip thyself of everything personal and selfish and keep 
just thy bare humanity; thus thou shalt be to the eternal Word 
exactly what his human nature is to him. Thy human nature is 
no different from his: they are identical: what it is in him it is 
in thee. And hence I said at Paris that every prophecy of holy 
scripture is fulfilled in the just man; for being perfect, the 
whole promise of the old and new testaments is accomplished in 
thee. 

How to be perfect ? There are two aspects of the question. 
The prophet says, ‘ In the fullness of time the Son was sent.’ Now 
fullness of time is of two kinds. In the first place a thing is ful- 
filled when it is done, as day is done at eventide. So when time 
drops from thee thy time is fulfilled. Again, time is fulfilled when 
it is finished, that is, in eternity. Time ends when there is no 
before and after: when all that is is here and now and thou seest 
at a glance all that has ever happened and shall ever happen. 
Here there is no before nor after; everything is present, and in this 
immediate vision I possess all things. This is the perfection of 
time, and I am perfect and I am truly the only Son and Christ. 
May we attain to this fullness of time. So help us God. Amen. 

XCV 
BUT NOW THE LIGHT IN GOD 

Eratis enim aliquando tenebre, nunc autem lux in domino (Ephes. 
5,). St Paul says, ‘ For ye were sometimes darkness but now the 
light in God.’ The prophets walking in the light perceived and 
knew the truth umbraged in the procession of the Holy Ghost. 
Sometimes they were moved to return to the world and speak 
of things they knew to be conducive to our happiness, thinking 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 287 

to teach us to know God. Whereupon they would fall dumb, 
becoming tongue-tied and for three reasons. 

First, because the good they knew by sight in God was too 
immense and too mysterious to take definite shape in their under- 
standing. Such ideas as formed were so unlike what they had 
seen in God, were such a travesty of the reality, that they held 
their peace for fear oflying. Another reason was, that what they 
had gotten in God rivalled God’s very self in its immensity and 
sublimity and yielded no idea nor any form for them to express. 
Thirdly, they were dumb because the hidden truth they saw in 
God, the mystery they found there, was ineffable. So it befell 
from time to time that, coming back and speaking of these things, 
they slipped, through lapses from the truth, into gross matter and 
tried to teach us to know God by means of infernal creature things. 

Paul says, * but now the light in God.’ Aliquando, to those who 
are instructed, is the same as when and expresses time, which is 
what keeps the light from reaching us. There is no greater 
obstacle to God than time. He means not time alone but temporali- 
ties ; not only temporal things but temporal affections ; not only. 
temporal affections but the very taint and aroma of time; for 
as, where an apple has lain the smell lingers, so with the contact 
of time. According to our best authorities the visible heavens 
and the sun and stars have nothing to do with time beyond bare 
contact with it. This I cite as showing that the soul, which 
towers high above the heavens, has, at her very summit, no 
connection with time at all. Many times I have explained about 
the act in God, the birth wherein the Father bears his one-begotten 
Son whose procession causes the interior blossoming of the Holy 
Ghost, that the Spirit proceeds from both and that in this pro- 
cession the soul comes leaping forth, the image of the Godhead 
being sealed into the soul in this procession; and that in the 
return of the three Persons the soul goes back, re-informed into 
her primitive and formless form. Or as Paul puts it, “now the 
light in God.’ He does not say, ‘ Ye are the light’ but * now 
the light.’ Meaning, as I have often said, that to know things 
(really) we must know them in their cause. The philosophers tell 
us that things are suspended in their birth as in a look-out over 
their existence. The Father gives birth to his Son now. In this 
eternal birth wherein the Father generates his Son, the soul comes 
into her existence which is the image of the Godhead imprinted 
in her soul. 

It was mooted in the schools and maintained by some of the 
professors, that God imprints his image in the soul as a picture 
is painted upon canvas, and it fades. This was refuted. Others 
suggested with more truth, that God leaves in the soul a permanent 

238 MEISTER ECKHART 

impression of the nature of an abiding intention, as thus : my wish 
of to-day is my purpose of to-morrow, the idea of which is kept 
alive by my actual thinking of it, just as, they said, God’s works 
are done. For if the carpenter were perfect at his work he would 
not need materials: he would no sooner think a house than, lo, 
it would be made. And so with works in God: he thinks them 
and behold they are. 

Then came a third professor who spoke most truly of them all. 
He pointed out that yonder no work is done at all: it is the now, 
being without becoming, newness without renewing, and this 
existence is his essence. God’s content is too subtile for renewal. 
And also in the soul there is a subtile nature too fine and rare to be 
renewed. In God it is all the here and now ; unrenewable. 

There are four points I had intended to discuss: the subtile 
nature of God, the subtile nature of the soul, the work of God and 
the work of the soul. These I must leave over for the present. 

XCVI 
RIDDANCE 

Qui audit me non confundetur (Eccl. 2459). The eternal 
wisdom of the Father says, ‘ He that heareth me is not ashamed. 
(If he is ashamed he is ashamed of his shame.) He that worketh 

-in me does not sin. He that reveals me and fears me shall have 

everlasting life.’ I will consider first these words of the eternal 
wisdom, ‘He that heareth me is not ashamed (or, confounded).’ 
To hear the eternal wisdom of the Father he must be within, at 
home and by himself. 

Three things prevent our hearing the eternal Word. The first 
is body, the second number, and the third is time. If we were 
rid of these three things we should be living in eternity and in the 
spirit, solitaries in the desert listening to the eternal Word. But 
our Lord says, “ No man heareth my word or my teaching till he 
be free from self.” To hear God’s Word demands absolute self- 
surrender. Hearer and heard are one in the eternal Word. The 
subject the eternal Father teaches is his essence, his nature, his 
whole godhood, which he divulges to us altogether in his Son, 
teaching us to be the Son himself. 

A man who has gone out of himself and is the only-begotten 
Son owns what is proper to the only Son. God’s work and teach- 
ing are all done in his Son. God works with the sole object of 
getting us to be his only Son. As soon as he perceives that we 

' are his only Son, God makes for us impetuously ; he comes well- 
nigh to shattering his essence, naughting his very self, in his 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 239 

rash haste to show us the whole abysm of his Godhead, the fullness 
of his essential nature. God flies to make this ours. as it is his. 
Here God enjoys and delights in his plenitude. And this man who 
is within God’s love and ken is none other than what God is him- 
self. Loving thyself thou lovest all men as thyself. While thou 
lovest anyone less than thine own self thou dost not love thyself in 
truth : not till thou lovest all men as thyself, all men in one man 
who is both God and man. The man who loves himself and all 
men as himself is righteous, absolutely just. 

Sometimes people say, ‘I like my friends and _ benefactors 
better than other people.’ But I say that is wrong, imperfect. 
True, we must make shift with it as we have to do with a side 
wind to cross the sea: it will take us over. Like our preference 
for one man above another, it is natural. To love another as 
myself means that I would as lief his fate for good and ill, for 
life and death, happened to me as him, which would amount to 
perfect understanding. 

As bearing on this subject St Paul says, ‘ I would I were divorced 
from God for ever, for God and for my friends’ sake.’ And as you 
know, to leave God for an instant is to leave God eternally and to 
leave God at all is hell torment. What does St Paul mean then 
by wishing to be divorced from God? Doctors debate whether 
St Paul was upon the way to his perfection or whether he was 
perfect ? I say he was perfect, otherwise he could not have said 
this. 

I will put into plain words what St Paul means by wishing to 
depart from God. Man’s last and highest leave-taking is leaving 
God for God. St Paul left God for God: he left everything he 
could give or take of God, every concept of God. In leaving these 
he left God for God since God remained to him in his essential 
self; not as a concept of himself, nor yet as an acquired thing, 
but God in his essential actuality. This is no case of give and 
take between himself and God: it is the one and perfect union. 
Here man is the true man whom suffering can no more befall 
than it can befall the divine essence, for, as I have said before, 
there is something in the soul so nearly kin to God that it is one 
and not united. It is one; it has naught in common with naught 
and is naught to aught. Anything created is naught. It is 
remote and alien from creature. If man were wholly this he 
would be wholly uncreated and uncreaturely; if everything 
temporal were so, were comprehended in this one, it would be 
nothing else than the unity itself. Were I to find myself but for 
a single instant in this case, I should esteem myself of no more 
moment than a worm. 

God gives to everything alike, and as flowing forth from God 

240 MEISTER ECKHART 

things are all equal; angels, man and creatures all proceed from 
God alike in their first emanation. To take things in their primal 
emanation is to take them all alike. If here in time they are 
alike, in God in eternity they are much more so. Any flea as it is 
in God is nobler than the highest of the angels in himself. Things 
are all the same in God : they are God himself. 

God delights so in this likeness that he pours out his whole 
nature, his whole substance into it, in his own self. The joy and 
satisfaction of it are ineffable. It is like a horse turned loose in 
a lush meadow giving vent to his horse-nature by galloping full- 
tilt about the field: he enjoys it, and it is his nature. And just 
in the same way God’s joy and satisfaction in his likes finds vent 
in his pouring out his entire nature and his being into this likeness, 
for he is this likeness himself. 

It is a question whether those angels who are dwelling here with 
us to serve and guard us have less likeness in their joys than the 
ones abiding in eternity : is it in any sense a drawback to them to . 
be serving and protecting us? No, not at all. Their joy is 
undiminished, so is too their likeness ; for the work of the angels 
is the will of God and the will of God is the work of the angels. 
Neither in their joy, their likeness nor their work are these angels 
handicapped. If God should bid an angel go pick the cater- 
pillars off a tree, the angel would obey him readily, nay, since it 
is God’s will it would be his happiness. 

Being established in God’s will, a man will want what is God 
and what is God’s will and nothing else. If he is sick he will not 
be wanting to be well. To him all pain is pleasure, multitude is 
pure and single, provided he is really in the will of God. Aye, 
though it were the pains of hell it would be joy and happiness to 
him. He has left himself and he is free, passive to all impressions. 
My eye can see colour because it is free to be coloured. When I 
see blue or white, my eye which is seeing the colour is taking the 
colour that it sees. The eye wherein I see God is the same eye \ 
wherein God sees me: my eye and God’s eye are one eve, one 
vision, one knowing, one love. 

Man being thus in the love of God is dead to self and all created 
' things, and no more mindful of himself than one a thousand miles 
away. This man abides in likeness, in unity, and there is no 
unlikeness in him. This man has left the world and himself as 
well. Supposing some man owned the world and for God’s sake 
gave it up just as he had gotten it¢ then God would give him back 
the world and eternal life to boot. And if there were a second man 
possessing merely the good will, who thought: Lord were this 
whole world mine, nay two of them (or any number he may choose), 
I would resign it and myself as well, entire as I received it from 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 241 

thee : him would God recompense no less than if it had been given 
by his hand. Another man with nothing to resign, bodily or 
ghostly, would be the most resigned of all. He who for one instant 
wholly resigns self, to him shall all be given. To leave himself 
for twenty years and then to have self back again, an instant, is. 
never to have left himself at all. He who both has and is 
resigned, nor ever casts one glance at what he has resigned but 
remains firm and unshaken and motionless in himself, that man 
is free. May we remain steadfast and immoveable, like the 
eternal Father, So help us God and his eternal Wisdom. Amen. 

XCVII 
DIVES 

Homo quidam erat dives etc. (Luc. 16,,). ‘ There was a certain 
rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen and fared 
sumptuously every day and he had no name.’ 

This will equally apply to the causeless Deity and to the loving 
soul. ‘There was a rich man.’ Man means a rational entity. 
A heathen philosopher says, ‘ By man in the scriptures we mean 
God.’ And St Gregory says, if there were in God one thing nobler 
than another we should say it is his understanding ; for in under- 
standing God is manifested to himself; in understanding God is 
proceeding in himself; in understanding God is proceeding forth 
into all things. Were there no understanding in God there would 
be no Trinity and no emanation of creatures. 

He had no name. And so is the threefold nature of God name- 
less ; such names as the soul gives him are gotten of her own 
understanding. As the heathen philosopher says in his book, 
The Light of Lights, * God is superessential and super-rational and 
unintelligible,’ that is, to the natural understanding. I speak not of 
gracious understanding, for by grace we may be brought to know 
as much as St Paul did, who was caught up into the third heaven 
where he saw those things that he neither would nor could express. 
He could not express them as he saw them, for when we know a 
thing we know it either in its cause or in its mode or by its activity. 
God remains unknown because he is the first (7.e. he has no cause), 
he is unconditioned (i.e. unknowable) and he is inactive (in his 
hidden stillness). He is without the names that are applied to 
him. Moses enquired hisname. God answered and said, ‘ He who 
is hath sent thee.’ He could not understand it in any other form. 
God as he is in himself he cannot give creatures to understand, . 
not that he cannot do it but creature cannot understand. As 

16 

242 ä MEISTER ECKHART 

the heathen philosopher says, ‘God is beyond nature, beyond 
praise, beyond reason and beyond understanding.’ 

‘This man was rich.’ And so is God rich in himself and in all 
things. Mark the plenitude of God. It is fivefold. First, he 
is the prime cause, so he pervades all things.—Next, he is essentially 
one, so he is universal.—Thirdly, he is the fountain-head, so he is 
flowing into all things.—Fourthly, he is unchangeable, so he is most 
desirable.—Fifthly, he is perfect, so he is most incomprehensible. 

Being the first cause he imparts himself. As the heathen 
philosopher observes, ‘The First Cause pours into causes in 
general more than these secondary causes pour into their causes.’ 
Again, he is indivisible. Bishop Albertus says a thing is 
impartible which is intrinsically one without a second. And the 
sum of all partibles amounts to what he is. In him creatures are 
one in the same, they are God in God. In themselves they are 
naught.—Thirdly, being the fountain-head he is overflowing into 
all things. Bishop Albertus says: ‘Into things in general he 
flows in three ways: in being, in life and in light ; and into the 
rational soul in particular as the potentiality of all things, the 
bringing back of creatures to their original source.’ To wit, the 
light of lights : ‘ All gifts and perfections flow from the Father of 
lights,’ as St James says.—Fourthly, being unchangeable he is 
most comfortable. Here note that God unites with things while 
keeping his intrinsic oneness, and all things are one in him. Hence 
Christ’s- words, ‘ Ye shall be turned into me and I into you.’ 
Owing to his unchangeableness and the littleness of creatures. 
For as the prophet says, all things are to God as a drop to the ocean. 
And as the drop becomes the ocean not the ocean the drop so the 
soul imbibing God turns into God, not God into the soul. There 
the soul loses her name, her power and her activity but not her 
existence. The soul abides in God as God is abiding in himself. 
Anent which Bishop Albertus declares that the will a man dies in 
he abides in eternally.—Fifthly, being perfect he is most incom- 
prehensible. God is self-perfeet and omni-perfect. What is 
perfection in God ? It means that he is brim-full of himself and 
is the sole good of all things. And because he is good he is the 
desired of all things. 

XCVIII 
HE WENT UP INTO A MOUNTAIN 

Videus Jesus turbas ascendit in montem etc. (Matt. 5,). We read 
in the gospel that our Lord departed from the multitude and 
ascended into the mountain. There he opened his mouth and 
taught them about the kingdom of God. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS | 243 

St Augustine says, ‘ The student of this subject sets his stool in 
heaven.’ The student of God must rise above things scattered : 
these he must eschew. To take in God’s instruction he must 
gather himself together and withdraw into himself, turning his 
back on care and the pursuit of nether things and on his powers 
so many and so various. He must leave all these behind, even as 
existing in his thought, not but what thought works wonders in 
itself. These thoughts must be transcended if God is to speak into 
the powers which are inseparäte. 

Again: “He went up into the mountain’ implies that God is 
imparting the sublimity and sweetness of his nature. In this 
intuition wherein there must needs fall away everything that is 
creature, he is aware of nothing but God and himself as the image 
of God. 

Thirdly : his ascent into the mountain betokens his exaltation 
(what is high is near to God) and concerns the powers trenching 
on divinity. Upon one occasion our Lord took three of his dis- 
ciples and led them up into a mountain where he appeared before 
them in that same light-body wherein we shall see him in eternal 
life. Our Lord said to the children of Israel, ‘ Remember what 
I told you about heaven : ye see there neither image nor form nor 
any likeness.’ When a man does leave the multitude God comes 
into his soul without image or likeness. 

St Augustine teaches about three kinds of knowledge. The 
first is bodily : the eye, for instance, is sensible of images. The 
second is mental but still admits of images of bodily things. 
The third is in the interior mind, which knows without image or 
likeness, and this knowledge is like unto the angels. 

The higher angels are divided into three. One philosopher 
says: ‘The soul knows only in effigy. Things are all known in 
image and likeness, but angels know themselves without likeness, 
and God.’ What he means to say is: God imparts himself to the 
soul at her summit without image or likeness. ’ 

He went up into the mountain and was transfigured before 
them. The soul must be transfigured or re-formed and sealed 
and re-cast in his form. I maintain that the soul transcends 
form, she being cast in the form of God’s Son. According to the 
masters, the Son is the image of God and the soul is formed in 
his image. I agree. But the Son is the image of God above 
form: the form of his concealed Godhead: the Son as the idea, 
as the conception of God, that is the form of the soul. By the 
fact that the Son loves the soul loves also. Where the Son is 
proceeding is not where the soul is suspended : she is above form. 
Fire and heat are one and yet far from the same. Taste and hue 
in an apple are one but by no means identical. The tongue can 

244 MEISTER ECKHART 

taste things which are lost on the eye ; the eye perceives colours the 
tongue knows not of.. The soul knows one only ; she is above form. 

The prophet says : ‘ God will lead his sheep into green pastures. 
Sheep is in the singular: and so are they singular who are simplified — 
to one. A philosopher says, that nowhere is the heavenly course 
so plain as in the simple hearts who guilelessly accept the heavenly 
influence and in children with no mind of their own. The clever 
and active-minded people are carried away into multitudinous 
things. Our Lord promises to feed his sheep in the primitive 
mountain pastures, on green grass. In God all creatures are in 
embryo. First, all creatures sally forth from God and then the 
angels. To have the nature of one particular creature is to bear 
the stamp of creatures as a whole. An angel’s nature bears the 
impress of all creatures. All that angelic nature can receive is 
summed up in him. Whatever God chooses to create his angels 
entertain on penalty of missing the perfection which belongs to 
other creatures. 

St Augustine says: What God creates has a channel through 
the angels on high, where on the hill-tops everything is flourishing, 
where creatures are all fresh and green. Falling into time they 
droop and fade. Among the young green of all creatures there 
our Lord pastures his sheep. Creatures which flourish on these 
verdant heights are, as existing in the angels, more grateful to 
the soul than all the things of this world. The vilest of creatures 
as it is there, is to this world as day to night. 

Whoever would be taught by God has to ascend this mountain ; 
there God will perfect them in the day of eternity when the light 
is full. What I perceive in God is light; what touches creatures 
is darkness. The true light has no contact with creatures. Spirit- 
ual perception is light. St John says, ‘ God is the true light that 
shineth in the darkness.’ What is the darkness ? In the first 
place: independence, detachment: being blind and unaware of 
creatures. As I have frequently said: to see God we have to be 
blind. Again, God is the light which shines in the darkness. 
He is the blinding light. That is, light incomprehensible, illimit- 
able, that: knows no end. Its blinding the soul means that she 
knows nothing, is aware of nothing. The third darkness is best 
of all: there is no light. A master says, ‘ Heaven has no light, it is 
too high up for that ; it ddes not shine and in itself is neither hot 
nor cold.’ In this darkness the soul has lost all light, she has 
outgrown what we call light and colour. 

A philosopher says : ‘Light is the Supreme, God’s promised 
land.’ A philosopher says: ‘ The realization of every desire is 
brought to the soul in this light.” A philosopher says : ‘ There 
never was anything subtile enough to enter the ground of the soul 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 245 

but God only.’ Meaning to say: God shines in that darkness 
where the soul transcends all light. For what though her powers 
are open to sweetness and light and grace yet into the ground of 
the soul she lets nothing but absolute God. Whatever besides of 
sweetness and light proceeds from him she receives merely into 
her powers. 

According to our best authorities the powers of the soul and she 
herself afe-one: fire and fire-light are one, and where it (light) 
changes to reason it changes to another nature. Where intellect 
issues from the soul it invents another nature. Thirdly, the light 
of lights where soul transcends all light is on the mountain sum- 
mit where no light exists. Where God breaks out into his Son is 
not where the soul hangs from. Where God is proceeding, we 
knowing God somewhat, is not where the soul is suspended, it is 
infinitely higher up than that ; she transcends light and knowledge 
completely. He says, ‘I will deliver them and will gather them 
together and bring them into their own land where I will lead 
them into green pastures (upon the mountain of Israel)” Upon 
this mountain he opened his mouth. One doctor says: ‘ Our Lord 
opens his mouth here below leading us by the scriptures and by 
means of creatures.’ But St Paul says, ‘Now hath God spoken 
to us in his only-begotten Son in whom I know from the least 
to the greatest all at once in God.’ May we out-grow whatever 
is not God, So help us God. Amen. ) 

XCIX 
BE YE RENEWED IN THE SPIRIT OF YOUR MIND 

Renovamini spiritu mentis vestre (Ephes. 4,3). ° Be ye renewed 
in the spirit,’ here called mens or mind. Thus speaks St Paul. 
Now St Augustine says that in the highest part of the soul, 
‘there known as mens or the mind, there was created along with 
' the soul a capacity called by philosophers the casket or shrine of 
mind-forms or formless images. This power makes the Father com- 
- parable with the soul in his emanating deity whereof he has poured 
forth the whole hoard of divine being into the Son and into 
the Holy Ghost in distinction of Persons, just as the memory of 
the soul pours out treasure of ideas into the soul-powers. Now 
if with this faculty the soul sees form, whether she see the form 
of an angel or her own form, it is an imperfection in her. But 
when all forms are detached from the soul and she sees nothing 
but the one alone, then the naked essence of the soul finds the 
naked, formless essence of the divine unity, the superessential 
being, passive, reposing in itself. O surpassing wonder, what 

246 MEISTER ECKHART 

lofty suffering is that, when the soul suffers nothing but ‘the 
absolute unity of God ! ; 

Ye shall be renewed in the spirit, says St Paul. Renewal befalls — 
all creatures under God ; but for God there is no renewal, only 
all eternity. What is eternity ?—It is characteristic of eternity 
that in it youth and being are the same, for eternity would not 
be eternal could it newly become and were not always. Now I 
maintain that renewal befalls the angels, that is, in their knowledge 
of the future, for an angel knows of future things only so much as 
God reveals to him. And renewal befalls the soul in so far as she 
is soul, and she is soul in so far as she gives life to the body and is 
the form of the body. And renewal befalls her too inasmuch 
as she is spirit. She is spirit in so far as she is detached from 
here and now and from everything that belongs to matter. But 
so far as she is the image of God and nameless as God is, no renewal 
befalls her but only eternity, as in God. Now mark! God is 
nameless; no one can know or say anything of him. A heathen 
philosopher says that what we know or predicate about the first 
cause is what we are ourselves rather than what the first cause is, 
for this transcends speech and knowledge. If I say God is good, 
it is not true: I am good, God is not good. Isay more: Iam 
better than God is, for what is good can be better and what is better 
can be best. But God is not good, therefore he cannot be better ; 
and since he cannot be better therefore he cannot be best. These 
three : good, better, best are remote from God who is above all. 
And if, again, I say that God is wise, it is not true: I am wiser 
than he. Or if I say, God is a being, it is not true: he is a trans- 
cendental essence, a superessential nothing. St Augustine says, 
‘ The finest thing a man can say of God is that he is silent from 
consciousness of interior fullness.’ Wherefore hold thy peace and 
prate not about God, for prating of him thou dost lie, committing 
sin. If thou wouldst be free from sin and perfect, babble not 
of God. Neither know anything of God, for God is beyond 
knowing. One philosopher says, Had I a God that I could’ 
know I would have him for my God no longer. Know’st thou 
of him anything? He is no such thing, and in that thou dost 
know of him anything at all thou are in ignorance, and ignor- 
ance leads to the condition of the brute; for in creatures 
what is ignorant is brutish. If thou wouldst not be brutish then, 
know nothing of the unuttered God.—* What then shall I do ? >— 
Thou shalt lose thy thy-ness and dissolve in his his-ness ; thy thine 
shall be his mine, so utterly one mine that thou in him shalt 
know eternalwise his is-ness, free from becoming: his nameless 
nothingness. 

* Be ye renewed in the spirit,’ says St Paul. If we have a mind 

4 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 247 

to be renewed in spirit, then those six powers of the soul, the 
higher and the lower, must each wear a golden finger-ring all 
gilded over with the gold of divine love. Consider the lower 
powers, which are three. The first is called reason, rationale ; 
on this thou shalt wear a golden finger-ring : light, so that thy 
reason may be all the time timelessly irradiated with divine light. 
The second power is rage, irascibilis ; on it thou shalt wear the 
finger-ring, thy peace. And why? Because, in peace, in God; 
without peace, out of God. The third power is desire, concupis- 
cibilis; and on it thou shalt wear, enough, so that thou mayst 
have done with all creatures under God; but with God thou shalt 
never have done, for of God thou canst never have enough: the 
more thou hast of God the more thou wantest of him; couldst 
thou have enough of him, could enough ever be applied to God, 
God were not God. | 

Also on each higher power thou shalt wear a golden finger- 
ring. Of these higher powers there are likewise three. The first 
is the retentive faculty, memoria. This power is likened to the 
Father in the Trinity. On it thou shalt wear the golden finger- 
ring, remembrance, that all eternal things may be stored up in 
thee. The second one is understanding, intellectus. This power 
is likened to the Son. On this, too, thou shalt wear a golden 
finger-ring, perception, that thou mayst be ever apprehending 
God.—* In what way ?’—Thou shalt know him without image, 
without semblance and without means.—‘ But for me to know God 
thus, with nothing between, I must be all but he, he all but me.’ 
—I say, God must be very I, I very God, so consummately one 
that this he and this I are one is, in this is-ness working one work 
eternally ; but so long as this he and this I, to wit, God and the 
soul, are not one single here, one single now, the I cannot work 
with nor be one with that he. The third power is will, voluntas. 
This power is likened to the Holy Ghost. On it thou shalt wear 
the golden finger-ring, love, that thou mayst love God. But thou 
shalt love God apart from loveworthiness: not because he is 
worthy of love, for God is unloveworthy : he is superior to love 
and loveworthiness.—‘* How then shall I love him ? ’— Thou shalt 
love God non-spiritually, thy soul must be de-spiritualised : 
stripped of spirituality. For while thy soul is specifically spirit, 
she has form; the while she has form she has neither unity. nor 
union; the while she lacks union she has never really loved God, 
for actual love lies in union. Wherefore let thy soul be de-spirited 
of all spirit; let it be spiritless ; if thou lovest God as God, as 
spirit, as Person or as image, that must all go.—* Then how shall 
I love him ? ’—Love him as he is: a not-God, a not-spirit, a not- 
Person, a not-image ; as sheer, pure, limpid unity, alien from all 

248 MEISTER ECKHART 

duality. And in this one let us sink down eternally from nothing- 
ness to nothingness. So help us God. Amen. 

C 
ONE GOD AND FATHER OF ALL 

Unus deus et pater omnium, qui est super omnes et per omnia 
et in omnibus nobis (Ephes. 4,). I am quoting St Paul’s words, 
‘One God and Father of all who is above all and through all 
and in us all.’ From the gospel I will take another saying, the 
saying of our Lord, ‘ Friend, go up higher.’ 

To begin with, when St Paul speaks of ‘ one God and Father of 
all’ the omission of the particle suggests some variation from his 
‘one God.’ God is one in himself and apart from all. God 
belongs to none and none belongs to him, God is one. Boéthius 
says, God is one and changes not. God’s whole creation he 
created without changing. All things, once created, progress in 
changing. The moral of which is that we ought to be one in 
ourselves and wholly free from attachment. Firm and unshaken in 
God does it behove us to be. Out of God there is nothing but 
naught. No change nor movement can get into God. What 
seeks another place outside him, that changes. God has all things 
in him in one omnipotentiality ; God seeks not anything outside 
himself, for he has got it in him in its perfection. No creature 
can conceive it as it is in God. 

Another teacher says, ‘ Father of all, blessed art thou.’ This 
too is big with change, for calling him Father he makes us his 
children. And if he is our Father then we as his children shall 
have his honour at heart. Our Lord says, ‘ Blessed are the pure 
in heart for they shall see God.’ Purity of heart means separation, 
cleansing, from all bodily things, the isolation of the self and in 
this abstraction the plunging into God and being atoned with him. 

David says, ‘Those works are pure and guileless which are 
pursued and perfected in the light of the soul’; and those are yet 
more guileless which abide therein in the depths of the spirit and 
proceed not forth. ‘One God and Father of all.’ 

The other saying, ‘ Friend, come up higher, take the higher 
seat.’ I will make of twain one. ‘Friend, come up higher, 
draw up,’ is the friendly conversation of the soul with God. He 
says, ‘Friend, draw up, come up higher,’ and, answering her: 
one God and Father of all. A certain philosopher says, Friend- 
ship resides in the will. But so far as friendship resides in the will 
it does not unify. Love does not unify; true, it unites in act 
but not in essence. It merely says, ‘One God, come up higher, 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 249 

draw nigh.’ Into the ground of the soul nothing enters but God 
himself. Even the highest angel, although he is so nigh to God 
and is endowed so largely with God’s love (his works are estab- 
lished in God in one essence not one operation; he has in God 
an immanence, a settled habitation), this angel, strange to say, 
exalted though he be, is not allowed into the soul. One master 
lays it down that all creatures individually merit that God himself 
should work in them. Soul as transcending body is too virgin- 
exquisite to set her heart on aught save pure Deity himself. But 
nothing enters there until it has been shorn of all additions. That 
is why she was answered, ‘ one God.’ 

St Paul says, ‘one God.’ One is something more simple than good- 
ness and truth. Goodness and truth are constants, they are added 
to (only) in thought; thinking attributes things to them. There 
is no addition to the one as proceeding in himself into the Son and 
into the Holy Ghost. He said, ‘ Friend, go up higher.’ A master 
says, One is the denial of denials. If I say God is good, that is 
an affirmation. One is the denial of denials, the grave of expecta- 
tions. What does one mean? That to which nothing is added. 
The soul receives Godhead as told forth in her, unadded to, 
unthought. One is the denial of denials. Every creature makes 
innate denial; the one denies it is the other; an angel denies 
being any other creature. But God makes the denial of denials ; 
he is one and denies all other, for there is nothing without God. 
All creatures are in God; they are his very Godhead, that is to 
say, the fullness. He is the Father of all deity. One God, not 
proceeding, unmoved, unmindful of the Word. By the fact of 
denying God something—and by denying God goodness I am not 
denying God,—(I say), by denying God something I conceive 
something about him, that he is not; even this has to go. God 
is one, he is the negation of negations. According to one master, 
the angelic nature secretes no power nor work, it has no know- 
ledge save of God alone. Everything else it ignores. As he says, 
“one God and Father of all.’ 

Some of the powers of the soul take in from without, as, for. 
example, the eye. Though it lets in but little, rejecting the great 
bulk, yet it is dependent on and does receive something from 
outside in the mode of here and now. But intelligence and 
intellect, paring to the core, seize what is neither here nor now. 
In her unconditioned state she is right in touch with nature, but 
she still receives from the senses; what the senses bring in from 
outside the intellect uses. Not so the will; in this respect will 
ranks above the intellect. Will accepts nothing save in abstract 
understanding, where there is neither here nor now. God intends 
to convey what a pure and exalted thing will is. It rises to 

250 MEISTER ECKHART 

familiar colloquy with God, and God says, ‘ Friend, come up higher, 
honour waits thee.’ 
The will wills happiness. It has been asked, what is the differ- 

ence between grace and happiness. Grace, as we are now in this 
life, and happiness as ours to be hereafter in eternal life, are to one 
another as the flower to its fruit. When the soul is brimming with 
grace and nothing is left her, then grace works to perfect all that 
exists in the soul; not that it comes to actual work, but by its 
mere presence in the soul what the soul does grace makes perfect. 
Grace does no work but, all-pouring, pours all at once into the 
soul. The third grace atones the soul with God. Its consumma- 
tion, its effect, is to bring back the soul to God; hers, after the 
blossom, the fruit. Will, as the will to happiness, as the will to 
be with God and the actual ascent, in this singleness (of heart) 
God slips into the will, and the single mind seeing God as the 
truth, God slips into the intellect. But his entering into the will 
raises it up. As he says, ‘one God. Friend, come up higher.’ 
One God: God’s unity is the crown of God’s divinity. God 
could never bear his one-begotten Son were he not one. The 
fact of being one determines all he does creaturely and godly. 
Oneness belongs to God alone; God’s idiosyncrasy is oneness ; 
God must be one God or not be God at all. Divine riches or 
wisdom or truth, it is all the same thing in God ; it is not one, it 
is unity. God has all he has in him; it is one with him. Theo- 
logians say that heaven revolves with the object of gathering all 
things in; hence its rapid motion. He said, ‘ Friend, come up 
higher, thou art honoured.’ It is the honour and adornment of 
the soul that God is one. God behaves as though he existed for 
no purpose but to please the soul ; as though he did adorn himself 
solely in order to attract the soul. And man desires now one thing 
now another; he cultivates now wisdom and now art. If she has 
nothing of the one she will never rest; (she will never rest) till 
she is all the same in God.. God is one; that is the soul’s beati- 
tude, her ornament, her rest. A philosopher says, God orders all 
things in his operation. The soul is all things, and in all respects 
the noblest and highest and God pours in all at once ; God is one. 

CI 
IN ALL THINGS I SEEK REST 

Part I 
In omnibus requiem quesivi (Eccles. 24,,). St Augustine says, 
“My soul was created by thee and for thee wherefore she is ever 
restless. till she finds thee. In all created things, which I search 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 251 

in understanding, there is no refuge for my soul, but in thee, 
God, alone. In the love-spring of thy substance are gathered up 
to one the perfections of all creatures, which in them are scattered 
and divided.’ Were there any single creature with all creaturely 
perfections both in quality and number then God would not have 
made more than that one alone, as I have pointed out in my 
discourse, * Whosoever would follow me let him take up his 
cross.’ Now the whole happiness of creatures depends on resting 
in the sovran good which is the fount of all good things, and hence 
our Lady Mary says these words about herself wherein she counsels 
our interior man to cultivate in lowliness the habit of divine 
repose in which the soul is most of all united, and without it not. 
She says, ‘ In all things have I sought rest for my inner man.’ 

In this connection mark how the divine essence carries pent 
up in itself all creaturely perfection, creaturely existence being the 
reflection of God’s essence. St John says, Quod factum est, in 
ipso vita erat: that which was made, in God was life. Creatures 
in their pre-existing form in God have been divine life for ever. 
Hence the opening words of our quotation from the Book of 
Wisdom, ‘all things,’ mean that our Lady sought peace for her 
inner man in the eternal good of the divine nature wherein as in 
a magic mirror creature-nature as a whole is one in God eternally. 
Referring to the paradigm of all things in God, they being one 
divinity. a 

Theologians put three fundamental questions about these pre- 
existing forms in God, whereto attach some admirable doctrines 
and stimulating facts. The first question is, whether ideas of all 
the creatures exist in God eternally or not ? The second question 
is, whether these ideas are one or more in number ? The third 
question is, whether the divine mind has ideas of all the things it 
knows or does it know at all without ideas ? 

To the first question Doctor Thomas answers that, it is necessary 
to suppose in the divine being ideas of all the creatures. And 
his argument is this. The three terms, form, idea and semblance 
are identical in meaning. Now the form, idea or semblance of 
a thing, a rose for instance, is present in my soul and must be for 
two reasons. One is, because from the appearance of its mental 
form I can paint the rose in corporal matter, so there must be an 
image of the rose-form in my soul. The second reason is, because 
from the subjective rose-idea I recognise the objective rose 
although I do not copy it. Just as I can carry in my head the 
notion of a house I never mean to build. In both these ways 
[ü.e. as types and principles of knowledge] ideas exist in God, for 
with all natural things it is the rule for the natural form or char- 
acter of the progeny or fruit to exemplify the type belonging to 

252 MEISTER ECKHART 

its species ; as with mankind, for instance, the generative power of 
the father’s manhood is repeated in the son’s born manhood so that 
a man breeds men, a lion lions and a falcon falcons. The rose 
grows on a rose-bush not a cabbage-stalk ; fire engenders fire. 

And sometimes the idea of the work is in the practical power 
not as a natural species but theoretically, as the house of wood 
and stone is designed in the architect’s practical mind, who makes 
the outward house as much like his ideal as he can. Now since 
God created this whole world (not that all creatures are by natural 
birth descended from God’s nature like the eternal Word of the 
Father, for in that case all creatures would be God, which no 
sane mind allows: creature-nature rejects it as an impossible, 
false thing), therefore God created all creatures by practical 
understanding of divine nature. So there must be eternally in 
the divine understanding the pre-existing form or idea to the 
likeness of which God created this creature and not another whereof 
God had no pattern in his mind. 

The second question is, whether the idea is one or more in 
number? To this the Doctor answers that, the ultimate end of 
the work is ever the real intention of the work’s first cause. Now 
the ultimate end of the world is its good, i.e. the divine ordering 
of all creatures, as Aristotle says. Hence this ordering of the 
world must be eternally foreknown and foreordained in God, 
who is its first cause. Ergo, he:has in him the particular ideas 
appropriate to that order, whence it follows that he must carry in 
him ideas of individual creatures. For just as no architect can 
carry in his head the plan of a whole house without the plans of 
all its details, so there must be in God as many forms as there are 
natural grades of created things emanating from him; the rose, 
for instance, has one special form, the violet another; man has 
one distinctive type, an angel has another, and so with other 
things. 

The astonishing thing is that this multiplicity of forms should 
consist with the simplicity of God in whom all essential things are 
one. We can explain it thus. The idea of the work exists in the 
worker’s practical mind as an object of his understanding which 
regards it as expressing his idea to which he forms the material 
work, and is not in the mind of the worker as a form of under- 
standing informing his mind and setting up active intellection. 
The plan of the house in the architect’s mind is (something under- 
stood by him). It is not repugnant to the simplicity of divine 
understanding to see and understand more than one thing as 
object. But it would be repugnant to his simple nature if by a 
plurality of objective forms it were stimulated and reduced to the 
subjective act of understanding as opposed to the mirror of God’s 

oy 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 258 

essence. Countless ideas exist in God in the sense that he sees and 
understands them, not in the sense that his intellect sees in them. 
To resume. God knows his essence perfectly so far as it is knowable 
both in itself and so far as all creatures in their natural mode are 
exemplified in divine essence; and this express image of all 
creatures in the divine essence is their prototype, their idea. It 
. follows that there are as many types as there are grades of nature 
to be typified. 

With regard to this question of how the countless forms in the 
divine essence consist with their being the essence of God, they 
being many in number and the essence of God only one, it may 
be looked at in this way. We call these ideas the essence of God, 
not as such but inasmuch as the essence of God is a mirror reflecting 
all creatures. And since in the impartible essence of God we have 
the exemplar of all things, which we call their idea, therefore 
the form is many and the essence only one. Even as in a mirror 
there are many forms reflected, but an eye placed in the mirror 
would see all these forms as one object of its vision; they would 
not be innate in it nor would they form the eye’s intrinsic faculty 
of active present or passive and potential sight, for in that case the 
image would be no more than one. 

The third question was, whether God has in him ideas of all the 
things he knows or does he know at all without ideas? Doctor 
Thomas answers this as follows: These pre-existing forms are 
the origin or principle of the creation of all creatures, and in this 
sense they are types and pertain to practical knowledge. These 
forms, again, are the principle of all knowledge of creatures and as 
such they are really essential images of creatures; wherefore of 
everything he knows and his conception of it he must have ideas. 

This fact prompts the question, How does God know evil, 
which has no being in itself but is a privation of being? The 
answer is this. A’s I said above, all creaturely existence has its 
idea in God, but since evil or sin has no being that is aught (as 
Dionysius says), but deprives good of good or virtuous being, as 
blindness of eye has no positive existence but it deprives the eye 
of sight, even so God’s mind perceives all sin and evil in the idea 
of the corresponding good, not in the form of sin; for instance, 
he knows lying in the idea of truth. 

Consider next how God knows virtue. In the eternal mirror of 
his works God knows all creaturely perfections both natural and 
ghostly, perceiving in their pre-existing forms all accidents as 
substantial being. But accidents are various. Basic character- 
istics of the abiding nature of their subject God has no ideas of 
apart from the ideas which are proper to their subject: the 
whiteness of the daisy, for example, not its whiteness as a separate 

254 MEISTER ECKHART 

idea. But accidents subsequently added to the abiding nature 
he knows in particular ideas apart from the idea of any host. 
Whence it follows that all noble human attributes like acquired 
virtues and spiritual wisdom, God knows in separate eternal 
forms reflecting the wisdom and virtue of souls in general. 

Moreover, since grace is not natural to creature therefore grace 
is communicated to the soul in the guise of accident, and by the 
same token, faith and other godly virtues are inspired super- 
naturally in the soul, and love and sometimes divine wisdom 
as with the prophets and apostles. Again, the seven gifts of 
the Holy Ghost are supernaturally instilled into the soul. And 
spiritual sweetness too is an inspired accident. Wherefore of all 
the graces in mere creatures God has ideas wherein he knows the 
contingencies of grace. 

In the divine essence there exist then also particular ideas 
reflecting the certainty or hope and divine charity of the soul, albeit 
she is but a creature. In their own ideas there exist as well all 
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which have an adventitious character. 
This I affirm because the prime gift of love wherein he gives all 
gifts, this love he is himself in Person and in essence. And 
because, again, all the sacred rites of the seven sacraments, wherein 
the soul is sanctified and initiated into godly life, because all these 
were instituted to show forth the workings of grace in the soul, 
therefore God must know all the seven sacraments in eternal 
pre-existing forms and each in a distinct one. The cathartic 
virtue of baptism by natural water comes springing out of the 
eternal formal baptism of the mirror of God’s nature. So, too, 
the primordial perfect conception of that nature survives in 
marriage, wherein the mutable nature of the father is reborn into 
the immortal and impersonal nature of the soul of his child, where 
nature, no longer ridden by the race-instinct governing creatures, 
is in that sense performing the work of all creation. Marriage 
is true to its exemplar as long as we preserve it in its natural 
purity and free from animal intention which is all opposed to its 
divine ideal. And the same I say about the other sacraments. 
God then has ideas of every longing, love and godly intuition, 
whether of sweetness or of inwardness, wherein he feels and knows 
at once all thy desires when thou dost call on him in prayer; and 
in these same ideas the soul of any saint whom we invoke sees all 
our prayerful longings from the beginning of the world down to the 
very end in one flash of God’s essence, just as an angel sees creatures 
and their prototype in God all at once in the vision of God, in 
the dawn, not in the evening light, or else they would not know our 
. longing for them. Here ends the first part of this sermon. 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 255 

Part II! 

Now it must be remembered that this rest of the inner man in 
the divine wonder born of vision and divine love, transcends in 
its perfection and its sweetness any activity of the outward man, 
and for nine reasons. 

The first reason is, because in this passivity of the interior man, 
which is one of knowing and loving, the highest of the faculties 
in man are engaged in their noblest and most proper occupation 
and are thus detached and free from everything temporal and mor- 
tal, and these powers are knowledge and love. The life of the 
exterior man, on the other hand, is one of varying sensation. 
St Gregory says that Rachel, meaning the interior life, signifies 
a vision of the source, but Leah, the other sister, means the life of 
the exterior man, for she had weak eyes. 

The second reason is, that man’s interior wont of love and con- 
templation is more lasting, though not at the culminating point 
of actual vision, for the moment of supreme illumination is short- 
lived, and passes like a flash of lightning. According to St Augus- 
tine, the common use of love and knowledge lasts longer with the 
inner man than with the outer. 

The third reason is, because man’s inner life of rest and spiritual 
leisure is somewhat like the peace of the divine eternal essence ; 
for albeit the Father is ever in the act of engendering his Word 
that does not disturb his rest; as our Lord says, ‘My Father 
worketh until now.’ The life of outward man, on the other hand, 
is one of perpetual physical unrest. Mary sat still and Martha 
kept about the house. 

The fourth reason is, that the interior life is more self-sufficient 
than that of outward man. The inner man needs nothing for 
his work but the freedom from bodily affairs which comes with 
detachment of the soul-powers, together with knowledge and love. 
The freer and less occupied with mortal things the better adapted 
to God is the life of the inner man. But the life of outward 
man has need of many things which are disturbing: of working 
and talking and giving and taking and eating and drinking. St 
Luke tells us how Martha, meaning the outward man, was cum- 
bered with overmuch serving; aye, though it be all on God’s 
account, like works of mercy, natheless it entails a deal of 
trouble. 

The fifth reason is, that the interior life is infinitely more 
enjoyable than that of outward man. As the philosopher says, 
Intellectual delights are free from drawbacks, but every mortal 

1 This is not numbered separately in Pfeiffer’s text. 

256 MEISTER ECKHART 

pleasure has its other side. St Augustine says that while Martha 
was distraught Mary was in company with her interior man, 
Hence the comment of one teacher, ‘ Mary taxed Martha before 
the eterna] Word Christ Jesus.’ Why did not Mary answer? 
She did not hear, because she was not at home by herself. Where 
was she then? She was with her inner man in the Word whose 
word she was attending to. For the soul is where she loves rather 
than where she is giving natural life. 

The sixth reason is, because the interior life, apart from know- 
ledge and apart from love, is desirable in itself. But the outward 
life is desirable only in so far as it makes for the greater good of 
the soul. The prophet cries, ‘One thing have I desired of the 
Lord and that same will I seek : to see God’s will and behold his 
godly habitation.’ 

The seventh reason is, because the inner life is concerned with 
things divine and the outer with things human. St Augustine 
says, Mary heard the Word in the beginning, whereas it was the 
human word that Martha served. 

The eighth reason is, because the inner life is that of the powers 
most proper to the soul. But the powers used for outward 
purposes we have in common with the brutes, the senses, namely. 
David says, ‘ Lord thou dost nourish man and beast.’ And later 
on he adds, * but Lord, we men shall see thy light in the light of 
thine own self,’ that is, in the light of understanding whereby 
man is distinguished from the brutes. 

The ninth reason is given by our Lord himself, who says, 
‘ Mary has chosen the better part.’ St Augustine says, ‘ Martha 
had no bad one; hers was a good one too, though Mary had the 
best.’ Hers the uses of the inner man, which starting here go on 
eternally. But the outward life of works of mercy ends where 
there is no poverty nor woe, that is, in eternity. Now though the 
inner life is intrinsically best, the outward life is sometimes better, 
as in cases of bodily necessity ; to feed the hungry, for example, 
were better than to spend the time in contemplation. According 
to one teacher, to see a man in any need and fail to help would 
make me guilty towards him, and St Augustine says I ought to lend: 
him aid. In cases then of real necessity, to use the works of the 
outward man for the relief of one’s own self or neighbour is better 
than to settle down to the interior man’s spiritual idleness of mind 
and will.—It is now explained how our Lady rested in the eternal 
good. Let us too seek rest for the inner man as well as for the 
outer, So help us God. Amen. : 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 257 

CII 
HONOUR THY FATHER 

Hec dicit dominus : honora patrem tuum ete. (Matt. 15,). This 
Latin quotation is taken from the gospel. The words were spoken 
by our Lord, and the translation runs, ‘ Honour thy father and 
mother.” And another commandment is given by God our Lord, 
‘Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s goods nor his house nor 
anything that is his.’ The third point is that the people went to 
Moses and said, ‘ Do thou speak to us, for we cannot hear God.’ 
‘The fourth, that God said to Moses, ‘ An altar of earth and in 
earth shalt thou make unto me and all that is offered thereon 
thou shalt burn away.’ The fifth is that Moses went into the 
cloud and ascending into the mountain there he found God : 
it was in the darkness that he found the true light. 

There is a saying of St Augustine’s, ‘ Where the lamb sinks there 
swims the ox and the cow and where the cow swims the elephant 
runs and forges ahead.’ Which is a pretty parable to draw a 
moral from. The scriptures are the deep sea, St Augustine 
says, and the little lamb the humble, simple soul which is able 
to fathom Holy Writ. By the ox that swims we understand ill- 
tutored folk: each choosing out of them the: things that suit 
himself. But in the elephant that goes ahead we recognise wise 
souls searching the scriptures and making progress in them. I 
am amazed how full the scriptures are withal the mastérs say 
they are not to be taken merely as they stand ; the material things 
in them, they say, must be translated to a higher plane, for which 
we must have symbols.—First it reached to the ankles, next it 
came up to the knee, thirdly it rose to the girdle, and fourthly 
it covered his head and he was submerged altogether. 

Now what does this mean? St Augustine says, at first the 
scriptures will amuse and attract the child, and in the end, when 
he tries to understand them, they make fools of the wise, for none 
is so simple-minded but can find his level there nor none so wise 
but when he tries to fathom them will find they are beyond his 
depth and discover more therein. All the stories and quotations 
taken from them have another, esoteric, meaning. Our , under- 
standing of them is as totally unlike the thing as it is in itself and 
as it is in God, as though it did not exist. 

To return to our text. ‘Honour thy father and mother,’ and 
in a general sense it does mean father and mother, that we ought 
to honour them, and all who have spiritual power are to be honoured 
and preferred as well as the authors of thy temporal weal. Herein 

we wade, herein do we touch bottom ; but it is precious little we 
17 

258 MEISTER ECKHART 

get out of it. It is a woman who says, ‘If we ought to honour 
the authors of our outward good much more are we behoven to 
magnify the author of it all.” What we have here outwardly in 
multiplicity is all within and one. Yours to make this likeness 
like unto the Father. I was thinking this evening that all likeness 
ends in sameness with the Father. In the second place, thou 
oughtest to honour thy father, meaning thy heavenly Father, 
the source of thy being. Who honours the Father? None but the- 
Son: he alone does him honour. And none honours the Son save 
only the Father. The Father’s whole love, his fondness, his 
favours, are for the Son and him only. The Father knows nothing 
at all but the Son. Such delight does he take in his Son that he 
wants nothing else but to be getting his Son, for he is his exact © 
likeness, the perfect image of his Father. 

The teaching of our school is that anything known or born is 
an image. They say that in begetting his only-begotten Son the 
Father is producing his own image abiding in himself, in the ground 
of the image, as it has ever been in him, (forme illius) i.e. his 
immanent form. It is contrary to nature and seems to me 
irrational, the doctrine that God is known by likeness, by this 
thing or by that. For he, after all, is neither this nor that, and 
father is not satisfied till he returns to his first nature, to the 
innermost, to the-ground and core of fatherhood, where he has been 
for ever in himself, in his father-nature : to where he enjoys him- 
self in the Father as the Father does himself in the one alone. 
Here wood, stone, grass-blades, all things are the same. This is 
the best of all, and I have fooled myself therein. All the natural 
powers being gathered to a head are plunged into the Father- 
nature, so that they are one, one Son, transcending all the rest and 
subsisting alone in the paternal nature, or if not the one they are 
at least the image of the one. This nature, being of God, seeks 
not what is outside her, nay, this nature, existing in itself, has 
naught to do with ornament: nature which is of God seeks none 
other than God’s likeness. 

I was thinking this evening that a likeness is an outwork 
(preamble). I cannot see a thing unless it has some likeness, some 
relation to me, neither can I know a thing excepting it is like me. 
God has all things hidden in himself; not this and that distinct 
but one in the same nature. The eye is coloured and also receives 
colour, the ear not. The ear senses tone and the tongue has taste. 
It is a case of like to like. The form of the soul and God’s image 
have the same nature: we being sons. If I had neither eyes nor 
ears still I might have being. Who robs me of my eyes robs me 
not therefore of my being nor yet of my life, for my life is seated 
in the heart. A blow aimed at my eye I parry by a lifting of the 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 259 

hand. A blow at my heart I should stop with any portion of my 
body. But if someone attempted to cut off my head I should 
hit out straight from the shoulder in order to preserve my life and 
being. 

~~ I am fond ‘of saying, You must break the outside to let out the 
inside : to get at the kernel means breaking the shell. Even so 
to find nature herself all her likenesses have to be shattered and the 
further in the nearer the actual thing. On coming to one, where it 
is all one, she is the same. Who honours God ? He who is ever 
seeking God’s glory. 

Many years ago I was not; not long after that my father and 
my mother eating bread and meat and the vegetables growing 
in the garden, I became a man. In this my father and my mother 
were unable to assist, but God made my body without aid and 
created my soul after the supreme. Thus I became possessed of 
life (possedi me). This grain of rye has it in its nature to develop 
into wheat, and it never rests until it has that nature. This corn 
seed has it in its nature to be all things and pays the penalty of 
death in order to be all things. And this metal, copper, has it 
in its nature to be gold, and it will never rest till it has gotten that 
same nature. Aye, this wood has in its nature the power of 
turning into stone; I say more than that : it may indeed become 
all things if put into the fire and allowed to burn away and be 
transmuted to the fire-nature ; then same comes to same and. has 
eternally one being. I trow that wood and stone and bone and 
all the grasses have collectively one being in the first nature. 
And if so with this nature then how about the nature which is 
so intrinsically pure that it seeks not either this or that but 
transcending all the others is simply making for its primitive 
‘perfection ? 

I was thinking this evening, there are many heavens. There 
are some incredulous who will not believe that this bread upon 
the altar may be changed, that God can do it. (How unworthy, 
to deny that God is capable of this.) If God has given to nature 
the power to be all things, how much easier to him must be the 
changing to his body of this altar bread. If this frail nature from 
a drop of blood can contrive a man, how much more possible for 
God to make his body from a bit of bread. Who honours God ? 
He who is ever seeking God’s glory. This meaning is more 
obvious albeit the former is the better one. . 

The fourth point (is), ‘ they stood afar off and said unto Moses : 
Moses speak thou to us for we cannot hear God.’ They were 
standing at a distance, that is the reason they could not hear God. 

‘Moses went into the cloud and ascended into the mountain 
and there he beheld the divine light.’ We see this light best in 

260 MEISTER ECKHART 

the dark: in suffering and travail this light is nearest to us. 
Let God do his best or his worst he is bound to give himself to _ 
us whether in travail or distress. There was once a pious dame 
with many sons, whom they sought to slay. Smiling she said, 
‘Grieve not, be of good cheer and remember your heavenly 
Father, for from me ye have gotten nothing whatsoever.’ As 
though to say, Ye have your being straight from God. This 
applies to us. Our Lord said, ‘ Thy darkness (i.e. thy suffering) 
shall be turned into bright light.” But I must not love nor 
covet it. It was said by a master in another place, ‘ The mysterious 
darkness of the invisible light of the eternal Deity is unknown and 
never shall be known.’ And the light of the eternal Father has 
ever been shining in this darkness and the darkness comprehends 
not the light. May we arrive at this eternal light, So help us God. 
Amen. 

CIII 
OUT OF THE MOUTH OF THE MOST HIGH 

Ex oro altissimi prodivi (Eccl. 24,). These words, which I 
have quoted in Latin, we may speak in the Person of the 
eternal Word. He says, ‘I proceeded forth out of the mouth of 
the Most High.’ This is the exalted source which uttered from the 
Father’s heart the eternal Word which took on human nature in 
our Lady’s womb. Not of this carnal birth am I going to tell, 
for much is told you of it. It is on the eternal birth that I propose 
to speak, and I will broach the subject by answering two questions. 

The first one is, Whether the eternal Word can be called the 
perfect Word seeing it is still in the throes of birth ?— Yes, for the 
eternal Word is gotten in the essential light and abides therein, 
untold to anything outside it, and is withal infallibly uttered by 
_ the Father. Hence it may well be called the perfect Word. 

The second question is, Whether our intelligence can at all 
conceive the perfect Word? for it is proper to every under- 
standing that it should understand. Is it not the same as our 
understanding in itself ?—I say no, because our word is gotten 
in a fitful light. Our understanding is a changing thing, so it 
cannot conceive a perfect word. The word you hear from me 
is not infallible, it is a sign of the Word within me. 

Now mark the way of the eternal birth. The Personal under- 
standing as confined to its unity of nature is one with the under- 
standing whereby the Father understands himself in his char- 
acteristic nature. Were this not the case there would be two 
intelligible essences. But there are not: there is but one intelli- 
gible essence wherein the Father sees himself in his characteristic 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 261 

nature. The object of his thought is the eternal Word. Where 
this is confined to the natural understanding of the Father it is 
none other than the Father-nature. Where this same Word is 
directed to itself there is ever distinction of Person and withal 
one simple essence divine in nature. Here I will put four questions 
the better for you to understand the mode of the eternal birth, 
though, let me say at once, that this is inconceivable to the multi- 
tudinous mind. However, I will tell you as much as it is possible 
for your minds to grasp. 

The first question is, Why is the Person of the Son @alled born 
and the Person of the Father not ? The answer is, that it is the 
personal understanding of the Father wherewith he understands 
himself in his characteristic nature, but the product of this con- 
ception is the eternal Word. Hence the eternal Word is said 
to be begotten and the Person of the Father not.—Question two : 
Is the work of the eternal birth wrought by his personal power or 
by his natural power? Some theologians say it is due to the 
personal power of the Father since it is proper to all begotten 
things to receive the same nature they are gotten by. Where 
saw ye the father that imparted not his own nature to his son ? 
So runs the argument for the eternal birth being due to personal 
power. This is not my view. Where the personal understanding 
keeps to its unity of nature there is this nature Person. Now the 
eternal Word originates in the essential thought wherein the 
Father understands himself in his characteristic nature. It 
follows that the work of the eternal birth must be due to his 
natural power, for if the eternal Word sprang from the personal 
understanding of the Father then this eternal Word would be th 
cause of its own self, for this conception is the Word. ; 

The third question is, Where does the Father-nature have 
maternal names? Where it does maternal work. Where personal 
understanding keeps to its unity of nature and has intercourse 
therewith, there the Father-nature has maternal names and is 
doing mother’s work, for it is exclusively a mother’s work to receive 
the seed of the eternal Word. In essential thought the mother- 
nature has paternal names and does paternal work. 

The fourth question is, Whether this work is essential or does 
the Father play a casual part therein? Isay,no. If he stopped 
a single instant he would negate himself. For the eternal Word is 
the image of the Father as he conceives himself in his character 
of Person, with the added dignity which the eternal Word receives 
in its own Person, all the perfection which the Father has and all 
the omnipotence peculiar to his nature. The heretical doctor 
Arius observes concerning this: It appears to me to be untrue 
that the eternal Word receives all the perfection that the Father 

262 MEISTER ECKHART 

has and all the omnipotence peculiar to his nature, for it cannot do 
what the Father does: he cannot beget another Son. But as 
St Augustine says, That he does not beget another Son is not due 
to impotence, but it behoves him not to. A statement which , 
some doctors misconstrue, giving to understand that the Son an 

he would could beget another Son. Which is erroneous, for in that 

case the Person of the Son would be the Person of the Father. 

The reason for not doing it is this. Each Person receives the same 

nature albeit variously : the Father as fatherhood, the Son as 

sonship and the Holy Ghost as the common product of them both. 

Here the Persons are an hypostasis of the nature, each Person 

receiving the one nature all at once as essence. Where (the 

Word) receives its dignity the three shine with one light, they 

having this light as their common being. The dignity the eternal - 
Word receives by birth is that of being equal with the Father, for 

it springs from the essential conception of the Father. As con- 

fined to this conception it is none other than divine nature; in 

its aspect of the Word it is distinct in Person and withal in nature 

one impartible essence. 

Here arises the question, How can the eternal Word be at once 
discrete and one simple essence divine in nature? The best 
answer theologians have to this is that it is due to the imparti- 
bility and simplicity of that nature. The entire content of divine . 
nature is one impartible essence which operates by divine nature. 
May we attain this oneness so far as it is possible to us. So help 
us God. Amen. 

CIV 
SUFFERING 

I say that next to God there is no nobler thing than suffering. 
Were there anything more noble than suffering the heavenly 
Father would have given it to his Son Jesus Christ, in exemplary 
fashion, for all things. We find in Christ, as regards his manhood, 
nothing so much as suffering. Suffering was with him at his 
birth, and it never left him while he was here on earth. I say, 
moreover, that had Christ been a man upon this earth without 
his deity, yet would he have been noble beyond all human ken by 
reason of his suffering; for granting that suffering is noble, he 
who has most suffering is the noblest. But no human suffering 
was equal to Christ’s passion. And he is the more noble in 
proportion to it. Again I hold, if anything were nobler than 
suffering, God would have saved mankind therewith, for we might 
well accuse him of being unfriendly to his Son if he knew of 
something superior to suffering. And I say, were not suffering 

SERMONS AND COLLATIONS 263 

always noble, the heavenly Father would have left his Son some 
few hours on earth that were free from suffering. But we do not 
find that Christ on earth spent one single hour without suffering. 
Suffering then must be superior to all else. I ween that our 
Lady, God’s mother, rather than that she should be deprived 
of the reward attached to the least instant of her suffering at sight 
of her child’s martyrdom, would choose to have remained here 
upon earth and not behold God till the judgment day, provided 
that would win back this reward. So great the guerdon won in 
that short hour. 

I declare, all the humility and virtue we attribute to our Lady 
brought her no such great reward or love of God as the least of all 
the sufferings that God sent her. I say that if our Lady, God’s 
mother, and suffering stood together in the street and with our 
Lady all her earned reward for chastity, humility and her other 
virtues except suffering: to our Lady suffering would appear as 
lovely as sunshine in a burrow, for in that case she would be out- 
side God. And again, I say: suppose a man committed a sin 
beyond all sins, it might involve a suffering wherein by virtuous 
conduct he could cancel all his sin and win greater merit in God’s 
eyes than any of his saints. Further, I maintain, no man apart 
from God has ever been so holy or so good as to deserve the least 
nobility such as the smallest suffering would give. Given one 
man’ endowed with the collective humility and virtues of all the 
people who have lived since God created the first man, he, for all 
his virtues, would not merit the reward a man wins by a little 
suffering. I tell you, right suffering is the mother of all virtues, 
for right suffering so subdues the heart, it cannot rise to pride 
but perforce is lowly. And suffering makes for chastity; for in 
right suffering vice is burnt away. And to one who has mastered 
all the virtues, suffering is the mother of virtue as a whole. Noth- 
ing makes a man so like God as suffering. For he who has least 
vices is the most like God. But nothing is like suffering for 
killing a man’s vices. Ergo, it makes man Godlike. Finally I 
say, not all the theologists together could describe what profit, 
what glory lies in suffering. Suffering alone is sufficient prepara- 
tion for God’s dwelling in man’s heart. God dwells only with 
the sinless. But suffering exorcises sin. Hence God is always 
with a man in suffering; as he himself declared by the mouth 
of the prophet, ‘ Whosoever is sorrowful, I will myself be with 
him.’ 

[Peradventure thou wilt say, ‘If it be a fact that suffering is 
so noble and profits one so much, why are not the Jews and 
heathens saved? I see and hear a great deal of their sufferings, 
for as captives they are ever subject to the Christians and that 

264 _ MEISTER ECKHART 

causes them much suffering.’ I answer. Baptism is the basis. 
of the welfare, the salvation, of mankind. In the absence of it, | 
virtues and good works are not rewarded with eternal grace. And 
since the Jews are not baptized, they have no guerdon of eternal 
grace, but are accursed on earth as well as in the other world.]* 
But thou mayst object, Why is it that all Christians are not saved ; 
they are all God’s, and there is nobody on earth but is bound to 
suffer in some fashion? My answer is, There are two kinds of 
sufferers. Some, when suffering befalls, take it not as if it came 
from God; they resist it to the utmost, saying in their hearts, 
What have I done to God that he should visit me with such 
misfortune ? and are moved to tears. Not that in this thought 
they are to blame, but in other cases they chide God vehemently, 
whereas God sends the suffering to rid them of their sins and by 
not accepting it in the proper spirit they make it useless to them ; 
and to such as these there is no reward for suffering though they 
are always having it; they scorn God’s gift and thrust it from 
them. And they chase away God too, albeit they fain would 
have him. On the other hand, some people take it as from God, 
when their suffering comes, and send it back to God. They take © 
it from God, saying in their hearts: God, I accept this suffering 
from no one else but thee, for my sins have thoroughly deserved it. 
And they send their suffering back to God, saying in their hearts, 
Lord God, I willingly contribute all the suffering thou hast suffered 
from the hour of thy birth down to the very end; for thou wert 
a pure and sinless.soul, yet wert in great affliction ; it is more fit 
that I should be afflicted, I who am a man in sin. Accepting 
suffering thus, a man will merit the eternal kingdom. God help 
us to attain it. Amen. 

1 This is probably a gloss which has become incorporated in the text. 

\ 

II 
TRACTATES 

RE |. J 
Ra lah ASS 
eo) thon 

a} 

Iı 
THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

‘Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of God and his righteousness 
and all things shall be added unto you.’ Since Christ bids us seek 
the kingdom of God it is our duty to know what this kingdom is. 
Know then that God’s kingdom is himself and his perfect nature. 
Secondly, there is God’s kingdom in the soul. He himself says: 
* The kingdom of God is within you.’ 

Consider this first kingdom. Theologists say that . God’s 
kingdom is unity of essence in a trinity of Persons. The question 
is, where is God happiest ? I answer that God’s happiness is all 
alike in him according to his unity but according to our under- 
standing God is far happier in his unity of essence than in his 
trinity of Persons, as we will prove. According to some theolo- 
gists there are three kinds of distinctions in the Godhead. First, 
rational distinctions; secondly, formal distinctions; and thirdly 
real distinctions, to wit, the mutual relations of the Persons. 
Others say the Godhead has no more than two kinds of distinc- 
tions, rational and real. 

Take first the distinction of Persons. St John says: ‘In the 
beginning was the Word.’ This beginning or origin is the Father, 
as St Augustine says. The question is, has the Father a begin- 
ning? The answer is: yes, his beginning is primary not pro- 
ceeding, as I will show. Theologists teach that we must distin- 
guish in the Godhead between essence and being (i.e. nature). 
- Being in the Godhead is deity itself and is the first thing we 
apprehend about God. Deity is the whole basis of divine per- 
fection. The Godhead in itself is motionless unity and balanced 
stillness and is the source of all emanations. Hence I assume a 
passive welling-up. We call this first utterance being, for the most 
intrinsic utterance, the first formal assumption in the Godhead is 
being : being as essential word. God is being, but being is not God. 

Now the origin of the Father is necessarily involved in this 
assumption of a passive welling-up. In other words, the deity 
being in itself intelligence, therefore the divine nature steps forth 

1 Jostes, No. 82. 
267 

268 MEISTER ECKHART 

into relation of otherness: other but not another, for this distinc- 
tion is rational not real. Thus the first Person arises in the 
Godhead passively, not from any active beginning. Hence its 
beginning is without property (or, Person). 

The question is, what is the Person of the Father? I answer 
that it is being in the Godhead, not according to essence but 
according to paternity which is the formal notion specifically 
determining the Father. The Father is the beginning of the God- 
head. Hence, some theologists assert that if there were neither 
Son nor Holy Ghost in the Godhead there would still be the Person 
of the Father. When, therefore, St John says: ‘ In the beginning 
was the Word,’ we must not understand this beginning to be 
God’s essence or his nature, for the Father alone is the active 
origin of the Son. 

Mark how the Son is in the Father. Theologists say that the 
Father looking into himself actually conceives in himself his own 
impartible exuberant nature. There follows the characteristic of 
that nature. The same nature which in the Father is active is 
receptive in the Son, for they participate it according to their 
properties. 1 

Anent this divine birth theologists teach that this word is to 
be taken in a two-fold sense : essential and personal. The first 
or essential word every Person possesses visually, but the Father 
possesses it both visually and really. And this same Word in 
Person is the Son. The same power which is active in the Father 
is passive in the Son, the Son receiving his divinity from the 
Father. We must understand the passivity begotten of passivity, 
divinity of divinity, as properties of the Persons by which the 
essence is determined. For saints and doctors teach that the 
Persons proceed from the essence as origin, the essence being 
determined by the Persons and the Persons by their properties. 
As paternity is the formal notion which specifically determines 
the Person of the Father, so filiation is the formal notion which 
distinguishes the Person of the Son. These formal notions 
signify the relationship of the Persons. And this property, this 
formal relationship of paternity and filiation, is the final attribute 
of divinity. Paternity and filiation are divine accidents and 
dependent properties. 

Mark how in this birth from the Father the Word remains 
within as essence and goes forth as Person. Philosophers teach 
that to every rational concept there succeeds an intelligible word. 
Now when the Father conceives himself in himself; his own nature 
is the object of his understanding. The Father observes himself 
and his nature has another property, that of being observed. 
Accordingly the Son remains within as essence and goes forth as 

' TRACTATES 269 

Person. Corresponding with the divided nature of this act the 
Son is born and proceeds out of the paternal heart. Thus saith 
the Eternal Wisdom: ‘I proceeded out of the mouth of the 
Most High,’ to wit, out of the natural conception of the essential 
word of the divine Father. Not that there are in the Godhead 
two words really but only logically. 

‘ The Word was with God.’ That means, as a Person distinct 
from the Father, as here demonstrated. 

Observe further concerning these two how they bring forth the 
Holy Ghost. Theologists teach that the Father, pouring himself 
out as love into the Son, there his love is as it were reflected, the 
Son pouring himself back into the Father. This mutual outpour- 
ing of love is the common spiration of the Father and the Son. 
It might be thought that this spiration is identical in the two 
Persons but it is not. For according to its formal origin this 
spirative force is different in Father and Son, the Father being 
formally something other than the Son. But taking it, this 
spiration, both formally and really, it is the formal notion and the 
property which distinguishes the Person of the Holy Ghost. 
Hence the Holy Ghost proceeds from two formal sources as from 
one active origin. 

Then comes the question whether this property (Person) of 
the Holy Ghost results from the (divine) nature in the same way 
as the property of the Son does? The answer is: no, for were 
that so the Holy Ghost must proceed by an act of nature, like the 
Son; which is not the case, for then there would be two Sons in 
the Godhead. But the divine nature is posterior to the property of 
the Holy Ghost which proceeds by spiration of the free-will. 
Hence were it possible to separate the nature from the Person 
of the Holy Ghost in the Godhead, the Holy Ghost would never- 
theless continue to subsist in itself apart from the nature. With 
the Son this would not be possible seeing that the Son emanates 
from the Father as an intelligible word proceeding from the act 
‘of the exuberant nature of the Father ; hence he could not exist 
apart from that nature. And as the nature is posterior to the 
Person of the Holy Ghost and as the Holy Ghost does not subsist 
apart from that nature, so on the other hand it is true that the 
Person of the Son is posterior to the nature. The nature does 
not exist apart from the Son, for the Son is the image of the Father 
from whom he emanates naturally ; which the Holy Ghost does 
not, seeing that it emanates from his free-will. It follows that 
there is reciprocity only between paternity and filiation ; not the 
Holy Ghost. Howbeit the reciprocity of the spirative power 
common to the paternity and filiation is rational not real. Herein, 
noble soul, seek with understanding the kingdom of God. 

270 MEISTER ECKHART 

St John says: ‘ And “God was the word,’ signifying unity of 
nature. Up, noble soul, arise in divine wonder at this exalted 
fellowship: the three Persons united in one impartible nature ! 
The prophet says: ‘ The Lord shall reign for ever and beyond.’ 
God reigns (for ever) in distinction of Persons, but his reign in the 
beyond is in unity of nature. There God is the kingdom of himself, 
being super-essential. 

Then comes the question: Can the divine essence as essence, 
apart from those formal distinctions which philosophers call the 
eternal eternities, be God’s happiness or that of creatures? We 
answer: No! Essence as essence is the same in God and crea- 
tures, but God’s happiness and the soul’s also lies in the divine 
nature. For the divine nature subsists in itself with all its per- 
fections, to wit, the eternal eternities which are intrinsic in it. 
Some teach that it is possible for the soul to attain happiness in 
the knowledge of one of these formal relations regardless of the 
rest. But that is not true; if it were, each of these formal 
relations must be established in itself apart from the others and 
detached from its divine nature, which is impossible ; hence this 
opinion is false. But the soul’s beatitude consists in compre- 
hending all together, in one property, these eternal eternities 
which are the formal expression of the divine nature. For here 
is no division ; God is the superessential one, his own beatitude 
and that of all creatures in the actuality of his Godhead. Be sure 
that in this unity God knows distinctions but as one impartible 
property. 

In this unity God is idle. The Godhead effects neither this nor 
that ; it is God who effects all things. God in activity is manifold 
and knows multiplicity. God as one is absolutely free from activity. 
In this unity God knows nothing save that he superessentially 
is in his own self. 

Hence we understand: ‘God was the word’ to refer to the 
unity of the essence. ‘ The same was in the beginning with God,’ 
his equal in wisdom, in truth, in goodness and in all the essential 
perfections, to wit, the eternal eternities, the formal modes, the 
fullness of the divine essence. This superessential unity is what is 
meant by the divine kingdom which the spirit seeks with know- 
ledge and with love. 

Secondly, by this kingdom of God we understand the soul, for 
the soul is of like nature with the Godhead. Hence all that has 
been said here about the kingdom of God, how God is himself 
the kingdom, may be said with equal truth about the soul. 

St John says: ‘ All things were made by him.’ This refers 
to the soul, for the soul is all things. The soul is all things in that 
she is an image of God and as such she is also the kingdom of 

TRACTATES 271 

God; as God is essentially in himself without beginning so in the 
kingdom of the soul he is, as essence, without end. ‘ God,’ says 
one philosopher, ‘is in the soul in such a fashion that his whole 
Godhead hangs upon her.’ It is far better for God to be in the 
soul than for the soul to be in God. The soul is not happy because 
she is in God, she is happy because God is in her. Rely upon it, 
God: himself is happy in the soul, for God, when he broke out and 
wrought the soul, so far maintained his ground in her.as to conceal 
in her his divine treasure, his heavenly kingdom. Hence Christ 
says: ‘The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field.’ 
. This field is the soul, wherein lies hidden the treasure of the divine 
kingdom. Accordingly God and all creatures are happy in the 
soul. What we say of the soul applies to her as being an image of 
God. 
Let us see therefore wherein this image lies. One theologist 
says it lies in her powers, and this is commonly held to be true. 
And it is true when rightly understood. If it is taken to mean 
that her powers are diverse there is no ultimate truth in it, but if 
the powers are understood to be one at the summit of her activity 
then it is true. In this divine activity the soul looks back immedi- 
ately, intellectually, in the divine nature. In this divine act she 
conceives her own nature superessentially in God. In this act all is 
divine to the highest image, which in its proper activity it is very 
God and happy—formally, not objectively. For gazing into itself 
it simultaneously conceives God in himself, without means. Hence 
it is happy in him formally, and objectively owing to the divine 
nature. One doctor says that this supernal light flows immediately 
out of God and at the same instant by an act of intellection is 
gotten without means into God. Hence its going out of and 
persistence in God are one intellectual conception, the impartible 
nature of the same intelligent act. In God, be sure, the soul in 
its highest prototype has never known creature as creature nor 
has she ever therein possessed either time or space. For in this 
image everything is God: sour and sweet, good and bad, small 
and great, all are one in thisimage. This image is no more changed 
by anything in time than the divine nature is changed by anything 
that is creature ; for it apprehends and uses all things according 
to the law of godhood. cat 

Now it may be asked : If this kingdom is in us why is it unknown 
to us? To which I answer that, owing to the soul’s natural 
disposition towards creatures, all her acts are bound to originate 
in creaturely images; hence these acts are thought by some to 
be the seat of this image in the soul, though this is not the case. 
These persons little know the nobility of the soul, whose activity 
in her ordinary understanding originates in an intelligible image 

272 MEISTER ECKHART 

in highest thought (or, memory), begotten there as to form by 
phantasmal images and as to essence by the supernal, God-behold- 
ing image whence the soul receives power to understand all truth. 
In the train of this understanding comes the ordinary will, which 
is nothing but the bias of the mind. Now since the ordinary 
understanding takes things for true and the will takes them for 
good, things are the object of both these activities which are alien 
and remote from God. For God is neither good nor true. And 
as God is detached and free from all that creatures can understand,, 
so also is the highest image of the Godhead. 

It is a question whether there is mutual regard between God 
and creatures ? I answer that, God has no regard to creatures, 
for God has no regard except towards himself ; but creatures have 
regard to God, for everything that ever issued from him is ever 
gazing back towards him. Apply this to the highest image. The 
instant it glanced out from God this highest image looked back 
again, with countenance unveiled conceiving the divine nature 
without means. From this act is gotten its whole existence. 
In this act this prototype is God and is called the image of God ; 
in its breaking forth it is a creature and is called the image of the 
soul. 

Consider then thyself, O noble soul, and the nobility within thee, 
for thou are honoured above all creatures in that thou art an 
image of God ; and despise what is mean for thou art destined to 
greatness ! 

That is what is meant by the soul being the kingdom of God. 

‘Seek first the kingdom of God.’ It should be our only care, 
our only quest, to know the nobility of God and the nobility of the 
soul. Let us see then how to seek the kingdom of God. 

In the Book of Love it is written : ‘ Knowest thou not thyself, 
O fairest among women ? Then go forth and follow after the 
footsteps of thy flocks!’ These words refer to the soul; she is 
the fairest of all creatures and she shall go forth in perceiving her 
own beauty. Now observe in the soul three sorts of going-forth 
out of three sorts of nature which she has. The first is her crea- 
turely nature. The second is the nature she has in the personal 
Word of the Trinity. The third is that which belongs to her in 
‘the exuberant nature functioning in the Father, the beginning 
of all creatures. 

Taking this first exodus, note how she has got to go out of her 
creaturely nature. Christ says: ‘If any man ‘will come after 
me let him deny himself and follow me.’ As surely as God lives, 
no man will ever go forth into the negation of himself until he is 
as free from his own self as he was when he was not. Doctors 
declare that man is to be known in two ways: as outward man and 

TRACTATES 273 

as inward man. The outward whose works are bodily and the 
inward whose works are ghostly: By the inner man God is sought 
in the contemplative life, by the outer man God is sought in the 
active life. Now mark my words. I say again what I have 
said before: outward disciplines are of little worth; they are 
useful only in subduing natures that are still uncontrolled. Know 
that the discipline ‘of outward acts, though it subdue nature, 
cannot kill it. Nature dies by ghostly acts. There are many 
to be found who, with the best intentions, cling on to themselves, 
not denying themselves. Verily I say, these persons are mistaken, 
for it is contrary to human reason, contrary to the habit of grace 
and against the nature of the Holy Ghost. As for those who see 
their salvation in outward practices, I do not say they will be lost, 
but they will get to God only through hot cleansing fires ; for they 
follow not God who quit not themselves ; keeping hold of them- 
selves they follow their own darkness. .God is no more to be 
found in any bodily exercise than in sin. Nevertheless those 
‚who make much practice of outward disciplines are greatly 
regarded by the eyes of the world ; which follows by analogy, for 
those who understand only that which is bodily esteem highly 
the life they can grasp with the senses. None but a fool would 
prize any other! 

Secondly, the work of the inner man is vision in knowing and 
loving. In this work lies the beginning of the holy life. These 
two activities define the nature of the soul. Doctors declare that 
every nature exists for the sake of its proper activity. Now since 
this nature (the soul) can be apprehended only in these two 
‚activities, therefore they are the noblest activities in man. I have 
said before that virtue is a mean between vice and perfection ; 
now love is the form of virtue without which no virtue is virtue. 
Whensoever a person practises a virtue the works of the virtue are ~ 
works of love, not of the person; each work of virtue having 
power in love to bring the person to God. St Dionysius says, it 
is the nature of love to change a man into that which he loves. 
Wherefore we ought so to live that our whole life is love. In this 
disposition all practices are praiseworthy, outward or inward. 
David says: ‘ They shall go from virtue to virtue, then shall the 

God of Gods be seen in Sion.’ The vision of God transcends 
"virtues. Virtue, as I said, is a mean between vice and perfection 
and the fruit of virtue—the end and object of virtue, that is to 
say—will never be obtained until the soul is caught up above the 
virtues. Be sure that as long as a man holds fast himself as 
thrall to virtue he will never taste the fruit of virtue, which is 
nothing else than seeing the God of Gods in Sion. God is not seen 
in Jacob, the practice of virtue, but God is seen in Sion. Sion 

18 

274 MEISTER ECKHART 

is as it were a polished mirror and stands for unveiled vision 
with the single eye of the divine nature. Rely upon it, virtue 
has never seen this sight. 

Now it may be asked, are we to abandon virtue altogether ? 
To which I answer : no, we are to practise virtue, not possess it. 
The perfection of virtue is freedom from virtues. Thus Christ 
says: ‘ When ye have done all that is possible to you, say: we 
are unprofitable servants.’ 

That is what is meant by the soul dying to her own works. 
The question we must now consider is how she loses her own 
nature. Doctors declare that everything made by God is ordered 
in such an excellent way that nothing can wish it did not exist. 
Yet the soul is to relinquish her existence. This means the death 
of the spirit. And in order to accomplish this death the soul must 
let go of herself and all things, retaining of herself and things 
no more than when she was not. Christ says: ‘ Except a corn 
of wheat die it abideth alone.’ To die is to be wholly deprived 
of life, so that while a man lives, as long as there is life in him, 
be sure that he knows nothing of this death. St Paul says: 

“I no longer live.’ Some people interpret this death to mean 
that one must live neither in God nor in oneself nor yet in any 
creature. And so it does, for death is the loss of all life. But I 
say more: a man may be dead to everything, to God and crea- 
tures, yet if God still finds in his soul a place that he can live in, 
then the soul is not yet dead and gone out into that which follows 
created existence. For to die is, properly speaking, to lose 
everything. Ido not say the soul is brought so utterly to naught 
as it was before it was created ; this naughting applies to holding 
and possessing. In this respect the soul suffers total loss—God 
as well as creatures. 

It sounds strange to say the soul must lose her God, yet I affirm 
that in a way it is more necessary to perfection that the soul 
lose God than that she lose creatures. Everything must go. 
The soul must subsist in absolute nothingness. It is the full 
intention of God that the soul shall lose her God, for as long as the. 
soul possesses God, is aware of God, knows God, she is aloof from 
God. God desires to annihilate himself in the soul in order that 
the soul may lose herself. For that God is God he gets from 
creatures. When the soul became a creature she obtained a God. 
When she lets slip her creaturehood, God remains to himself that 
he is, and the soul honours God most in being quit of God and 
leaving him to himself. _ 

This is the lowest death of the’ soul on her way to divinity. 
Such souls are hardly to be recognised for, as St Paul says: ‘ Ye 
are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God.’ If it be ques- 

TRACTATES 275 

tioned whether the unique virtue of these souls finds no outward 
expression, IT answer: Yes, just as Christ, the pattern of perfection, 
was unindigent and a shining light to all mankind, so these men 
are turned towards humanity by reason of their in wisdom 
and godlike frame of mind. 

So much for the first exodus in which the soul goes out of her 
creaturely nature seeking the kingdom of God. 

Secondly, she must go out of the nature she has in her eternal 
pretotype. Theologists teach that the prototype of the soul is 
the divine understanding. The divine understanding is the Person 
of the Son. Hence the Son is the exemplar of all creatures and 
the. image of the Father in which image broods the nature of all 
creatures. Now when the soul strips off her created nature there 
flashes out its uncreated prototype wherein the soul discovers 
herself in uncreatedness, for things are all one in this prototype 
according to the property of the (eternal) image. 

And now the soul fares forth out of this same prototype wherein 
she discovers her nature according to the uncreatedness of the 
image and this she does in the divine death. The soul is conscious 
that what she seeks is neither her exemplar nor its nature, wherein 
she perceives herself to be in multiplicity and separation. For 
this final attribute of divinity is multiplicity. And since the eternal 
nature wherein the soul now finds herself in her exemplar is 
characterised by multiplicity—the Persons being in separation— 
therefore the soul breaks through her eternal exemplar to get to 
where God is a kingdom in unity. One philosopher declares that 
the soul’s breaking-through is more noble than her emanation. 
Now Christ says: ‘No man cometh to the Father but through 
me.’ Christ is the eternal exemplar. Though the soul’s abiding- 
place is not in him yet she must, as he says, go through him. 
This breaking-through is the second death of the soul and is far 
more momentous than the first. Of it St John says: ‘ Blessed 
. are the dead that die in the Lord,’ that is, in God. 

O surpassing wonder! How can there be death in him who 
says of himself that he is the life? To which we answer: In the 
birth of the Son all creatures went forth receiving life and being, 
hence all things are lively imaged in the Son. Now when the soul 
returns again within she loses the Son. Theologists declare that 
when the Son returns to unity of nature he is neither Person nor 
its property : the Son is lost in the unity ofthe essence. Likewise 
I say concerning the soul: when the soul breaks through and 
loses herself in her eternal prototype that is the death the soul 
dies in God. St Dionysius says: ‘ When God exists not for the 
soul there exists not for her either the eternal prototype, her source.’ 
Equality belongs to the soul in her exemplar, for the Son is equal 

276 MEISTER ECKHART 

with the Father. But in that they are one in nature they are not 
equal, for equality resides in separation. Accordingly I say con- 
cerning the soul: if she is to enter the divine unity she must lose 
the equality she has in her eternal exemplar. Dionysius declares 
that the soul’s supreme delight is the nothingness of her prototype. 
And a heathen philosopher says: ‘ God’s naught fills everywhere 
and his aught is nowhere.’ God’s aught, then, is not discovered 
by the soul till she has come to naught as regards finding or being 
able to find herself, created or uncreated as we have shown her 
eternal prototype to be. 

This is the second death and second exodus, the soul going forth 
out of the nature which is hers in her eternal prototype to seek 
the kingdom of God. ‘ He who desires to come to God,’ says one 
philosopher, ‘ let him come with naught.’ 

The third nature out of which the soul goes is the exuberant 
divine nature energising in the Father. According to some 
theologists the Father always perceived within himself tokens of 
emanation before he brought forth the Word. They all agree 
that God the Father conceived his own nature in originating the 
eternal Word and all creatures. Doctors distinguish between 
nature and essence. Essence, in as far as it is active in the Father, 
is nature. The distinction is therefore a logical one. From God 
in activity all creatures look forth potentially. But this is not 
the summit of divine union so it is not the soul’s abiding place. 

It must be clearly understood that the soul has got to die to all 
the activity connoted by the divine nature if she is to enter the 
divine essence where God is altogether idle ; this highest prototype 
of soul beholds without means the essence of the Godhead abso- 
lutely free from activity. This supernal image is the paradigm 
whereto the soul is brought by her dying. 

Now mark! The Godhead, self-poised, is self-sufficient. God 
as Godhead transcends all that creature as creature ever compre- 
hended or can ever comprehend. As St Paul says: ‘ God dwells 
in light inaccessible.’ Now when the soul has gone out of her 
created nature and out of her uncreated nature wherein she dis- 
covers herself in her eternal prototype and, entering into the divine 
nature, still fails to grasp the kingdom of God, then, recognising 
that thereinto no creature can ever get, she forfeits her very self 
and going her own way seeks God no more; thus she dies her 
highest death. In this death the soul loses every desire and image. 
and all understanding and form and is bereft of any nature. 
And as God lives it is true that the soul, being spiritually dead, 
can no more manifest to any man any mode or image than the 
dead can stir being bodily dead. This spirit is dead and buried 
in the Godhead and the Godhead lives for none other than itself. _ 

TRACTATES 277 

Ah, noble soul, prove thy nobility! But while it is the case 
with thee that thou lettest not go thine own self altogether to 
drown in the bottomless sea of the Godhead, verily thou canst 
not know this divine death. The wise man says: ‘ The Lord 
possessed me in the beginning in his own way.’ God possesses 
all things in his Godhead’s way, not in the soul’s way, for God 
never received creature nor can creature ever get to him, as 
creature. 

Now when the soul has lost herself in every way, as here set 
forth, she finds herself to be the very thing she vainly sought. 
Herself the soul finds in the supernal image wherein God really 
is in all his Godhead, where he is the kingdom in himself. There 
the soul recognises her own beauty. Thence she must go out 
to get into her very self and realise that she and God are one 
felicity: the kingdom which, without, seeking, she has found. 
As saith the prophet : ‘I poured out my soul into myself.’ That 
is the meaning of: ‘ Knowest thou not thyself thou fairest among 
women ? Then go forth.’ The soul has to go forth, as we have 
seen, in order to enter into herself, where she finds, without 
seeking, the kingdom of God. St Paul says: ‘I reckon as worth- 
less temporal suffering in comparison with the future glory which 
shall be revealed to us.’ 

Look you. I said of old, and say again, that I have now all that 
I shall possess eternally, for God in his felicity and in the fullness 
of his Godhead is enjoyed by my supernal prototype though this 
is hidden from the soul. As the prophet says: ‘ Indeed Lord, 
thou art a hidden God!’ This treasure of God’s kingdom is 
hidden by time and multiplicity by the soul’s own activity and 
by her creaturehood. The more the soul departs from all this 
multiplicity the more God’s kingdom is revealed in her. But the 
soul is not able for this without the help of grace. An she find it, 
it is grace that has aided her thereto, for grace is innate in her 
highest prototype. There the soul is God, using and enjoying 
all things God-fashion. There the soul no more receives either 
from God or creatures, for she is what she contains and takes all 
things from her own. Soul and Godhead are one: there the soul 
finds that she is the kingdom of God. 

It may be asked what discipline best enables the soul to reach 
this end? I answer: This, that the soul remain in death, not 
shrinking from death. St Paul says: ‘Christ was obedient to 
the Father even unto the death of the cross. Therefore he hath 
exalted him and hath given him a name above every name.’ And 
I say about the soul: if she remain obedient to God in death he 
will exalt her likewise and will give her a new name above every 
name. For as the Godhead is apart from name and nameless 

278 MEISTER ECKHART 

so also the soul, like God, is nameless, for she is the very same 
as he is. Christ said: ‘ Henceforth I call you not servants but 
friends, for all that I have heard of my Father I have made known 
unto you.’ ‘A friend,’ says a heathen, ‘is a second self.” God 
became my second self that I might become his second self. 
And St Augustine declares: “God became man that man might 
become God.’ In God the soul receives a new life. In him she 
arises out of death into the life of the Godhead ; here God pours 
into her his divine fullness, here she receives a new name which is 
above every name. For as St John says, ‘we have passed from 
death unto life because we love.’ 

Such is the interpretation of Christ’s words: ‘Seek first the 
kingdom of God and his righteousness.’ 

Now let us see how ‘all things shall be added unto us.” We 
can take this in two ways: first, as meaning that whatever of 
perfection there is in things we shall find in that first kingdom. 
Secondly, that we must hold fast to perfection in all we do: a 
man’s works should be wrought according to the law of God’s 
kingdom. If any man acts in such a way that his deeds are able 
to demean him, be sure he is not acting according to the law of 
God’s kingdom. When works are wrought according to humanity 
weeds and discord soon fall among them, but he whose work is 
wrought in the kingdom of heaven remains tranquil in every 
undertaking. ‘ And God saw all that he had made and behold it 
was very good,’ say the scriptures. And I say -concerning the 
soul, that all her acts are perfect as-seen in the kingdom of heaven, 
for there all works are equal, my least is my greatest, and my 
greatest least. Humanly speaking they are imperfect, for works 
in themselves are manifold and lead to multiplicity, wherefore in 
respect of such one is nigh on the brink of discord. Hence Christ’s 
words: ‘Martha, Martha, thou troublest thyself about many 
things ; one thing is needful.’ 

Of this be sure: to win perfection our activity must be of a 
nature so exalted that all our works are wrought as one act; 
. and this must take place in the kingdom of heaven where man is 
God. There all things make divine response, there man is lord 
of all his works. Verily I say unto you: works wrought out 
of the kingdom of God are dead works but works wrought in the 
kingdom of God are living works. The prophet says: ‘God as 
"little loves his works as he is disturbed and changed by them.’ 
And so with the soul when she works in accordance with the law 
of God’s kingdom. People of this sort are always the same 
whether they work or whether they work not, for works give 
nothing to them and take nothing from them. 

That is the meaning of: ‘ All things shall be added unto you.’ 

TRACTATES 279 

This is addressed to none but those who already know it as a 
live reality or who at least possess it as their heart’s desire, 
May it be revealed to us, So help us God! Amen. 

II! 
THE NOBILITY OF THE SOUL 

Whosoever would attain to the summit of his noble nature and 
to the vision of the sovran good, which is God himself, must have 
profoundest knowledge of himself and of things above himself. 
Thus he reaches the supreme. Beloved, learn to know thyself, 
it shall profit thee more than any craft of creatures. How to know 
thyself, of this now learn two ways. 

First, see that thy outward senses are properly controlled. 
Reflect, as regards these outward senses, that to the eye evil 
presents itself nö less than good. The ear is importuned by one 
as well as the other and so with the other senses. Wherefore it 
behoves thee strictly to confine thyself and with all diligence to 
those things which are good. So much for the outward senses. 

Now turn to the inward senses or noble powers of the soul, 
lower and higher. Take the lower powers first. These are 
intermediate between the higher powers and the outward senses. 
They are excited by the outward senses : what the eye sees, what 
the ear hears, they offer forthwith to desire. This offers it again, 
in the ordinary course, to the second power, called judgment, 
which considers it and once more passes it on to the third power, 
reckoning or reason. In this way it is clarified before it arrives 
at the higher faculties. So exalted is the power of the soul that 
she can seize it minus form or image and carry it in this state up 
into her higher powers. Here it is stored in the memory, mastered 
in the intellect and consummated in the will. These are the 
superior powers of the soul and they are one in nature. What 
the soul does is done by this simple nature in her powers. 

Now it may be asked, What is this nature of the soul ?—It is the 
consciousness (the spark or synteresis) in the soul, that is the impar- 
tible nature of the soul. So subtile is this nature of the soul that 
space might not exist at all for all it troubles her. For instance, if one 
has a friend a thousand leagues away, thither flows the soul with 
- the best part of her powers, loving her friend there. St Augustine 
testifies to this. He says, ‘ The soul is where she loves rather than 
where she is giving life.’ The simple nature of the soul is in no 
way hampered by place. So much for the nature of the soul. 

Next consider her higher, powers, so orderly appointed, so 

1 See also Greith, p. 114, etc. ; and Spamer, Texte, B. 2. 

280 MEISTER ECKHART 

admirably adapted to their several functions albeit of one nature. 
Memory is the power of storing up what the other powers bring | 
in, that is its function—The second power is understanding. 
This is so exalted that in its understanding of the highest good, 
God namely, all the other powers must subserve it to the best of 
their ability.—The third faculty is will. It is lordly enough to 
bid what it will and forbid what it will not; from things it does 
not will it is altogether free. So much for the superior powers of 
the soul and the röle assigned to each. 

Doctors dispute as to whether understanding is the nobler 
or the will. The position is this. Understanding sees things 
beyond this mundane level, that is its prerogative. .But to will 
alone are all things possible. As St Paul declares, “I can do all 
things in God who strengtheneth me.’ When understanding 
comes to the end of its tether, up soars the will transcendent in 
the light and power of faith. Here will surpasses understanding. 
This is the prerogative of will. But mind you, though the will 
is free to do and leave undone exactly as it will, this upward flight 
is not achieved by its own power alone : help comes from the other 
powers and from faith_as well. What help we shall now see. 
The powers have in common their impartible nature, and to this 
is due the transcension of the will. The other powers are the 
cause of this transcension in virtue of identity of nature. That 
is one help. 

Then comes the question, which is the power in the psychic 
trinity wherein faith first appears ?—The middle one: it springs 
from understanding but it is fortified in will and will is fortified 
by faith. Thus the light of faith contributes to this ascent of 
will. That is the second help, And of still another it remains 
to tell. Intellect projects itself to hear and understand. It 
analyses, orders, synthesises. But even when working to per- 
fection, always there is something on beyond which it cannot 
penetrate and which it recognises as belonging to a higher order. 
This it communicates to will, in their common nature, not in its 
individual capacity. This communication gives will an upward 
swing which displaces it into that higher order—always in their 
common nature. Here understanding is superior to will. But 
to will as individual a certain superiority belongs at the summit 

of its nature where it receives from the highest good, from very 
God.—What does it receive ?—It receives grace and in grace the 
highest good itself. What soul receives she receives willingly or 
not at all. Not that will as such receives this light: to receive 
is not its part; but by the grace of the sovran good the other 
powers are strengthened in their common nature. This light is 
kindled in that second power, in the Holy Ghost. It is in this 

TRACTATES 281 

light that all works are wrought in the soul. As Isaias says, 
“All our works are wrought by God.’ This light is gracious 
light, and any light outside this light is the light of nature. It is 
a sure sign of this light when of his own free will a person turns 
from mortal things to the highest good, God namely. We are in 
duty bound to love him for conferring on the soul such great 
perfection. When she has reached her limit of endeavour then will 
as such is free to leap over to that gnosis which is God himself. 
A somersault which lands the soul at the summit of her power. 
A marvel, truly, God has made from naught in the image of 
himself ! 

See now how the soul rises to sovran rank and to the zenith of 
her power. One master says, God is conveyed into the soul 
and there implanted. Whence there arises in the soul a divine 
love-spring which bears the soul back into God. Mark how. 
According to one holy man, ‘ Whatever we can say of God, that 
God is not.’ According to another, ‘ Whatever we can say of 
God, God is.’ And an eminent authority declares that both are 
right. With these three holy men even so I say, that when with 
her own understanding the soul receives divine understanding it 
is offered forthwith to her will. Will accepting it grows one with 
what it has accepted and finally takes it and puts it’ away in the 
memory. Thus God is conveyed and implanted in the soul. 
Then as to the divine love-spring. This overflowing in the soul 
causes her higher powers to flood the lower ones and the lower 
ones flood the outward man who, borne above all nether things, is 
incapable save of what is spiritual. As the spirit works by divine 
energy even so the outward man is driven by the spirit. 

Oh wonder of wonders! When I think of the union of the 
soul with God! He makes the soul to flow out of herself in 
joyful ecstasy, for no named things content her. And since she is 
herself a nature named therefore she fails to content herself. The 
divine love-spring surges over the soul sweeping her out of 
* herself into the unnamed being in her original source, for that 
is all God is. Creatures have given him names, but in himself 
he is nameless essence. Thus the soul arrives at the height of 
her perfection. 

Further as concerns the noble nature of the soul. St Augustine 
says, ‘As with God so with the soul.’ Had God not made the soul 
in the likeness of himself, to be God by grace, she could never 
be God above grace. Her likeness to the pattern of the blessed 
Trinity we see by comparing her with God. 

God is threefold in Person and onefold in his nature. God is 
in all places and in each place whole. In other words, all places 
are the place of God. And the same with her. God has prevision 

282 MEISTER ECKHART. 

of all things and everything is pietured in his providence. This 
is natural to God. And also to the soul. She too is threefold in 
her powers and simple in her nature. She too exists in all her 
members and in each member whole. So that all her members 
are the place of the soul. She too has foresight and imagines 
such things as she is able. To anything that we can predicate of 
God, soul has a certain likeness. Or, in the words of St Augustine, 
‘ Like God like the soul.’ God has endowed the soul with his own 
likeness which did she not possess she could not be God by grace 
nor above grace either ; whereas in this likeness she is able to attain 
to being God by grace and also above grace. And she must 
equal him in divine love and divine activity. So much for the 
soul as being God by grace. 

The soul who abides in this perfect likeness and in this noble 
nature God has given her, and at the same time rises to higher 
rank and higher, to her, what time she leaves the body, and at 
that very point, eternal life is open and in the opening she is 
encompassed with divine light, and enveloped in this divine light 
she is absorbed and transformed into God. Now each of the 
powers of the soul is endowed with the likeness of a divine Person : 
will receives the likeness of the Holy Ghost; understanding 
receives the likeness of the Son; memory the likeness of the 
Father and (her nature the likeness of the) divine nature withal 
remaining undivided.—That is as far as I can understand it. 

In the third place let us see how the soul becomes God above 
grace. What God has given her is changeless for she has reached 
a height where she has no further need of grace. In this exalted 
state she has lost her proper self and is flowing full-flood into 
the unity of the divine nature. But what, you may ask, is the 
fate of this lost soul: does she find herself or not? My answer 
is, it seems to me that she does find herself and that at the point 
where every intelligence sees itself with itself. For though she 
sink all sinking in the oneness of divinity she never touches 
bottom. Wherefore God has left her one little point from which 
to get back to herself and find herself and know herself as creature. 
For it is of the very essence of the soul that she is powerless to 
plumb the depths of her creator. Henceforth I shall not speak 
about the soul, for she has lost her name yonder in the oneness of 
divine essence. There she is no more called soul: she is called 
infinite being. 

Now I go on to speak about abstract knowledge of God. And. 
I address myself to you, my brethren and my sisters, beloved 
Friends of God who are familiar with him and know something 
of the matter. I will start with the nomenclature of the holy 
Trinity. And here you will be called upon to follow an abstruse, 

TRACTATES 288 

technical discussion. When we speak of the Father or the Son 
or the Holy Ghost we are speaking of the Persons. When we 
speak of the Godhead we are speaking of their nature. The 
three Persons, as Person and essence, flow with their essence into 
the essence wherein they are Godhead. Not that the Godhead 
is other than what they are themselves: they are the Godhead 
in their unity of nature. They flow in essence into the essence, 
both Person and essence, because essence is comprehended by 
nothing but itself. It is fast locked in stillness, comprehending 
itself with itself. This influx is, in the Godhead, the oneness of 
the three inseparate Persons. In this same flux the Father 
flows into the Son and the Son again into the Father (as our Lord 
Jesus Christ declares, ‘ He that seeth me seeth my Father. My 
Father is in me and I in him ’), and they both flow into the Holy 
Ghost and the Holy Ghost back to them again. (As our Lord 
Jesus Christ says, ‘ I and my Father are one Spirit.) The Father 
utters his Son and in his Son tells forth himself to creatures as a 
whole, all in this flow. And the Father returning to himself speaks 
himself to himself : ‘ The fountain flows into itself,’ as St Dionysius 
says. This proceeding in the Godhead is a speaking without words 
and without sound; a hearing without ears; a seeing without 
eyes. Inthis proceeding each Person wordlessly utters himself in 
the others. It is a flow where nothing flows. Compare with this 
the noble soul, which provides a striking likeness of this flow; 
for where her higher powers and her simple nature have the same 
property (hyparxis) they are flowing into each other, speaking 
themselves without word and without sound. Happy the soul 
who thus attains to the vision of eternal light ! 

But it may be questioned, what about their power ? Is their 
power that of Person or of essence ?—I answer that, the three are 
one God, no one is before or after the other: all three Persons 
are one first in the unity of their essential nature. Hence we 
speak of the activity of the blessed Trinity not of their essence. 
This is silence. Now speech, remember, beats into silence. In 
this sense the Persons are the hypostasis of essence.—But why 
call it a beat ?—Because it is neither a coming nor a going. In 
this impulse the Trinity has equal power to act and has wrought 
its work entirely unmoved and undisturbed. 

Examine, again, the statement, ‘ the Persons are the hypostasis.’ 
This reveals two things. From the word are we gather that each 
Person is distinct in the Personality. But saying ‘ the hypostasis ’ 
argues the three Persons and one nature to possess one property. 
The Persons are the hypostasis of the essence since their unity 
and personality have like power to act. This power the holy 
Trinity possesses in the unity of its natural essence. There you 

284 MEISTER ECKHART 

have the argument in full for the blessed Trinity having power in 
the unity of its divine nature. ‘ 

Two things we attribute to God, essence and nature.—‘ I should 
much like to know the difference.-—Essence attracts and nature 
is common to the Persons: they are one.—‘ For God’s sake, Sir, 
explain.’—Then follow with enlightenment, with mind attuned 
to the highest pitch. You see, God, whatever he is, has essence 
and essence is absolute stillness; it is immoveable. It speaks not, 
loves not, gets not; but it moves moveable things like creatures. 
Immoveability and motion do not represent (the divine nature) 
and the divine Persons: Persons and nature have one property. 
(Immoveability) distinguishes the essence. But what the divine 
nature is, of that no single drop did ever fall within the ken of 
any creature. According to one philosopher, ‘ God’s nature is 
God’s beauty.’ And to this I add that in this same beauty there 
is play of light and its reflection, each Person radiant to the rest 
as to itself. This illumination is the perfection of beauty.— 
‘Good. I am quite satisfied with that. But now I want to ask 
about the eternal Word of the Father : is it to be taken as abiding 
within in his essence ? —No.— Is it to be taken in his Person ? ’— 
No.—* Then is it to be taken as being in the abstract nature of 
the Father ? ’—St Augustine, speaking as it were in the person of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, gives for it five analogies: ‘I am come as 
a word from the heart that is spoken therefrom; I am come as 
the light from the sun; I am come as the heat from the fire; I 
am come like the fragrance of a flower; I am come like the 
stream from its perennial spring.’ Even so is the eternal Word 
uttered in the Person of the Son while remaining God by nature 
in his nature. That is the answer. - 

—‘ Now another question. Theologians say God is in every- 
thing. Is God in everything in his nature ? ’—No.— Is God in 
everything in Person ? ’—No.—‘ Then how is he in everything ?’ 
—As preserving their unity of nature, Persons and nature have 
but one property and this property is the divine essence as a whole. 
As such God is in all places and in each place. God is all at once. 
For since God is impartible, all things and all places are the place 
of God. So everything is full of God, of his divine essence, 
continually. . 

Three things are to be noted about the divine essence. First 
and foremost, it is the principle preserving all things; in his divine 
essence God is in all things upholding them. But he is in the soul 
innately. Witness our Lord Jesus Christ : he was God and man. 
He has given us his sacred body: whoso receives it worthily 
receives at once the Person of the Son and divine nature; he 
receives human nature joined with divine nature. For he is 

TRACTATES 285 

really present where he is worthily received. This accounts for 
God’s loving himself in the soul. 

It may be asked, how does God love himself ?—God is in all 
things, for he is with himself. God is with himself for love of 
himself. Hence God loves himself with himself in all things.— 
Secondly, God is one alone; hence it is from itself not from 
another. Were it from another it would reveal the thing from 
whence it came. Not so: it is by itself in stillness so profound 
it cannot of itself reveal anything at all. And here it may be 
noted that although God is potent for good yet it may be main- 
tained that his greatest power is his impotence. The argument 
runs thus. The impartible essence of divine nature is unity. 
Now unity cannot reveal itself to itself. That is its impotence 
and this impotence is the unity itself: the unity which is God’s 
chief potentiality. Whence also the deduction that the three 
Persons have like power in their natural essence. And since this 
cannot manifest itself therefore the three Persons have manifested 
it and to none more than to themselves, for it is their own essential 
nature.—Thirdly, it unifies and embraces all things in itself and 
in this embrace the Father loses his name although he preserves 
his paternity of Person. That is one Person. And the same with 
the other Persons. In this embrace all is dissolved in all for all 
encloses all. But in itself it is self-disclosed. 

Here arises the question how the first embraces all? The 
answer is this. Things flowed forth finite into time while abiding 
infinite in eternity. There they are God in God. Take an illus- 
tration. Suppose some master of the arts. If he produce a 
work of art he none the less preserves his arts within himself: the 
arts are the artist in the artist. Even so the first contains the idea 
of all things, which is God in God. 

Then there is the question of how all things return into their 
first source? The answer is this. Creatures all change their 
names in human nature and become ennobled ; in human nature 
they lose their own particular nature and find their way back into 
their cause. There are two ways of doing this. First, it is 
feasible for human nature to scale the heights by ghostly toil, 
for in spiritual travail the soul ascends to whence it came. That 
is one way. But there is another. The meat and drink a man 
consumes turns into flesh and blood. Now it is the Christian 
faith that this actual body will rise at the last day. Then things 
shall all arise, not as themselves but in him who has changed them 
into himself. He, spiritualised and turned to spirit, shall flow in 
spirit back to his first cause. From this it may be argued that 
every single creature has, in human nature, a stake in the eternal. 
Furthermore it argues the faithfulness and kindness and perfect 

286 MEISTER ECKHART 

love of God who refuses to shut out any belonging of his faithful 
servant: he takes him all together to himself. All embraces all, 
for all is one and one is all in all. 

Then there is the question how the Person of the Son was sent 
into Mary’s virgin body and took on human nature without his 
ever quitting the shelter of his Father’s bosom ? The answer is 
as follows : The bosom of the Father is the throne of God. The 
Father has given birth to his Son, is now giving him birth and 
shall go on giving him birth without stopping. This birth has 
been taking place in him for ever. At the very instant when the 
Son was donning human nature the Father was bringing him to 
birth. That is one explanation. Or take it in another way: 
the Son is the understanding of the Father and the architect of 
all things in his Father. Had this architect not wrought in his 
Father without ceasing the Father had not wrought at that 
particular point. So God’s Son while taking on man’s nature in 
Mary’s body was the architect of all things in his Father. That 
is another explanation. Or take it, thirdly, in yet another sense. 
The Son has no less of the essence than the Father or the Holy 
Ghost, with whom he possesses it in common. And in the com- 
munity of their essential nature the Son himself is the encloser. 
Unity is the close, the Persons what the one encloses. Each 
Person in the utterance keeps his individual nature. But within 
this close the three Persons have one nature. The Son has his 
nature in common with the Father and with the Holy Ghost so 
that as therein contained he has with them one common property. 
It follows that the Son has never for one instant left the Father. 
And herewith I conclude this threefold argument. It demon- 
strates conclusively that God has never waxed or waned in divine 
glory.—So much of theology and of the noble lineage of the soul. 

Now we will speak about the union of the soul with God. There - 
are those who say, nothing unites the soul so much as knowledge. 
Others again aver the same of love. And yet a third school 
teaches that nothing unites like use (i.e. actual enjoyment). Now 
I put one question regarding these three things. What is the 
property of each? Each is its own peculiar property. But at 
the summit of its property (its nature) each of them approaches 
so closely to the rest that they are virtually the same: threefold 
yet one in nature. This, to be sure, is not strictly true, but in the 
higher reaches of their nature, where they are verging on each 
other, knowledge enhances love and love enjoyment. Each one, 
however, does its own appropriate work. Knowledge raises the 
soul to the rank of God; love unites the soul with God; use 
perfects the soul to God. These three transport the soul right 
out of time into eternity. There the spirit in perfect freedom 

TRACTATES 287 

enjoys in its origin the height of bliss. Love and the sweetness 
of its uses have lured forth the soul to its naked spark. What 
is her fortune there? All I can say is this: the glance, out of 
the spirit, which pierces without stop into naked Godhead; the 
flow, out of the Godhead, into the naked spirit, these are but one 
form which conforms and unites the spirit to’God in form and 
oneness so that it receives as like from like. How spirit fares in 
this exalted state I know not, nor can I tell at all more than to 
say that the spirit is then at the summit of its power and its 
welfare is supreme. . 

Peradventure you will say, ‘ It is all very well to talk, my friend, 
but how do I arrive at this exalted state you have described ? ’— 
See. God is what he is and what he is is mine and what is mine 
I love and what I love loves me and absorbs me and what absorbs 
me that I am rather than my own self. By loving God therefore 
ye may become God with God. But I will not pursue this subject 
further. 

Now I want to say a little about the virtuous life so that you 
may have some guide to its attainment. Whosoever would attain 
to God must make him some return for all his godly works. He 
who would atone to God must needs possess one virtue : righteous- 
ness (or justice). This is the epitome of all the virtues. He must 
be bare and free within and without. What is the freedom of 
a godly man? Being absolutely nothing to and wanting abso- 
lutely nothing for himself but only the glory of God in all his 
works. Mark two degrees of freedom in the willing poor. First 
they abandon friends and worldly goods and honours and descend 
into the valley of humility. There the willing poor find outward 
freedom and dwell unsolaced by perishable things. Follow the 
scorn and bitterness of the world. Courage, my children, establish 
yourselves in the valley into which ye have gone down. If the 
sons of the world revile you waver not; stand fast in Christ 
remembering and acting on his words, ‘ The servant is not greater 
than his lord; if the world hate you, know, it hated me before it 
hated you!’ Accept it all from God with hearty thanks and’ 
deem yourselves all unworthy of it; then, only then, have ye 
renounced yourselves. 

Then again there is ghostly freedom. He is in this sense free 
who finds within himself no sort of sin or imperfection. More 
free is he who cleaves to nothing that has name nor it to him. 
Still freer is the man who works not for reward from God but 
solely for God’s glory. And most free of all, one who forgets 
himself and flows with all he is into the bottomless abyss of his 
first cause. This is the case of those willing poor who have 
descended into Humble Valley. They verily obey the precept of 

288 MEISTER ECKHART 

our Lord, ‘ If any man will come after me let him take up his cross 
and follow me.’ From such as have denied themselves to follow 
after God in genuine poverty how can God refrain? he must — 
pour out his grace into those souls who thus in love have undone 
themselves. He pours his grace into them filling them full and in 
his favours he bestows himself. With his own self does God 
adorn the soul like gold adorned with a precious stone. There- 
after he leads on the soul to the beholding of his Godhead. In 
eternity this happens, notintime. Although in time she has a fore- 
taste of it in what is here described of the virtuous life. This I 
have told so ye may know that none achieves the crown and sum- 
mit of his nature, knowing and loving, excepting by the path of 
willing poverty, of being like these poor. That is for all the best. 

Now praising God for his eternal goodness we pray him to 
receive us at the last. So help us Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 
Amen. 

III 
THE RANK AND NATURE OF THE SOUL 

When God created the soul he fell back upon himself and made 
her after his own likeness. Meister Eckhart of Paris says, God 
made nothing like himself besides the soul. Thus we can give no 
shape to God nor can we to the soul, and as God is immortal so 
did he make the soul. The soul is not dependent upon temporal 
things but in the exaltation of her mind is in communication with 
the things of God, hence her prodigious capabilities, and it amazes 
me that, being so like God and of such perfection and with such a 
powerful word of her own, the soul is still unable to speak the same 
as God. Some say it is because what is innate in God is not so 
in the soul: God is his own being and gets this from himself, but 
what the soul is that she gets from God and when she issues forth 
from him she does not keep his nature: she takes another nature, a 
descendent of divinity. Soshe does not behave the same as God : 
God moves all things in heaven and earth and gives life to all, and 
the soul moves the body, giving life to every limb so that it sees, 
hears, feels and walks and talks although the mind may be else- 
where. St Gregory observes, ‘We cannot see the visible except 
with the invisible’: the eye sees nothing corporal, lacking the 
a-corporal thing which quickens it to sight. Subtract the mind, 
i.e. the soul which is invisible, and the eye is open to no purpose, 
which before did see. God has formed the soul to himself and with 
himself and in himself; of time and in time and timely, and no 
soul can get into God without first being God as she was before 
she was made into God. Nothing but God finds its way into 

TRACTATES 289 

God, and once the soul is in God she is God, borne into God on his 
eternal Word. Soul is the mean ’twixt God and creature; she is 
placed at the beginning and end of the supreme, in touch with 
common knowledge and with the consolation the angels bring to 
her from God. If she prefers the inferior powers of her five senses 
to her higher ones whence comes her knowledge of celestial things, 
then she grows ignoble and base. The creature pleasures of the 
soul God has no stomach for, and when she realizes this she discards 
the joys in which God has no share. 

While the soul is still here, in sleep, she drives away the angels, 
and refusing any longer to serve creature she conceives herself 
all one with God. St Augustine says the soul is nobler, mightier, 
grander than any creature, but the angels are by nature of still 
higher rank, for they are the first issue of the breath of God which 
gives life to them. Gregory, again, observes that ‘ The soul God 
has appeared to, who has some inkling of him, finds creatures all. 
so narrow and so vain.’—While the higher powers of the soul are 
holding fast to God she actuates her lower powers so that what 
. occurs in these comes to the knowledge of the higher ones. The 
highest power of the soul is called an inextinguishable light 
because of the vision the soul has in this power. However far 
away her power is from God she can discern God always. Her 
power is never sö much out but that it still burns somewhat, 
enough to be a danger-signal to the soul and, even were she 
spiritually dead in sin, a beacon showing her the way to come 
alive again and arise in true sorrow and repentance. 

Here comes the question, Can the soul with her own powers 
comprehend her highest happiness? The answer given to this 
question by the four doctors, Thomas, Egidius, Henricus and 
Albertus is, that if the soul had her knowledge of herself, as she 
has her being, image-free, then she would be able to take in her 
_ highest happiness, she being an infinite capacity which God cannot 
fill excepting with himself. St Augustine says, If her own perfect 
nature were immediately present to the soul she would be her 
proper self rather than creature in her nature, as she is classified. 
For God is spirit and he en-spirits the soul who, in her spiritual 
nature, belongs to an order above creatures ; she finishes with 
creature in the perfect image of the eternal birth which is directly 
. formed in her. 

Another question is, How does God enter the soul? Is he 
innate in her, sustaining her with his intrinsic energy and pro- 
viding her with life and being? One theory is that God enters 
the soul in three ways. First in his grace whereby a man being 
gratified is filled with the desire of perfecting virtue as a whole, 

mingled with alarm lest any creature ever filch it ae him. 

290 MEISTER ECKHART 

Secondly, God enters the soul in pure perception wherein a man 
beholds himself and learns to know himself and answer any call 
God may make upon him, be it suffering or trials, bodily or 
mental. Thirdly, God enters the soul in true freedom, liberating 
man from all the cares of life. Let the soul bid him welcome, 
refusing to be satisfied save with him alone. At the highest point 
of his inner self, his soul, man is more God than creature : however 
much he is the same as creature in his nature, in mind he is like 
God more than any creature. To the soul at rest in God in her 
potential, her essential, intellectual nature, everything comes 
natural as though she were created not at the will of something 
else but solely at her own. In this point creatures are her subjects, 
all submitting to her as though they were her handiwork. It was 
in this power the birds obeyed St Francis and listened to his 
preaching. And Daniel took refuge in this power, trusting himself 
to God alone, when he sat among the lions. Moreover, in this 
power it has been the custom of the saints to offer up their suffer- 
ings which, in the greatness of their love, are to them no suffering. 
Dionysius says the soul has got to purify herself till in her 
perfect clarity she is like the angels and receives by grace what the 
angels have by nature. For the soul will not be able to fulfil 
her destiny till she is like the angels in whom is no sin. But the 
soul is from heaven (that is to say, from God who is the heaven of 
the soul) and body from the earth, so they are ever opposed to 
one another. And that is why the soul, wanting to get back to 
God whence she issued forth, absconds and leaves behind her all 
the things which are not God and do not lead to God. All form 
and likeness, Dionysius says, God in the first instance imprinted 
in the lesser angels so that they should inform the soul with divine 
light and consolation and enable her to enter into her own solitude, 
God namely, wherein no creature can ever look and see. 
Theologians say the soul is more greatly blest when God begets 
himself in her without corporal union than the body of Christ is 
without his Godhood and without his soul. But any beatific 
soul is a nobler thing than Christ’s mortal body, for the interior 
birth of God within the soul is the final consummation of her 
happiness, a happiness more real to her than Christ’s becoming 
man since this profits the soul nothing without union with God. 
As Dionysius says, ‘ Beatitude means an in-dwelling with God such 
that he is more present to the soul than she is to herself, and the 
soul can apprehend him best when she approaches him with a 
tranquil mind.’ For in peace is his habitation and in peace he 
elected us his children. But as God is the mover in the starry 
and revolving heavens so here in the soul he is the mover of the 
freedom of our will towards himself and towards all good things : 

TRACTATES 291 

it is in his light that she sees the light and in his light she will 
be united with the light. Theologians say that in their own 
nature the angels in heaven are nobler than the soul of Christ or 
Mary because they are in essence nearer than the soul to God. 
But by merit Christ’s soul has more joy than all the angels and is 
nearer God than any angel. And the, same with Mary’s soul. 
Not by nature though, for by nature Christ’s soul, and Mary’s 
too, is the same as mine or any other human soul. Further, 
theologians teach that the soul in man is more than thousandfold, 
for it is whole in every limb: in the fingers, in the eyes and in the 
heart and in every several portion of each member large and small. 
Just as in the eighth heaven, where there are so many stars, 
there is one angel who revolves that heaven and exists entire in 
each star. When God created man he safeguarded him against 
all ills; the golden chain of destiny coming from the Trinity to 
- the highest power of the soul and running also through her lower 
powers subordinates them to the higher so that no fell disorder 
can attack either the body or the soul excepting he transgress this 
law. In her higher powers the soul is spirit and in her lower, 
soul; and betwixt soul and spirit is the bond of one common 
being. 

tes you must know that in the soul there exists one power 
which rests not day or night; it is flowing from the Spirit and is 
altogether ghostly, and in this power God comes out in the full 
flower of his joy and glory, as he is in himself. Such intense 
delight, such supreme exaltation as no mind can conceive nor 
tongue express. Were he always recollected in this power a man 
would never age. Nay more I say: should he in this power 
catch but one fleeting glance of the joy and bliss therein, it 
would be happiness enough to make amends though he suffered 
all things. 

The soul receives four things from God in her power of under- 
standing. First, the entire certainty of freedom, of riddance, 
from all creatures, which God objects to in her. Next, the full 
enjoyment of God while she abides in the power of love. Third, 
the complete protection of God against all harm from creatures. 
Fourthly, victory in this power over all her foes. For as the Son 
of God, so also is the soul, and the promise of the Son is the promise 
of the soul, only she is not suspended from where the Son issues 
from the Father. Fire and heat are one; taste and tasted are 
one, albeit far asunder. The Word God speaks eternally lies 
hidden in the soul so that one neither knows of it nor hears it. 
Dionysius says the soul resembles the procession in the Godhead 
since the higher powers of the soul have her nature common to 
them and each power flows into the rest. For the soul to rise 

292 MEISTER ECKHART 

to spirit she must betake herself to her eternal part, never failing 
to remember that, by the grace of God, hers is an imperishable 
nature and capable of eternal bliss. Her spirit is suspended from 
the unchanging God, so neither life nor death nor height nor depth 
nor angel nor man nor any creature can loose her steadfast hold 
on God: the soul who dies in God is also buried in him and 
beyond the ken of creatures just as much as God is beyond their 
ken. As Dionysius says, when the soul considers the greatness 
of God’s might beside her littleness she casts herself out of herself 
and out of every creature and thus reduced to naked nothingness, 
God keeping her in his power, she persists simply'in the grace of 
God. God is concerned solely with himself; he is to each thing 
absolutely whole. And the soul should be the same: what God 
is by nature she must be by grace: detached and free from 
creatures, abandoning all things to God as though they were not. 
In a soul like this all that survives is God: his uncreated Breath 
is what the soul draws in inspiration, and she is spirit to all things 
and all things spirit to her, the eternal spiration of the Holy Ghost. 
Vicentius the philosopher observes, ‘ The spirit detached is of 
such perfection that what it sees is real, what it wills comes true 
and its commands must be obeyed.’ 

It must be remembered that when the free spirit stands in 
perfect isolation it constrains God to itself, and if it could subsist 
as form devoid of accident it would have all the character of God. 
But this God grants to none beside himself; the utmost God can 
do is to give himself to him, and such an one is so far raised up to 
eternity that nothing temporal can move him, nothing material 
affect him ; he is dead to the world, as St Paul says, ‘I live not: 
Christ liveth in me.’ 

According to Dionysius, death in God is nothing but the un- 
created life, that is, God himself, not now called the soul but the 
sovran power of God, because with it he performs his will. What 
the five senses get from such a soul she gives the whole of to her 
inner man whenever he embarks upon some high adventure, and 
such an one is then nonsensical (or senseless), his object being the 
rational, a-sensible idea. Dionysius comments on the dictum of 
St Paul, ‘ There be many that run for the crown but it falls to none 
but the wise.’ This race, he says, is nothing else than the flight 
from creatures to union with their uncreated God. The soul, in 
hot pursuit of God, becomes absorbed in him, and she herself is 
“ reduced to naught, just as the sun will swallow up and put out the 
dawn. St Augustine says, ‘The soul has a private door into 
divine nature, where for her all things amount to naught.’ And, 
‘The flavour of the spirit spoils the taste for flesh ° ; and, ‘ The 
soul at her summit is ignorant with knowing, for in the oneness of 

TRACTATES 293 

the spirit those that have abandoned everything to God are as he 
had them when we existed not.’ The Lord Jesus stands before 
the soul as the perfeet pattern for our human conduct. But the 
subjective aspect of the three Persons— Godhead, mind—no crea- 
ture ever saw, not soul nor angel nor the humanity of Christ, in 
its own nature. Yet it is held by some, and Meister Eckhart of 
Paris notably, maintains in the teeth of all objections: As surely 
as you know me for a man so surely God gives birth to his own 
nature in the ground of my soul as in his heaven, and I am not 
happy till I return to God discarding every means of sin and all its 
brood together with all creatures. For in the selfsame ground 
wherein the Father bears his Son in his own nature therein am 
I born. In the soul that has trodden underfoot all the ills of time _ 
the Father naturally will beget his Son as surely as my father gat 
me a living man. In the very ground wherein the Father gets 
his Son therein does he get me and all whom the Father draws to 
him by grace. And as God in himself is absolutely free from 
things so I am there by grace what God is by nature. God 
destines all of us to such a glorious lot as few indeed can credit 
who have not gone out of themselves. If God gave the soul his 
whole creation she would not be filled thereby but only with 
himself : he is the very highest uncreated heaven of all the heavens 
in God’s nature. That the soul in us is deathless is not our doing 
but God’s: it is the nature of her. But union comes by grace, 
the highest stooping down to inform the lowest, and therein lies 
our hope of future sight. 

The soul ascends from corporal things and, being caught up 
above herself, abides within herself, first, for the sake of the 
delights she finds in God. For the divine perfection invests her 
in him with his likeness. His fullness is poured forth without 
stint : angels more in number than the sands and grass and water- 
drops and every single angel with his own distinctive nature, 
not one the same as any other.—Secondly, the soul ascends for 
the sake of the purity she finds in God; things in him are all 
quite pure and noble, but once they issue forth from him into 
the nearest creatures there is all the difference between aught and 
naught.—Thirdly, the soul ascends for the recollection she enjoys 
in God. In order to grasp God she must have a wont that is 
higher than herself; though God had made a thousand earths 
and a thousand heavens the soul could comprehend them all in her 
one power, the active power’s reflection. But she cannot conceive 
God in the act of making her in his own image.—Fourthly, the 
soul ascends for the sake of the infinite good things she enjoys 
in God: all things in him are ever new in his Son who to-day is 
being born the same as though his Father had never given him 

294 MEISTER ECKHART 

birth. And as God is flowing into the soul she is flowing back into 
God. 

The soul takes four steps into God. On turning to God, at 
first she feels afraid of his magnificence. Her next step is to 
overcome this fear and conceive the hope of God’s affection. 
Her third step brings the vehement desire, she hails it as the 
promise, of the infinite embrace wherein she is embraced by God.— 
At the fourth step she falls into such deep oblivion she never 
thinks of leaving what she has found in God. God made the soul 
for his only Son to be born in her. And when and where soever 
there befalls this birth it gives God greater pleasure than the 
creation of the heavens and earth because the soul is nobler and 
bigger than the heavens. As there is wedlock between a man and 
wife so there is wedlock between God and the soul. The head 
power in the soul is the man and the lowest is his wife. The 
man in the soul always stands bareheaded and the woman veiled, 
the lower power being caught up to the highest of the soul. First 
God begets his likeness in the soul and afterwards himself as he is 
in eternity. God’s Son is the soul’s Son: in him God and the 
soul have the same Son, that is, God. Once this birth has happened 
in the soul she is fit for God, and the oftener this birth befalls the 
more at home the soul will be in God, in his paternal heart. 

The soul has two feet, understanding and love. And the more 
she knows the more she loves. Who shall cause her to fall, she 
being upheld by the sustainer of all creatures? Grace lending wings 
to desire she is borne out of herself, and by grace and in grace she 
is borne into grace and past grace into God her first cause where in 
blissful union her lot is good beyond compare. There every sense is 
dumb; the soul’s will and God’s will are confused with one another, 
the two wills love-locked in the true atonement. Now the soul does 
neither more nor less than the work of God, for there no longer 
lives in her anything but God. As the soul cries in the Book of 
Love, ‘ I have run the whole world round and have found no end 
to it. Wherefore I have cast myself into the solitary point of my 
one God who has wounded me with his glance.’ Whom this 
glance did never wound, his soul was never pierced with the love 
of God. St Bernard says, ‘ To the spirit that feels this glance it is 
ineffable ; to him that feels it not it is incredible.’ ’”Tis an arrow 
sped without anger and received without pain; thence starts 
the pure and limpid stream of healing grace which opens the 
inner eye to perceive in blissful beholding the delights of this 
divine affliction wherein we enjoy unheard-of spiritual favours, 
things never told nor preached of nor yet described in any book. 

The soul must give up idle thoughts and worldly cares and 
corporal pleasures and find her way into his hiding-place whom the 

TRACTATES 295 

heaven of heavens is not able to contain. God’s comfort is only 
for that soul who scorns all temporal consolations ; and the more 
she runs from creatures the faster their creator comes and makes 
her one with him. Dionysius says, love takes the soul out of 
herself and identifies her with the object of her love, making her 
insensible and reckless of herself so long as she can do the will of 
her best-beloved. The powers of the soul, those of her spiritual 
mind, are celestial in the sense that they do celestial work ; thus 
the first power receives, the second one perceives and the third 
one loves. When the soul, conceiving God, is using in recollection 
her mnemonic power and, in beholding, her intelligence, then love 
transports her’into the midst of God, the point at which there is 
eternal rest. The Father abiding in the soul clasps her to his 
heart, and in this fatherly embrace she conceives the Son in his 
personal procession and hence divines his presence with the Father 
in his essence ; as saith the Lord, ‘ I will lead her into the desert,’ 
meaning, he will lead the soul away from vanity and say his say, 
his only Son, in her. And in this same begetting of his Son they 
pour their holy Breath into the soul, informing her of all things. 
Any act of soul that is to share in the eternal meed must be wrought 
in God. However good an act is in itself, excepting it be wrought 
in God, it meets with no reward from him who does not pay by 
length or size or multitude of works but for their being done in 
God, soul being the material God works in. In this divine alliance 
she is highly honoured, for what God is by nature she is made by 
grace. But if a soul presents herself before her bridegroom Jesus 
Christ without the ordinary virtues, forgetting to prepare herself 
in this respect for heaven, her shall he cast out into the pit of hell, 
there to realize his justice just as much in suffering as St Peter did 
in heaven his eternal joy. Her true‘ bridegroom Jesus Christ 
comes to the soul and shows her in his visible humanity his divine 
affection in order that all creatures may do homage to our nature 
which has been exalted higher than the angels. We cannot 
imagine him creating any creature nobler than ourselves. His 
manhood satisfies our sense as his Godhood does our soul. As 
St Augustine says, we shall end with our soul in the Godhead, and 
our bodily senses in the humanity of Christ which is exalted above 
the saints and angels to where, in its unchanging nature, no 
creature can attain. When the watching soul is warned by various 
signs of the coming of her king, everything in her rejoices, and it is 
his royal right to use his sovran power to fulfil the expectation of 
the soul who longs for him to buttress her against her outward 
senses lest by yielding to them in the least she should bring about 
in any creature something counter to the will of God. The 
surest way to friendship with the king is for the soul blindly to 

296 MEISTER ECKHART 

follow where God leads. If the soul, which rather than the body 
constitutes us man, if the soul, I say, would only obey all God’s 
intimations she would overcome every obstacle with ease and 
rejoice in the burdens borne for him. And when she finds herself 
with nothing to correct she will be free with perfect freedom from 
opinion. It is the mark of the God-loving soul that from the 
moment she goes into his service she never follows her own will 
as distinct from his. God is the one thing that needs nothing and 
that all things need. And when the soul, beholding herself from 
within, perceives herself by grace omnipotent she stays in her own 
ideal nature. 

The soul observes concerning God, first, that she has intuition 
of him who is to come to her. Next, she is in essential union with 
him who is operating in her. Thirdly, she enjoys him who so 
richly entertains her at his table. Fourthly, he provides her with 
a refuge where she is at peace. Dionysius says, ‘ When the soul 
returns to God her idea of herself in God is that, except for self- 
awareness, nothing survives in her but God.’ When the soul does 
this she still keeps in touch with her outward man whom she 
supplies with his natural life. By speaking himself into the soul 
God unites himself with her and makes the soul into himself, giving 
her such great ability, it seems to her that being here in time is 
her only obstacle to good. In the virtuous uses of her examplar 
mind, all things being present to the soul in this interior Word of 
God, her spirit converses with God freely in proportion to the 
clearness of the Father’s inspiration. It is important then for the 
soul to know what behaviour to adopt towards God so that she 
may discover the practices that draw from God his intimations. 
For this the loving soul must love God more than anything, who, 
descending into her and energising in her with his spirit, gives her 
to understand that the interior love she has from him she ought 
to have and show towards all mankind; and the soul should 
submit herself to God as though he suffered death for her alone. 
So doing she will wax in truth and fit herself to receive the universal 
gift of God whereby she will arrive at the truth of the humanity of 
Christ. But if she does not do her best she puts herself on a 
material level with the brutes, that must be spurred to great 
exertion ; yet the sorriest of men, who are always bound to fall 
short of God, Christ wrought more deeds of love for than all the 
saints have ever done for love of him. Though all creatures were 
to speak they could never tell the perfection God confers on man, 
especially the soul, than which he neither could nor would make 
any nobler creature. This he proves in his own Person, with its 
common boundary between his divine and human natures. It 
follows that the soul ought to shun all creatures as things unworthy 

TRACTATES 297 

of her whereby she may be lured from the things she is destined 
to by God, and she ought to be ashamed if, being within reach of 
his eternal good, she should fail to grasp it. 

Here there is the question, If the soul is of such high estate that 
time and place and nature are powerless to move or even touch 
her in her essential self, does God then work in her without any 
image of himself? To this theologists reply, Granting the soul 
‚is creature and has a spiritual nature it follows of necessity that 
what God does in her is wrought essentially and free from all 
contingency ; for his works are all essential and eternal as they are 
in himself, and the soul participates them in her nature above 
grace. Grace is the outflowing light designed for the service of 
the spirit ; grace would not be a light had it no recognised spiritual 
mission. At the point where God enters the soul in love she is 
no more known than the highest angel is to her and loves all things 
God-fashion without any natural idiosyncrasy. God is abstract 
intellectual essence, eternal in itself, whereas the soul is made 
eternal. The soul is no more to be grasped in images and forms 
than God in words and names. The soul is one in nature with and 
subject to the laws of the authentic intellect of God, a monad so 
perfectly balanced in itself no creature can find room there. 

The Lord Jesus said to his disciples, ‘ I go to prepare a place for 
you.’ These words teach us two important facts. First, that the 
soul is by nature made for heaven and God is her lawful heritage. . 
For God brought forth the soul alone in unbroken line and no man 
knoweth what she is. Every man has got a soul, but what she 
actually is there is no telling here in time. St Augustine says, the 
soul is sent from God and returns to God and she cannot rest 
except in him; for God is spirit and soul is also spirit and germane 
to God as one spirit to another. And they compare the soul with 
fire, most lofty in its nature, most mighty in its operation, which 
never rests until it licks the skies. Fire envelops all the elements, 
spreading further and wider and higher than the air, than water 
or the earth, so that it surrounds the rest and coming next the 
heavens turns round with them. The soul is called a fire because 
in her desire she keeps up with God, like fire with the heavens and 
can find no rest except in him. Again, the soul is dubbed a spark 
of celestial nature because one has already ascended into heaven, 
the soul, to wit, of Jesus Christ, which shows the common resting- 
place of souls is nowhere else than heaven. But unless the soul 
has turned from temporal to celestial things the Holy Ghost 
cannot enter in to do its work in her. All God’s work is wrought 
in spirit. God is high and man is low : to rise to him in prayer he 
has to hoist himself by putting under him God’s creatures, all 
of them, including the powers of the soul which end in the functions 

298 > MEISTER ECKHART 

of the body, then she will have the love and knowledge to carry her 
above the world. For to know God I want no eyes or ears ; for 
union with God in love I want no hands or feet: I want to withdraw 
myself from all created things and let my spirit swoon into God’s 
spirit and be one spirit with God; withal it was the love God 
bears my soul that prevailed with him to create all creatures and 
therein reveal to her his glory. And albeit he made creatures: 
glad, he mixed therewith some sorrow, that anyone careless of his 
honour might be whipped and spurred with pain. Marvellous as 
the mind of man are the ways of God, drawing one to him with 
pleasure and another with the buffets’of ill-fortune ; witness the 
amazing conversion of St Paul on his way to persecute the Chris- 
tians, notwithstanding which his soul was caught up into the third 
heaven. And the very day St Augustine was converted he 
refused to be appeased with the extraordinary pleasure he felt 
in the security God sent into his soul to turn her to him. 

Three things keep the soul from being content with creatures. 
In the first place they are partial. In the second, they are cor- 
poral : emblems of stagnation and corruption and unprogressive- 
ness. Thirdly, the gift of creatures is no largesse of him from 
whom she first came forth (i.e. from God), so they are not relished 
by souls who have been caught up into bliss ; but God the Lord 
lures souls to him just as the lambs are lured from one spot to 
another by green pasture. Though all psychic powers lay in a 
single soul she could not here receive the very least reward of the 
smallest act decreed by God in his eternal love without the soul 
melting and dying to the body. Not so, however, when she gets 
the whole reward, namely God himself. But for this the soul 
must transcend herself and creatures and enter into the divine 
estate, into her divine exemplar nature; for the soul contacts 
eternity with her higher powers and with her lower, creatures, 
which often lead her into evil. Could the soul see God as clearly 
as the angels do she would never have come into the body. God 
is formed in the image of himself, after a pattern of his own, and 
when she mingles with him in actual intuition, the soul resembles 
him in form, for he conforms her to him: divine light streams into 
the soul confusing her with God like one light with another and 
this is called the light of faith, the divine virtue. Where the soul 
with her powers and her passions is forbidden to go, there faith 
can take her; and when in this power God is apprehended in the 
soul she acquires the virtue of hope wherein the soul becomes so 
intimate with God she fancies there is nothing in God beyond her 
reach. St Augustine says, ‘The pears I stole, these were to me 
far sweeter than the ones my mother bought, because they were 
private and forbidden fruit.’ And so is that grace sweeter to the 

TRACTATES 299 

soul which she conceives in wisdom than that which is common to 
mankind. The soul must serve God here with her lower powers 
and in eternity with her higher ones, for she is not made of time 
nor of eternity: she is made from naught of the nature of them 
both. Leaning to the temporal she is unstable; keeping to the 
eternal she is strong and stable and superior to change. 

The bridegroom of the soul is the Lord Jesus of sevenfold like- 
ness. First, in his beauty with which the sun is nothing to compare, 
for it is not self-luminous: God provides the light wherewith 
it lights the air. And his bride should be the same in thought and 
word and deed. For this God has to brighten all her tarnishes of 
sin, making luminous the place of her abode.—Secondly, her Lord 
is of noble lineage : in heaven he has a Father but no mother and 
on earth a mother but no father, parentage too strange for any 
mind to grasp. And his bride, the soul, by birth adorns a rank 
higher than anything inferior to God.—Thirdly, her Lord is 
immensely rich: heaven and earth belong to him with all the 
creatures in it. Accordingly his bride, the soul, may freely 
confide her every care to him and have no doubt of his providing, 
for he is readier to give than we are to receive.—Fourthly, his 
wisdom is so lucid, it lights the ground of every heart and nothing 
is hidden from his eyes. Wherefore his bride, the soul, must be 
very careful not to do anything she thinks may be displeasing in 
his sight.—Fifthly, his power is prodigious; by it all things have 
come to be and are preserved in being. And his bride, the soul, 
has corresponding hope in times of trouble or in any kind of suffer- 
ing or struggle. For what she cannot do he can to whom all 
things are possible.—Sixthly, he is sweet-tempered. He is called 
in the scriptures a lamb without blemish, for he is free from anger 
and bears no resentment. Likewise the soul, his bride, must be 
gentle, kind and patient in whatever he shall send her to his 
glory.—Lastly, her Lord, Jesus Christ, has .eternal health and 
deathlessness. And the soul, his bride, should be cheerfully 
indifferent to disease, not caring for anything so much but she 
would always be as glad to do without as keep it, just as her 
bridegroom pleases, and finding no pain so hard to bear but she 
would suffer it as lief as not. God’s justice to her is as precious 
as his mercy. This soul is just as pleased with God’s gifts to 
others as herself. 

It is written, ‘ The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God’ 
who keeps them too tightly to his sides to be gotten out. Also he 
made them separate as his handiwork ; their guerdon in eternal life, 
himself ; for God alone did make the soul, unhelped by any crea- 
ture ; in power according.to his might ; in intellect according to 
his wisdom and according to his goodness in her will, as he from 

300 MEISTER ECKHART 

eternity knew how to make her ınighty in his power and, blessed 
in his infinite good. The soul is not made of the nature of God 
but in the image of the Holy Trinity, and being bound to God by 
love alone she, seeking perfect rest in him, proclaims her fitness 
to be his pleasant temple. He went into his temple and drove out 
the buyers and the sellers, commanding them, Take these things 
hence. So he made it known that he would have the temple of 
the soul swept clean, with nothing in it but himself alone. The 
soul should take example by the angels who disregard all outward 
things and are without intention except to do the perfect will of 
God. So bent are they upon the will of God, upon its being done 
in them, that were it to pick nettles or anything like that, they 
would do it with a will, as though their whole happiness depended 
on it. 

Any soul devoted thus to the will of God and seeking not her 
own Jesus takes delight and will work wonders in. When she goes 
out of her own will all things go in with Jesus and she becomes so 
full of light that God alone rivals her in splendour. For though 
the angels do to some extent resemble the soul in the joys of the 
hereafter, they have a limit set which they cannot pass beyond. 
The soul can transcend it in good works, and having once, in grace, 
drawn level here with the highest angel, her will, free now from 
all good works, carries her incalculably higher than the angels, 
provided she can leave her body. 

The uncreated God alone is free and the soul’s virgin nature is 
the same but not her creature nature: it was she who chose to 
come to naught, but it is left to God to fetch her back. For 
Jesus to be in the soul she has to recollect herself and be quiet 
and listen to his Word. When her spirit is receiving power in the 
Son her every word is pregnant of purity and virtue and perfection. 
Such a soul nothing can disturb: she stands firm and unshaken 
as in the power of God. 

And Jesus reveals himself in the soul in his infinite wisdom 
wherein the Father knows himself in all his fatherly authority, to- 
gether with his Word which is wisdom’s self and all that therein 
is and the oneness of it. When this same wisdom is embodied in 
the soul, doubt, error, obstacles of all sorts fade away and leave 
her in the clear, pure light which is God himself. God in this 
soul is seen with God: she knows herself and all things with his 
wisdom.—Also Jesus manifests himself with passing sweetness in 
the power of the Holy Ghost, and with him the soul flows into 
herself and beyond herself and transcending all things in grace, 
plunges directly into her first cause. 

Richardus says, commenting upon the Book of Virtue: When 
the divine light strikes into the soul she finds her own activities 

TRACTATES 801 

exceedingly insipid, and unable to tolerate herself in her own 
powers she confines herself to enjoying God. Now St Augustine 
says, ‘ My soul is where she loves rather than where she is giving 
life.’ At this rate God is nearer me than I am to myself; and any 
loving soul who follows God so far as to rise above herself, nor 
rests with pleasure in herself or any creature, such a soul, I say, 
will have no pleasure either in God’s gifts: what she desires is 
God himself. When the soul is rid of things she has certain 
knowledge of and is nothing lacking in the image of God, her 
mind is wide open to the eternal truth. The eternal sun sheds 
its light into this soul and permeates her powers, each separate 
faculty feeling the physical contingency of the visitation according 
_ to its individual nature. And the light of the eternal sun raises 
all the soul-powers to the power of itself in the wholly intelligible 
image. When the soul undergoes this operation, as it is per- 
formed by God, in essential understanding, then the soul’s under- 
standing becomes the light (or knowledge) of all God is bringing 
about in her by grace. And her mind being enhanced, as we have 
said, her faculties are raised above the things of time, so that 
come what may her powers are unhindered by anything infernal 
and are always being augmented, never getting less. For divine 
understanding we depend upon God’s bounty ; but it is his nature 
to give himself to us and the soul’s nature is to give herself to him 
who gives himself to her, thus giver and gift, doer and deed are 
one. The Lord Jesus said, ‘I go to him that sent me.’ And the 
soul too may say in her ascent to God, ‘ I go to him I came from.’ 

She goes to the Father, first, in her fixed intention no longer 
to disobey his will by cumbering herself with untoward creatures. 
Secondly, she goes the perfect way of answering every call God 
makes upon her; and thirdly, she goes in the sweet savour of 
God’s love wherein her suffering is no suffering. Fourthly, she 
goes in the four cardinal virtues, prudence, temperance, fortitude 
and justice, over time and creatures. And she goes in the three 
virtues of faith, hope and charity, without which no one gets to 
God. Who knows to what wonders the soul may not attain by 
committing herself into the hands of God ? Every blessed soul 
keeps open heart to God’s consolation, and such as she receives 
from him she passes on to her inferior powers wherewith she knows 
not God else were he dishonoured in the weak intelligence of these 
lower faculties. And because all souls have not the same aptitude 
for God, the vision of God is not enjoyed the same by all any 
more than the sunshine affects all eyes alike. 

It is written, ‘ There shall come forth a stem out of the root of 
Jesse.’ Here let us consider three things : what this root is out 
of which God is born in the soul, and what and what measure 

302 MEISTER ECKHART 

of profit does it bring? ‘ Root of Jesse’ is a term for the fiery 
nature which attracts and transmutes all comers to itself. It is: 
the fiery nature of God: drawing the soul it converts her into 
itself and she is spiritually born in understanding ; for the soul 
has in common with the angels a light wherein she can see God, 
and this light she is provided with is her intellect which is cease- 
lessly conveying God’s wisdom to the soul. But it darkens when 
poured into the body. + 

We read of three kings bringing Christ their offerings. These 
we take to mean the three inferior powers of the soul, things by ~ 
rights at the disposal of her superior powers. I am going now to 
speak of these superior powers, showing how they are the kings 
and what gifts of lower powers it is they bring. 

The first king is memory, bearing the produce of his kingdom. 
When the soul calls to mind how noble God has made her there 
flows from this perception a passionate desire which ascends to 
God, flinging behind it all the things of time. Then indeed King 
Memory comes offering the gold of love to God, together with - 
surrender of all else.—The second king of the soul is understanding. 
This corresponds with her other power, reason or judgment. 
When the soul sees that by grace she is enabled to fulfil the will 
of God, she is never weary of subjugating creatures to please God 
and each one the more in proportion to the merit she acquires from 
God. Understanding then, comes rich with patience and grateful 
acceptance of whatever lot God destines for her in the body here 
and with this she has the fruit of incense, the union of all virtues, 
so that what would otherwise be hard and difficult her love makes - 
feasible and easy.—The soul’s third king is will. When in the 
flower of his strength he brings the soul the fire of love, which 
tries her through and through and consumes away all the sinful 
affections of her nature, then she is fixed, and neither life nor 
death nor any creature can separate her from the love of God. 
So they bring her myrrh to keep her from the rot of temporal 
things which to the soul are a fertile source of evil. St Ambrose 
says, ‘God pours forth the soul creating and pouring forth he creates 
her.” And when she is in love with him, immediately he comes 
to her, as his spiritual bride admits where she says in the Book of 
Love, ‘ While I was at rest upon my bed my love came tapping 
at my window and he put in his hand and touched me.’ This 
suggests that when the soul comes to know herself she withdraws 
from all the things which are present to her here, for she herself 
is of greater worth and higher status than any of the other things 
in time. When now the loving soul has gone out of all creatures 
and herself, then the eternal truth comes forth as well to meet 
the loving soul and touch her understanding and exalt it with his 

~ 

TRACTATES 303 

light which more enriches her than all the knowledge of material 
things hitherto amassed by her own nature. St Augustine says, 
* As the sun shines through glass and makes its contents plain, so is 
the soul’s intelligence illumined by the light of God with the recog- 
nition of her divine abilities.’ Then the soul is seen in her poverty 
and God in his. purity. Indeed Dionysius says as much when he 
speaks of ‘the naked soul, one with her naked God, resting in the 
desert of the Godhead.’ It may well be called a desert, for crea- 
ture never looked therein by grace. Ignorance of these matters 
is just cause for shame. Yet if one of the chief angels should 
descend and, with creatures all as wise as he, discourse of human 
happiness, they might talk till doomsday and not tell the tale of 
all God has in store for every loving soul in life eternal. But the 
soul must not seek God for any reason except God himself. The 
emptier she keeps the more God fills her and the more perfectly, 

. he does his work in her; besides, it is the safest way, for then 

at any moment she will be prepared to quit the body at God’s 
instance rather than remain there at her own. And being so poor 
of self she will find naught but God both here and yonder. There 
is no call for such a soul to look outside herself : the Holy Ghost 
will teach her the elements of bliss in the school of her own heart. ° 
She cherishes the gift wherewith God has endowed his best beloved. 
And the better to fulfil God’s will in everything she does she 
trains herself never to be without pure consciousness so that the 
heavenly Father can go on ever giving birth in her to his eternal 
Word, Jesus Christ his Son. For at her highest point my soul is 
not in time and does not work in time and is just as near to things 
a thousand miles away as to this spot I stand on. 

Theoretically speaking, nothing that takes shape or is touched 

- by time can get into the soul, and not only time but likeness. 

The head of the soul is her highest power, and from the moment 
she was made she has never for an instant been without the boon 
of this divine light, this power in which the time God made the 
world in and the judgment day are just as present to the soul 
as this time wherein I speak. Being in the power of her head the 
soul enjoys the benefit of participation in the grace and happiness 
common to all saints as though they were her own. It is certainly 
the fact that anyone actually in this head never commits sin and 
knows so much about eternal bliss and is so well informed that he 
needs no sermons. Wherefore erecting the head of the soul let 
us gather ourselves up into the breadth and freedom of a power 
like this and depart from temporal to eternal things when, in this 
samie power, God suddenly gives birth to all he is in might and 
truth and wisdom in the soul. Verily the soul in whom this grace 
is found is absolutely pure and every whit like God. For anything 

304 MEISTER ECKHART 

well-pleasing to the Father or which makes for our profit or our 
weal, must be well-pleasing to him in his Son, because apart from . 
him he has no likes whatever. This then is the nobility which 
God has implanted in the soul, her beatifie nature which is receptive 
to the grace of God, so that in this grace the light of God’s pure 
nature can shine into the soul and the Word of the Trinity be 
gpoken in her mind and the life of eternity energise in her. 
Theologians say the soul is a suspended force in the power of 
the Father and a reflected light in the wisdom of the Son and a 
circulation in the sweetness of the Holy Ghost. According to 
St Augustine, the soul comes from the heavenly land, out of the 
paternal heart ; the offspring of God’s love and scion of the noble 
house of the holy Trinity, she is the heir to heaven, the mistress 
of all creatures and the proprietor of all the joys God gives 
in his eternity. She is the image of God and the noblest creature, 
that ever God conceived. For God gripped in between his divine 
nature and his Godhood, into his eternal essence, and produced the 
soul from nothing, just as he made from nothing heaven and 
earth and all things. If you ask how big the soul is, know, she 
is too big for heaven and earth to fill, or even God himself whom 
the heavens cannot comprehend. To measure the soul you must 
gauge her with God. And she is so beautiful as long as she is 
in the grace of God and not deformed by sin, the highest angels, 
Seraphim and Cherubim and all the saints try in vain to copy her in 
form and likeness, for she is God’s image. As to her life in time, she 
is flowing back to her natural source whence she issued forth; and 
the freer she has kept herself from temporal forms and creatures 
the kinder her return to God, for God is absolutely free from 
matter, mode and form: For the soul to compare with the abstract 
spirit of God she must be free from the smallest trace of sensible 
affection and quite without attachment to anything not God. 
That such perfect freedom is not known to every spirit is due 
solely to our undiscovered life and our untaught senses. All the 
potential good in creatures the soul will find in God together with 
inestimable joy. St Augustine says, ‘When everything was still 
that existed in me God spake a silent Word within my soul, 
which no one understood but me.’ And to whatever soul this 
Word is said she will forget all modes and forms and become an 
in-dweller with God. Thus St Paul relates, ‘From the moment 
the eternal Word was revealed within my soul I no linger lived for 
flesh and blood.’ Inasmuch as she is selfless she is self-possessed 
and strong. The faithful, loving soul is like the bee, sipping from 
all kinds of flowers the sweets to make its honey. And even so 
the soul culls from the flowers of virtue somewhat of each one to 
heal and fortify her. It is a crying need for she has three mortal 

TRACTATES 805 

foes : the world, the flesh and the devil, hanging all together like 
three cherries on one stem. Of these three foes the deadliest 
is the body, wherein the soul is clapt as into prison : not that she 
may pander to its vicious appetites but to say them nay and by 
this resistance daily to augment her reward in heaven and here the 
love inpoured. It was Seneca, the heathen philosopher, who said, 
“ Man is his own worst enemy.’ Death stands at the door of evil 
appetites, and the pursuit of vice leads into paths which seem all 
right to us but sometimes they debouch in the pit of hell. If the 
soul, the mistress of the body, indulges its base appetites and fails 
to check its sins she has herself to blame when either here or 
yonder she must pay for it to God. And that there may be no 
escaping from God’s justice for them that kill the soul with sin 
and end in fleshly lusts, he says in the prophet Amos, ‘ My wrath 
shall drive over you like a chariot, cracking with its weight ; 
my anger the swift shall not outrun nor the valiant turn aside 
nor yet the strong man conquer with his strength. Not one 
shall escape me, how fair or strong or mighty soever he may be.’ . 
And seeing that the soul has such a high and heavenly destiny, 
therefore Meister Eckhart of Paris, at the end of the aforesaid 
things, which are taken from his writings, sets the following 
prayer : 

O Sovran Riches of Divine Nature, show me thy way which 
thou in thy wisdom hast ordained and open to me thy most 
precious treasure whereto thou hast called me: to know with 
supercreaturely intelligence, to love with the angels, to enjoy with 
thy only Son our Lord Jesus Christ and to be thine heir to eternal 
wisdom and by thy help to be preserved from evil. For thou hast 
exalted me above all creatures and hast sealed me with the seal 
of thine eternal image and put my soul beyond the grasp of 
creatures and hast made nothing liker to thyself than man is in 
his soul. Teach me to live so that I never want thee ; ‘so as never 
to hinder the working of thy love-stream in me; so as never to 
lend myself to any outward pleasure without thee nor occupy 
my mind more with any creature than with thee. Lord thou art 
spirit and incomprehensible to creature ; thou dost inspire the 
soul and raise her to an order above creature so that she can do 
thy will, O Eternal Wisdom, and in grace be free from inroad of 
unbidden images. Thou hast made the soul to suit thyself in her 
nature and her laws and she maintains she has no room for anyone 
but thee. O Almighty and Most Merciful Creator and dear Lord, 
have mercy upon me a sinner and help me to overcome all pitfalls 
with their lures to idle pleasure; to shun in thought and act 
what thou forbiddest and both to do and keep all thy commands ; 

help me to believe, to hope, to love ; to live and feel iene as 

806 MEISTER ECKHART 

thou wilt and as much as thou wilt and what thou wilt. Lord, 
grant me the sorrow of the humble; a mind escaped from | 
mortal body ; to love, to laud and to behold thee and cherish 
every act and thought that is toward thee. Grant me a clear 
and sober and genuinely prayerful mind with real intuition of 
thy will, together with the love and joy which make it easy to 
perform. Lord, vouchsafe me always modest progress towards 
better things and never to backslide. And, O my Lord, condemn 
me not, as I deserve, to rely on my own powers or on human weak- 
ness and unwisdom but on thy good providence alone. Direct 
me Lord to The Good itself, my every thought and act to thine own 
liking, so that on my part, in me, thy will is always being done and 
I being saved from evil and brought to thy eternal life where thou 
art three in Person and one in the essence of thy divine nature : 
Father, Son and Holy Ghost and ever blest almighty God. Amen. 

IV 
THE SOUL’S PERFECTION ! 

Speaking of the final perfection of the soul theologians ask, What 
is meant by saying that the spirit in its understanding has become 
the intellectual existence of the eternal essence in the perennial 
now with nothing between? That is the first question. The 
second question is, How can the spirit make good its intellectual 
return into the unchanging, and have the eternal image in perfect 
clearness and essential intimacy and in the interior freedom of 
the spirit ? The third question is about the highest flight of the 
spirit, its nearest approach of all to the divine presence and 
whether its own powers are equal to the task ? 

First, we must remember how the divine being proceeded forth 
in the present now, with falling man, the gist of it, immediate in 
his spiritual prototype in virtue of its nearness and also by reason 
of the inherent now of its light of glory and intellectual image from 
which the intellect sees back quite clearly to the un-proceeded 
splendour of its eternally immanent spiritual exemplar wherein it 
is nameless and beyond all words which are creaturely. The word 
is in the eternal Word and one presence with it and God with his 
whole nature and the full range of his power can make out of his 
essence nothing more resembling the divine species in the ground 
. divine nature and reflecting him so well. He who receives the 
light of the spirit as it is the image of God, wherein is no part, that 
is the medium of perfection, for therein his spirit is one with divine 
nature. + , 

1 See also Jostes, No. 34, of which this tractate forms the middle portion. 

TRACTATES 307 

As to the second question, you must understand that although 
the intelligible image of God in the spirit partakes in its nature and 
purity more of the perfection of the content of its immanent 
essence than of the emanation of itself, nevertheless it is therein 
essence that has become. Take the spirit in its nearest ground, 
abiding within in its endless image and eternal image. As the 
endless image it is always within and in its eternal image it presents 
itself as an eternal question. As Christ asks, ‘ Whose is this 
image and this superscription ?’ Mark the difference between this 
image and its superscription. In the image exists God, and all 
his output in spirit and in nature—the human mind (or spirit) with 
all it is able to afford,—these are in uniformity so exact and close 
that the image of divine glory shines in all its detail in the spirit 
and this image in the spirit is perfectly reflected back into its 
indwelling essence. So much for the image of God. And what 
of the superscription ? That is the unspeakable species of the 
divine nature, which in its whole ground, actual and essential, is 
a naked and immediate presence in the spirit, in virtue of which 
the spirit in its free nature and intellectual image suffers all God’s 
super-rational operation. The limit comes where the divine 
freedom seizes the spirit’s freedom and turns it into foolishness and 
at this point all scientific knowledge fails; there is no further 
progress to be made by natural creature-knowledge but only in 
spirit by experiencing God. 

Now to answer the third question. Philosophers say that one’s 
own is ever innate and can be had at will. It follows that the 
spirit can rise to the supreme perfection of its divine nature for 
it can stand in its first now, in that wherein it was not. And 
that is the answer to the third query. 

Then there is the question, can God leave man’s spirit to itself 
or not? I say, No, it would be against the justice of his nature 
and against his truth and would make a travesty of God’s whole 
creation. God must either let the spirit be God extra to himself 
or else he must merge it in himself, when it has left all things. 
This will not outrage God, for the spirit is too haughty and touches 
too closely the honour of God for him to be able to make aught 
but himself theend of its perfection. It has this unique property : 
its ground can overleap all spirits into his super-intelligible spirit, 
namely, the indwelling essence of divine nature. 

A man was asked, What dost thou lack? He said, Nothing, 
except poverty of spirit.—And though I have a will no bigger 
than a grain of mustard seed I am no poor man, and if God were 
to ask me, Art thou a poor man? I should-reply that, be my will 
as good as God’s yet am I not poor, not even if with that same will 
I do as much as God. And why? Because God and God’s will 

808 MEISTER ECKHART 

are one, I and my will are two, for I am a man and not God and if 
I mean to do real work entirely without or free from will then I 
must emulate the stone which lies in the water and the water 
flows over it but enters not into the stone. Even so if I were a 
poor man I should do my works in such a way that they entered _ 
not into my will any more than the water does into the stone: 
I should do them simply at the will of God. And if again God 
asked me, whether I was poor and if I replied, ‘I have abandoned 
my own will and did I know the will of God that would I do,’ 
I might be assuming something not my own, for no one knoweth 
who we are, though we are not the truth for God can change our 
knowledge, not his knowledge, because he is the truth and we are 
not. 

Perhaps someone will say, How can I do my work like this, 
will-free ? The answer is, I ought to do my work as though no 
one existed, no one lived, no one had ever come upon the earth. - 
Then if God asked me once again, Art thou a poor man ? and if 
I replied, ‘I am unworthy of that knowing,’ that were the barest. 
poverty that ever I heard tell of or went through: the deepest, 
direst poverty. Yet all the while I have within enough of place 
for God to do his work in me, to give his gift to me, all that while 
I am not a poor man for all that while I am expecting God.—What 
more can I do ?—Thus shalt thou do: thou shalt leave all willing 
and knowing and receiving of things and at the very point where 
thou hast left all things there God has given thee all things; he 
durst not give thee more nor any more work with thee nor canst 
thou take in more, but thou shalt simply leave thyself. That is 
' poverty of spirit the most near of all, for none is downright poor 
but he who wills not, knows not, has not, whether within or 
without. To the eternal truth, God help us. Amen. 

Vv 
THE BOOK OF GODLY COMFORT 

Benedictus deus et pater domini nostri Jesu Christi etc. (2 Cor. 
1,). That great teacher St Paul says in his epistle, ‘ Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and 
the God of all comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation.’ 
Three kinds of tribulation may fall upon a man and plunge him in 
distress. First, misfortune to exterior belongings. Next, to our 
dearest friends. Lastly, to ourselves: shame, hardship, pain of 
body and distress of mind. 

So I purpose in this book to impart some ‘teachings apt to 
console a man in all adversity, unhappiness and suffering. And 

TRACTATES 309 

having therein and therefrom culled sundry general truths to com- 
fort him in any trouble, he will find thereafter thirty rules or 
maxims each of which alone is sufficient for his solace ; and after 
that again, in the third part of the book, he will find precepts 
and examples, theoretical and practical, the sayings and doings 
of the wise in times of tribulation.! 

1 

In the first place we must bear in mind that the wise and 
wisdom, true and truth, good and goodness, righteousness and 
righteous are closely related to each other. Goodness is not 
made nor created nor begotten : it is procreative and begets the 
good and the good man, so far as he is good, is the unmade, un- 
created but withal begotten child and son of goodness. Goodness 
reproduces itself and all it is in good things: knowledge, love, 
energy, it pours forth all of them into the good man, and the good 
man receives all his being, knowing, love and energy from the 
central depth of goodness and from that alone. Good and good- 
ness are no more than goodness by itself, except as unborn parent 
and born child of goodness therefrom. In the good is but one 
being and one life. All that belongs to a good man he gets both 
from the good and in the good. Therein he is and lives and dwells 
and there he knows himself, and all he knows and loves he wills 
and works with goodness and in goodness and the good does all 
its work with him and in him, as it is written. The Son said, 
‘My Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. All that 
belongs to the Father is mine; all that is mine is my Father’s: | 
his giving is my taking.’ 

Further we must remember that the Name or Word stands for 
nothing else, nothing more or less than the good, pure and simple. 
But when we call him good we understand his goodness to be given 
him, infused and engendered by the unborn goodness; in the 
words of the gospel, ‘ As the Father hath life in himself so hath he 
given to the Son to have the same life in himself also.’ In himself, 
he says, not from himself for the Father gave it to him. 

Now all that I have said of good and goodness equally applies 
to true and truth, to right (or just) and righteousness (or justice), 
to wise and wisdom, to God’s Son and to God the Father, to every 
God-begotten thing that has no father upon earth and wherein 
is gotten no created thing: nothing not God, and wherein exists 
not any form at all but that of God alone. St John says in his 
gospel, ‘to them gave he power to become the sons of God, which 
were born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will 
of man but of God alone.’ 

1 Only Part 1 is given here. 

310 MEISTER ECKHART 

By blood he means everything in man not subject to the human 
will. By fleshly will he means everything in man which is subject. 
to his will, albeit with reluctance and with an inclination to fleshly 
appetites : a thing which is common to the body and the soul and 
not confined to the soul alone, which accounts for the weakness 
and exhaustion of their powers. By the will of man St John 
means the highest power of the soul, whose nature and energy, 
unmixed with flesh, resides in the pure nature of the soul, detached 
_ from time and place and from everything that smacks of time and 
place relation ; that has naught in common with naught ; wherein 
man is formed in the image of God ; wherein he is of the lineage of 
God, and God’s kindred. Yet since these are not God himself 
but are products of the soul and are in the soul, therefore they 
have to lose their form and be transformed into God alone: born 
into God and out of God with only God for father. Then they 
are Son indeed, God’s only Son. 

I am his Son forasmuch as he begets me in his nature and 
forms me in his image. Such an one is the Son of God, good 
son of goodness, right son of righteousness. So far as he is simply 
good he is unborn parent and as born Son he has the same nature 
as righteousness has, and is and is possessed of all the character of 
justice and truth. In all this teaching which is found in holy 
gospel and confirmed in the natural light of the wise soul there is 
solace for every human sorrow. 

St Augustine says, ‘ God is not far nor long. If thou wouldst 
find him neither far nor long betake thyself to God, for there a 
thousand years are as one day, to-day.’ And withal I say, in 
God there is no pain or sorrow or distress. And if thou wouldst 
be free from all adversity and pain, turn thee and cleave to God 
and to God alone. Doubtless all thy ills are due to thy non- 
conversion into God and to God alone. If thou wert formed and 
gotten in righteousness alone, things could no more pain thee 
than righteousness, than God himself. 

Solomon says, * The righteous will not grieve for aught that 
may befall him.’ He does not say the righteous man or the 
righteous angel, not this or that right thing; just righteous, 
being right, for the righteous man is son with a father upon earth, 
he is creature, made or created as his father is creature made or 
created. He says righteous, pure and simple, and that has no 
made or created father, for righteousness is the same as God. So 
pain and sorrow can molest him no more than they do God. Justice 
will not grieve him, for love and joy and bliss are justice, and if 
justice made sorrowful the just it would be causing sorrow to 
itself. Injustice, inequality, can in no wise grieve the just, for 
anything created being far beneath him has no influence and 

TRACTATES 311 

makes no impression on the righteous nor is it gotten into him 
whose only father is God. 

A man then ought to set to work and de-form himself of him- 
self and creatures and know no father except God alone. Then 
nothing will be able to afflict or cast him down, neither God nor 
creature, uncreated or created, and his entire being, life, know- 
ledge, love and wisdom will be from God and in God and God. 

There is another thing which is wont to comfort us in any 
tribulation. It is the certainty that the just and virtuous man 
delights unspeakably, incomparably more in doing right than he 
or even the chief angel delights and rejoices in his natural economy 
or life. The saints will gladly sacrifice their lives for right. 

Supposing now that when outward ills befall the good and 
righteous man he keeps his even temper and his peace of mind, 
this only proves my argument that the righteous man is proof 
against external happenings. But suppose he is perturbed by 
these mishaps then it stands to reason that God is only just in 
sending trials to a person who while pretending to be righteous 
and fondly thinking himself so is yet upset by so small a thing. 
Since it is fair of God, he has no cause to mind but rather to 
rejoice, far more than he does at his own life, at what rejoices 
’ man and is of more good to him than this world all told ; for what 
profits a man the whole world when he is no more ? 

The third important thing for us to understand is the elemental 
truth that the fount and living artery of universal good, essential 
truth and perfect consolation is God, God only, and everything not 
God has in itself a natural bitterness, discomfort and unhappiness 
and does not make for good which is of God and is the same as 
God, but lessens, dims and hides the sweetness, Joy and comfort 
that God gives. 

And further I maintain, all sorrow comes from love of that 
whereof I am deprived by loss. If I mind the loss of outward 
things it is a certain sign that I am fond of outward things 
and really love sorrow and discomfort. Is it to be wondered 
at that I am unhappy when I like discomfort and unhappiness ; 
when my heart seeks and my mind gives to creature the good that 
is God’s own? I turn towards creature, whence there comes by 
nature all discomfort, and turn my back on that which is the 
natural source of happiness and comfort: what wonder I am 
woebegone and wretched! The fact is, it is quite impossible 
for God or anyone to bring true solace to a man who looks for 
it in creatures. But he who loves only God in creatures and 
creatures in God only, that man finds real and true and equal 

comfort everywhere. 

312 MEISTER ECKHART 

VI 
SISTER KATREI 

MEISTER ECKHART’S STRASBURG DAUGHTER z 

Blessed and praised be the name of our Lord Jesus Christ who 
has provided for us an image of the truth, himself namely, wherein 
is no possibility of error ! 

We read in the gospel that our Lord fed the multitude with 
five loaves and two roast fishes. The first loaf we interpret to 
mean the knowledge of what we have always been in God and 
what we are in God now. The second loaf is the scrutiny of our 
life in time : seeing how our time has been spent. And for this 
we need help in the shape of a trusty confessor. A confessor we 
judge of in this way. If he has what is true we may safely confide 
in him. There are three signs of this. First, he is a true priest. 
Secondly, he is confirmed in the perfect life. And thirdly, he has 
the authority which stamps the true priest. Him seek where- 
soever thou shalt find him. It is well worth any trouble. Go to 
him and solemnly kneeling before him as Mary Magdalene knelt 
at the feet of our Lord Jesus Christ, earnestly entreat him for 
God’s sake to hear thee. Then open thy heart to him as thou 
shalt appear in the eyes of our Lord Jesus Christ at the day of 
judgment when all things are revealed intruth. Discard shame in 
the knowledge that God has seen and heard all thy sins, and so 
too have those who are reflected into God from the face of the 
mirror of truth; they know thy shortcomings better than thou 
dost thyself. Be not ashamed before thy confessor, be ashamed 
before God and the friends of God, acquiring godly fear in the 
realization that God’s divine glance has seen thy every will, word 
and act; and opening thy heart pour out thy sins till, the whole 
tale being told, thou dost fervently pray him: ‘Sir, ghostly 
father, I entreat thee by the love that bound Christ on the cross, 
show me the nearest way to my eternal happiness.’ 

Upon this it is open to thy confessor to indicate three ways with 
which it behoves thee to be quite familiar. Setting thee thy 
penance, he instructs thee to repair wrongs done ; he bids thee 
restore goods not thine own ; he enjoins thee to make amends for 
aught thou hast done to another that thou wouldst not he should 
do unto thee. Word, will, and act: what was willed without 
effect must be willed to more purpose, thy will being such that thou 
wouldst sooner die a thousand deaths than plan a mischief 
to thine evenchristian. Thy wicked will, which is toward evil 

TRACTATES 313 

deeds, endeavour to cörrect. Where thou wast haughty now walk 
humbly for all the world to see thou repentest thee of thy pride. 
Pride I single out, knowing it for a temporal fault most fatal to 
our eternal happiness. False pride robs spiritual no less than 
worldly folks of their eternal bliss. Dost know what pride is ? 
Flattery of yourself or other people is false pride which cheats 
you of eternal happiness. 

Next, examine yourselves for sloth in God’s service. Not \ 
doing thy best is sloth in God’s service. To meet this, set to and 
do good, showing by diligence thy sorrow for thine egregious 
dereliction ; yet remaining detached withal and regardless of 
aught but God and the friends of God. 

Thereafter it behoves thee to check thy third sin. Where thou 
wast greedy now be liberal and let thy bounty attest thy whole- 
_ hearted abhorrence of greed. Dost. know what greed is? Desire 
of anything not God is evil greed. “ 

The fourth sin is envy and hate: bearing malice and hatred 
towards any with intent to do unto him what thou wouldst not 
he should do unto thee. Hast injured any man by act of thine, 
repair the injury at any cost. Hast tarnished his fair name by 
word of thine, thy words must brighten it again : abasing thyself 
before him, entreat him humbly for God’s sake to forgive thee 
and reiterate thy rueful supplication till he grant thee his free 
pardon. Call people’s attention to this, withal speaking so well 
of the man that thou dost win him back honour no less than thou 
didst filch from him. Know forsooth, ere thou canst find favour 
with God thou must needs pay in full for wrongs done to thine 
evenchristians. Disparagement is mischievous. Worldly goods 
we can replace but stolen honour cannot be restored save by the 
payment of our own. So weigh thy words well, friend. 

The fifth sin is anger. Reckon up words and deeds done in 
anger and cancel them with kindness. Peradventure thou hast 
. spoken in anger words which, if adhered to, shall doom thee to 
eternal death. A word said here may reach to Rome, and from 
Rome to overseas: how then recall it? Thus: man pays his 
debts through God. Saying, Shall I not tell the truth? folks 
canvass the failings of their evenchristians and forget their own. 
I say, though thou seest and hearest the faults of thine even- 
christians, betray them not. If so be that thou canst not for- 
bear the mention of them, then go and see the person privately, 
just you and he together; point out his faults to him in a friendly 
manner and invite him by thine own excellent precept and example 
to eschew his vicious habits. If he will not forswear them, acquaint 
the right authorities and leave it at that, allowing nothing of it to 
escape thy lips however much he vex thee. For know, to rebuke 

314 MEISTER ECKHART 

: 
him for sin in thine anger is to commit mortal sin : raising him out 
of sin thou dost fall in thyself. The sinner of to-day is the saint 
of to-morrow. Wherefore, unmindful of the sins and short- 
comings of our evenchristians, let us look to our own imper- 
fections, surely forgetting what God has forgotten: sins truly 
repented, which God has forgotten, ’tis no business of ours to 
remember. 

The sixth sin is eating and drinking to excess: eating, perhaps, 
two regular meals or three while thine evenchristian goes hungry 
and thirsty, who is nigher to God than thou art, and liker to boot ; 
for he is poor while thou art rich in temporal things. Christ said, 
‘ Blessed are the poor for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’ These 
frailties it behoves thee to amend so thoroughly that God must 
needs forgive them thee. 

The seventh sin in unchastity. Concerning this a heathen 
master says: ‘ All superfluity, anything unnecessary in word or 
deed, is unchastity.’ The traverner sets his hoop to a mark when 
he goes to sell wine. When the wine is sold, he takes off the hoop. 
So let them do who are minded to cure the sin of unchastity : 
let them avoid excess in word and deed and walk right humbly 
and soberly before the world, so all shall say that anything to be 
called excess offends them. 

Thy next care, daughter, is whether thou hast kept the ten 
commandments all thy days. To take one that Christ mentions, 
‘Thou shalt love thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul 
and with all thy strength,’ thou canst be shown to have broken 
this frequently. And breaking this commandment thou dost 
break them all. It behoves thee to tell thy confessor how often 
thou hast broken it from childhood up. It would take too long 
to go through all the ten commandments and say what thou 
must tell to thy confessor. Thou wilt see that for thyself better 
than we can tell thee. 

Then, the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost : how often thou hast 
resisted them and hast failed to practise the seven works of mercy, 
wherefor God shall arrantly upbraid thee at the day of judgment. 
Make a fresh start, my daughter, so mending thy ways that God 
is obliged to forget thy shortcomings. 

Such is the first counsel of the worthy confessor and the first 
way. To the question : ‘ Sir, is it the best way ? ’ he will answer, 
“No, but what I am telling thee is indispensable.’ Says she, 
‘Then, sir, tell me the best way.’ He answers, ‘ Bide till thou 
hast made thine own this counsel I have given thee ; bide till thou 
hast cast thy sins ; and meanwhile come often to see me.’ 

Obedient to her revered confessor, the daughter does this. 
She often comes back to him and says, ‘Sir, I will obey you to 

TRACTATES 315 

the death if you will help me so to live that I am bold to die.’ — 
“ Hast cast thy sins?’ he asked. ‘ Aye,’ she replied, ‘so far as 
I shall ever do it here in time ; and will do till I die.’—‘ Then I will 
redirect thee, and give thee fresh instructions. Keep a truthful 
tongue, a pure body and a loving soul. A code that may b: 
construed thus : A truthful tongue means that the lips utter only 
the intentions of the heart. Thus thou shalt speak the truth, 
daughter. God is truth, so thy whole conversation shall be of 
God ; not praying nor thinking of God thou thus speakest of God, 
and art ever receiving from God. 

“ A pure body means that, pierced with godly fear, thou sufferest 
naught save God to dwell in thee. 

“ A loving soul is one that loves her likes, God namely. Unite 
thyself with him until thee thinks thy heart is fit to burst with too 
much love.” Whereat the daughter cried, ‘ And I an utter stranger 
to it! Sir,’ she said, ‘shall I ever come acquainted with it ?’ 
He said, “Yes. Do as I bid you: discard the things that are 
darkening thy soul, and let the light of truth in. Then thy soul 
can retrace the road she came.’ 

By the third loaf we understand God’s mercy. Consider, 
daughter, the plenteous compassion that God has shown thee. 
When, having endowed thee with free will, thou didst of thy 
free will incur eternal death, he ransomed thee with his own self 
and washing thee in his own blood did cleanse thee from original 
sin. Observe further God’s mercy in being ready to forgive thy 
sins as often as thou seekest grace in time. To enumerate God’s 
mercies time would fail us though we lived till doomsday. Folks 
talk. of God’s providence. Know, what God has provided for us 
is his eternal felicity, in token whereof he has given us free will 
to do good and eschew evil. 

At this point it behoves us to determine whether we truly repent 
us of our sins. Wouldst know the quality of true repentance ? 
It has to be so strong in thee that thou wouldst sooner die a 
thousand deaths than sin one sin. There be many that say ‘I 
truly repent me of my sins’ who yet remain in sin. Speaking 
falsely they augment their sin. Thou virtuous soul who wouldst 
enjoy God’s mercy and be baptized in the Hoiy Ghost, repent thee 
thrice: (first) for the sins thou hast committed against the Lord 
thy God by word and deed. Repent thee next of sins against — 
thine evenchristians. If thou wouldst taste God’s clemency and 
have him to forgive thy sins and dowse thee with his Holy Ghost. 
in grace, then show the mercy due to all mankind made in Christ’s 
image as they are, whether or not they shall have sinned against 
thee: needs must if thou art ever to find grace. The third 
repentance is heartfelt pity for thyself, bred from a survey of the 

816 MEISTER ECKHART 

happy days that God has granted thee for finding thy eternal 
happiness, he having made all creatures for signposts to thy 
highest good. As St Augustine says: ° All creatures point me 
to my good; Lord, I deeply rue that if I ever get to thee ’tis by 
thy mercy. The time goes by that thou hast given me and thou 
art still unknown to me and unbeloved : hence my regret. And 
yet I fear me, Lord, I never felt the true rue that I ought.’ 

By the fourth loaf we understand God’s justice. Innately, he is 
as just as he is merciful. Yet know, were I to tell you of God’s jus- 
tice, *twould be too hard for you: precious few would look for grace. 
Hence we emphasise God’s mercy, who throws souls into purgatory 
to find grace at the judgment day if not before. Know that in 
itself God’s justice is of a sternness that must make all tremble. 
Well knowing this, Christ said to his disciples: * Having done all 
that is possible to you, say, We are unprofitable servants.’ We 
learn this from St John also, who, though he did no sin to separate 
him from God yet likened himself to the beasts of the forest. Surely 
he knew God’s truth. I say, moreover, God’s justice is so harsh 
that, though a man should do all the good works wrought by the 
company of saints now in eternal life, yet, being found in any mortal 
sin (the first"is pride ; the second, slothfulness in God’s service ; 
the third, hate; the fourth, anger; the fifth, greed; the sixth, 
overeating and drinking ; the seventh, unchastity : these are the 
seven deadly sins), being found, I say, in one of these, he would be 
lost eternally. I hold it would avail him nothing for all the saints 
in heaven to intercede for him. I affirm, moreover, were Christ 
to supplicate his Father, and Mary his mother, ’twould not avail to 
save his soul. Further, concerning this I say that I would sooner 
have the man who sins a thousand mortal sins and knows it, than 
him who sins but one in ignorance: that man is lost. I hold he 

‘may have practised every virtue of Holy Christendom and it will 
not avail him, he is damned with the lost, while he of a thousand 
conscious sins is saved, provided that, renouncing them heartily 
in true repentance, never to do them more, he mends his ways, 
steadfast in love till death. That man ranks with the saints. 
Ah, daughter, mark those souls who, all their days exempt from 
mortal sins, can say with the young man, ‘I have kept thy com- 
mandments all my life.’ Would to God I knew one person who 
could even say, “All my days have I kept the first of Christ’s 
commandments, Thou shalt love thy God with all thy soul-powers,’ 
and who has been preserved the while from spiritual pride. 

The fifth loaf signifies true faith. It means absolute trust in 
God. He who believes in God trusts God and knows God and 
therefore loves God. Observe, woman, having true faith means 
believing in God’s omnipotence. The masters say: ‘ Whosoever 

TRACTATES 817 

has true faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, can remove 
mountains.’ Wherefore it behoves us assiduously to free our- 
selves from things corruptible, which dim the ligh@®wherein we 
see the true faith, which is God. To be able to say, ‘I am a true 
Christian,’ a man must subsist in Christ in the sense that Christ 
is his exemplar whereto he is conformed in word and deed. Know, 
that whatever Christ did he did to edify us in eternal truth, for 
he is the truth itself; he can initiate thee into the true faith. 
What I say is, that to get to the Father we must go to him in 
Christ ; to know the Father we must know him in Christ. And 
so Christ taught. When Philip asked him, ‘ Show us the Father,’ 
Christ answered, ‘ He who seeth me seeth the Father, and where 
the Father is there I am.’ Plainly then, we must follow the 
lead of the Beloved if we would be saved. People say, ‘ How can 
I do as Christ did?’ Christ tells us how. He said, ‘Take up 
your cross and follow me.’ Which do not understand to mean he 
bids you die the death he died upon the cross. His words were, 
‘Follow me,’ meaning we are to imitate his perfect life. Our 
temporal failure to imitate his life in word and deed is our eternal 
failure. Concerning this he said, ‘ In my Father’s house are many 
mansions.’ For you must know that many a man who goes to, 
heaven no more enjoys the light of God’s countenance than 
sunshine in forest gloom. Nay, friend, mark what Christ said to 
the kinswoman who besought him for herson. He said, ‘ He who 
drinks of the cup I wot of shall be joint heir with me in my Father’s 
kingdom.’ Which being interpreted means : by our measure here 
it shall be meted to us again by our heavenly Father in his eternal 
kingdom. As St Augustine says: ‘So far as we know and love 
here we profit eternally.’ 

Theologians speak of hell. I will tell you what hell is. It is 
merely astate. Your state here is your eternal state. This is hell. 
Take an illustration. A thief who has incurred the penalty of 
death on being caught: picture his state of mind seeing others 
happy ! So do we feel, and worse. And so with those in hell who 
see God and his friends : the height of torment, so the masters say. 

This learnt, the aforementioned daughter goes to her revered 
confessor. She says, ‘Sir, tell me the best way to my eternal 
happiness.’ Quoth he, ‘ Daughter, let be.’—‘ I shall never let be,’ 

she said, ‘so long as my eternal happiness is not assured.’ He 
said, ‘Thou art sure of eternal life, daughter.’—* But, sir,’ she 
persisted, ‘have you told me the nearest way to it ?’— Any 
creature will tell you that,’ he said. ‘ With one accord they all 
exclaim: Pass on, we are not God. “Tis direction enough, 
daughter.’—‘ Not for me, sir,’ she said. Said he, ‘ An thou wilt 

j 

318 MEISTER ECKHART 

not believe me, at least thou wilt credit the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who said: Take up thy cross and follow me. He did 
not say, Tale up my cross and follow me. What he meant was : 
be content to do thy best, knowing that therewith God too is 
satisfied..—‘ Would I had! done my best,’ she cried.— What 
wouldst thou do?’ he asked. She answered, ‘I would leave 
honour and possessions and friends and kindred and the outward 
solace I get from creatures.’—‘ Wouldst leave me too?’ asked 
her confessor. She answered, ‘ Aye, sir; leaving all things, I 
must leave you also.’—‘ Essay it not,’ he said, ‘’tis not for a 
woman.’ Quoth she, ‘ Full well I wot no woman can enter 
heaven till she be man. That means she must*do man’s work 
and have the strength of mind to withstand him and all imper- 
fections.-—‘ Thou deemst thyself mighty strong! I wonder now, 
how thou wouldst like to bear more than thou hast already.’ She 
said, ‘I can bear all, sir, that Christ has borne for me.’ He said, 
‘These are words!’ She said, ‘It is true.-—‘ Canst prove it?’ 
said he. ‘ With ease,’ said she. ‘I have heard tell that in none 
of Christ’s sufferings did his Godhead come to the help of his 
manhood.’ He said, ‘ That is true. The Godhead is impassible ; 
„it never has suffered and never can suffer, seeing that nothing 
affects it.’ Quoth she, ‘ What Christ bore, I can bear.’ He said, 
‘Tell me how.’—‘ I will,’ she replied. ‘ Right well I ween Christ 
was the noblest man that ever was born: from threescore kings 
and twelve he was descended ; and I say, moreover, he was the 
best heart’s-blood of Mary. See now my proof that I am fit to bear 
all he bore for me. Taking the test of breeding, the best bred are 
the tenderest. It follows that I can bear more than Christ can.’ 
Said he, ‘ Were I to tell you all I know of the perfection of his 
life in time in right willing poverty, ’twere like to break my heart. 
Bethink thee well!’ She said, ‘I have bethought me. This very 
day I mean to follow the dictates of the Holy Ghost.’—* What 
does the Holy Ghost dictate?’ he asked. She answered, ‘ He 
counsels me to leave myself in the mighty hands of God and to 
sever my ties with creatures.-—* Thou art wrong,’ he said. ‘ How 
so?’ said she. He said, ‘In not taking advice. Obedience is a 
virtue, as thou knowest.’—‘ I am obedient unto death,’ she said. 
‘To whom ?’ he queried. ‘To Christ and his heavenly Father 
to whom John was obedient in the wilderness, and Mary Magdalene 
and Mary of Egypt and Mary Salome.’ Quoth he, ‘ It seems thou 
wilt no longer mind me.’—* You are right,’ she cried; ‘I am 
heartily sorry I listened so long to the counsels of men and was deaf 
to the counsel of the Holy Ghost.’—* Now listen to me, my daughter. 
What thinkst thou I have done to thee ? ’—‘ You have kept me 
from eternal bliss,’she said. ‘Howso?’heasked. She answered, 

TRACTATES 319 

“ By not telling me outright the quickest way to it.’—‘ It is obedience 
to the Holy Ghost,’ he said. ‘I should never counsel thee other- 
wise than I have counselled thee.’-—‘ If you had not discouraged 
me,’ she said, ‘ and other spiritual folks to boot, I should have 
spent my time more virtuously. I weened, forsooth, it were the 
gospel that priests propagated.’—‘ The gospel is begotten in the 
Holy Ghost of the perfect life of our Lord Jesus Christ and according 
to his noble teachings. We read and preach the gospel openly : 
he who would follow it let him follow it to the utmost.’—‘ God 
forgive me for not doing so all my days,’ said she. Quoth he, ‘I 
grieve thou shouldst accuse me of preventing thee.’—‘ Aye,’ she 
replied, ‘I accuse you and all creatures.’-—‘ Thou art mistook,’ 
he said. ‘No one can hinder thee but thine own self. Know, 
whom God impels none can resist : not all the saints in heaven nor 
all the preaching friars and barefoot monks on earth can stand 
against one man moved by the truth. He is impelled by that same 
word which Christ spoke, answering the youth who sought the 
perfect life. Christ said: Keep the ten commandments. The 
young man replied, All these have I kept from my youth up. 
Then said Christ, If thou wilt be perfect, sell all thou hast and give 
to the poor and follow me. Christ made known this same truth 
to us by Peter and others of his disciples whom he called to live 
with him in willing poverty. Thou knowest, daughter, that what 
Christ said and did is true, for he is truth itself; and know more- 
over, that to reach the Father we must walk in, Christ’s footsteps 
all the way.’ Quoth she, ‘ Well then, good father, why be so 
discouraging ? ’—* ’Tis such a flawless life,’ he said, ‘ anyone leading 
it God must needs come and help.’-—‘ God does not come and go,’ 
she said ; ‘ that I do know. I wot right well when we resign our- 
selves to him he does not fail to succour us at need.’ Quoth he, 
‘ What if all creatures despise thee?’ She said, ‘I want to be 
the least of creatures in our Lord Jesus Christ, the lowest of his 
creatures ; then I can say with Paul, Rejoice, all creatures are my 
cross and I the cross of creatures.’ He said, ‘ Daughter, thou 
art too young.’—‘ Mary was younger than I,’ she said, ‘ when she 
set forth into the desert and exile, driven by robbery and murder.’ 
—‘ God was with her,’ said he. ‘ And well I wot God is with me.’ 
said she. ‘He was there present in her.’ he replied. ‘He is 
ever present in my soul,’ she said. Quoth he, ‘ But Mary had a 
solemn pledge of his presence, which thou hast not, my daughter.’ 
Quoth she, ‘Since I dispense with outward consolations, I am 
without his outward presence. I would that he were ever being 
born within my soul.’—‘ Think twice,’ he said, * before adventuring 
that.’—‘ Peace, let me speak ! ’ she cried, ‘ ’tis by your too much 
admonition that you have hindered me.’ He said, * Know, did 

320 MEISTER ECKHART 

the truth move thee, thou hadst not done nor yet forborne because 
of me. I am but creature, as thou knowest. As long as any 
creature has power to give and take thou livest not unto truth. 
Truth has virtue sufficient to raise man to the summit without 
help from creatures. Thou durst not cast the blame on me, for 
know, whom the truth moves has the Holy Ghost to his master, 
who educates his pupils in the highest school of all. There we 
learn more in the twinkling of an eye than all the doctors can 
express.’—‘ You speak the truth,’ she said. 

The second article of faith is trust in God. He can say he 
trusts God who keeps not overnight so much as a pen’orth of 
possessions. I say more: he keeps nothing at all; but he who 
withholds but a pennyworth of worldly goods from his even- 
christian, knowing him to be in need of it, is a robber in the sight 
of God. I warn you, by Christ who suffered so for love of men, 
allow no want in any man, he being made in the likeness of Christ 
for whose sake God created all things ; and impair not his condition 
by withholding from him his father’s goods, which it behoves him 
to restore to God. 

Further I declare, who spares a penny for himself to put it by 
against a rainy day, thinking, I may need that for to-morrow, 
is a murderer before God. And I will prove it. Forif he trust God 
he will leave himself in God’s hands; if God give him the morrow, he 
will give him also the wherewithal for it. Hence I affirm there be 
few who have faith enough to trust God blindly. Know that the 
man who sets more store by worldly goods than by his powers of 
knowing and loving God, is justly termed a murderer. This I 
call Christ to witness, who said, ‘ When I am ascended I will draw 
all things after me.’ In the same way the virtuous man takes all 
things up to God, to their first source. The masters teach that 
creatures were made for man. They prove it from the fact that 
creatures all need each other: cattle need grass, fish water, birds 
the air, and beasts the forest. By the same token all creatures 
come in useful to the good and are carried, one creature in the 
other, by the good soul to God. Lived there a man who trusted 
God, God would do unto him better than ever he could do unto 
himself. 

Take the third article of faith, that is, knowledge of God. I 
say, no man knows God who knows not himself first. Mark 
how to know yourselves. To know himself a man must be for 
ever on the watch over himself, holding his outer faculties, breaking 
them in by vigorous training to obey the higher powers of his soul. 
This discipline must be continued till he reach a state of conscious- 
ness so pure that nothing short of God can form in it. Then thou 
dost come acquainted with thyself and God. 

TRACTATES 321 

The fourth property of faith is love. To be able to say, ‘ I love 
thee, Lord,’ a man must suffer without why what without why 
Christ suffered, and suffer it gladly without suffering. Though 
God shall tell him mouth to mouth, ‘ Thou shalt be lost for ever 
with the damned,’ he only loves God all the more, and says, 
* Lord, an thou wilt that I be damned, damned I will be, eternally.’ 
Thus he identifies his will with what God wills, willing that same 
in earth and heaven. Of this he deems himself unworthy. That 
man can say, ‘ I love thee.’ 

We have explained now what faith means. To carry out in 
practice these articles of faith as enumerated from the start entitles 
us to say, *I believe in God.’ 

By the two roast fishes (one fish is will, the other its fulfilment) 
we understand thorough subjection, the downright death of thy 
whole nature—the marrow of thy bones, blood in thy veins and 
whole concomitants of natural vigour—so that albeit having the 
will to sin, thou hast no power to. Doctors debate whether a 
man can reach the stage at which he is incapable of sinning in his 
body. ‘The best authorities say ‘ Yes’; alluding to souls so 
perfectly disciplined outwardly and inwardly that they have no 
propensity to sin. 

The second fish we take to signify achievement of the virtues ; 
virtue consummated to the pitch where it becomes instinctive ; 
where virtue is our very being; where our knowledge and love 
transcend virtue. A man at this stage gives pure light. 

Doctors describe four kinds of light. The first is natural, the 
light of natural man apt in affairs, which is less a help than a 
hindrance. The second is the light of grace. Whom this en- 
lightens has his natural light put out. It lights him on the road 
to his salvation, preserving him in grace so he follow it closely. 
The third light lightens the angels and man in his primitive 
innocence. For know, the man who with the angels receives all 
things from God is void of mundane things and creaturehood and 
naked as he was when he came out of God. Man can what angels 
cannot: in this light he can transcend the angels and receive all 
things from the source of divine truth. Then he is given divine 
light, the fourth light, and about this Iam dumb. I keep that to 
myself. 

Here the daughter comes to her revered confessor and says, 
‘ Sir, I fear I shall never do it.‘ Why not ?.’ said he. Said she, 
“I still have all the virtues to cultivate. I ween I never brought 
one single virtue to the pitch required.’ Quoth he, “ Be satisfied 
to do thy best.’—‘ I have never done my best,’ she said, ‘ albeit I 
am well aware that I am thrice behoven unto God. My first 
behoof is to repair my faults.’—‘ None can repair a =) if God 

822 MEISTER ECKHART 

_ forgive it not in love,’ said he. ‘I wot of that,’ she said, ‘ but I 
must do my share and live in hopes of grace until I die.’ 

Quoth he, ‘ What is thy second accusation?’ She answered, 
‘That, while fain to be in the joy of our Lord, I have not lived 
accordingly, albeit well aware that to enter there one has to live 
the perfect life in our Lord Jesus Christ.’—‘ That is so,’ he said. 
‘ Tell me, what is thy third behoof?’ Shesaid, “ Though there were 
neither hell nor heaven, to follow him for true love all the same, 
as he prevented me: to follow him to the end without a why. 
I know my duty but mend not my ways as in duty bound.’—* What 
more wouldst thou do?’ he asked. ‘Thou hast given up honour 
and possessions, and kith and kin and every comfort thou didst 
get from creatures.’—‘ True, sir, in letter,’ she said, * but giving up 
all God ever created to leave it for God’s sake is giving up nothing ; 
it is not mine to give. It is God’s. Anything in the shape of 
possessions is God’s. Wherefore I ween there is still something 
more for me to leave.’-—‘* What must thou leave ?’ he asked.— 
‘ Myself,’ she answered. ‘ If I leave myself wherever I find myself 
I can say, I have left myself.’—* Thou art right,’ he cried, ‘but I 
marvel, being so sensitive, thou canst brook the insults heaped 
upon thee.’ She said, ‘God knows I feel none.’ Quoth he, 
* Does it not touch thee that thy friends, spiritual as well as worldly, 
are so distressed on thy account, thinking thee most mistook in 
thy behaviour ? ’—‘ What is that to me?’ she said. ‘ For well 
I ween Christ knew, when he was sitting in the temple, that Joseph 
and his mother sought him sorrowing. The doctors told Christ : 
Thy father and thy mother are seeking thee. Christ answered : 
He who is kind to me, the same is my father and mother and 
sister and brother. —‘ True,’ he said. ‘I prithee, though, accept 
life’s necessaries when they are offered thee in the name of God.’ 
—‘ Tell me,’ she queried, ‘what are necessaries ? ’—* Wouldst 
have me specify the bare necessities of life ?’ he asked. ‘ Aye,’ 
she replied. ‘ Bread, water, and a cloak,’ he said. ‘ These are 
bare bodily necessities.’ Quoth she, ‘ Now tell me what is neces- 
sary?’ And he made answer, ‘To dwell in utter ignominy in 
Christ who alone lives.’—* Now God reward you ! ’ she exclaimed. 
‘Pray God on my behalf to give all creatures licence to cry me 
down and persecute me to their topmost bent.’ Quoth he, ‘ Thow It 
get a plenty in thy vocation. A holy man has said, Did God know 
anyone willing to suffer the sum of human suffering, he would give 
it him to bear that his worth might be so much the greater in 
eternity. God will do this out of pure love to anyone he calls to 
him.’ Quoth she, ‘A master says, He alone deserves suffering 
who dearly desires it.’—* True, daughter,’ he said. ‘ Prithee, an 
thou wilt, remain in these parts and busy thyself among us.’— 

TRACTATES 323 

* That will I not,’ she answered, ‘ I must be about my own business. 
I mean to live in exile, anywhere where I am persecuted. For 
you must know I have found more of God in the least despisery 
than ever I did in the sweetness of ereatures.’—* I’ll not quarrel 
with that for it is true,’ he said. ‘ Christ proves it by those words 
to his disciples, Go ye into all places where they shall persecute — 
you.’ Quoth she, ‘God bless you for it, who have my homage 
betwixt me and God.’—‘ Come to me wheresoever thou shalt find 
me,’ he said.—‘ That will I gladly.’ 

St Paul affirms of the holy martyrs and friends of our Lord, 
“ They are dead.’ From this we argue that we have to be dead too. 
I hold that anyone who is not really dead has not the faintest 
notion of the sacred things revealed by God to his beloved. As long 
as thou still knowest who thy father and thy mother have been in 
time, thou art not dead with the real death. Further I hold: 
as long as it affects thee that no one will shrive thee nor give thee 
God’s body nor shelter thee from the world’s scorn, as long as it 
is in thee to be moved by this, know that thou art a stranger to the 
true death. When thou art aware of nothing within thee : when, 
having escaped from earthly species and forgot thy honourable 
estate and all temporal happenings, thou hast entered oblivion 
so deep that nothing formulates itself in thee and thou art sensible 
of naught save the sheer ascension of thy soul, then thou canst 
say that thou art really dead. He who is dead thus is always the 
same ; nothing affects him. Anent this St John says, ‘ Blessed 
are the dead that die in God.’ See then, my friends, how good it 
is to die in God. We can die gladly if God will live and work in 
us while we are idle. We die, ’tis true, but ’tis a gentle death. 
Folks tell us of the holy life, how they have suffered. To tell the 
tale of what our Lord’s friends suffered time would be all too short. 
I say: they did not suffer. The least suspicion of God-conscious- 
ness and sufferings would be all forgot. This may well happen 
while the soul is in the body. I say more: while yet in the body'a | 
soul may reach oblivion of its travail not to remember it again. 
Further I hold: to him who suffers not for love, to suffer is 
suffering and is hard to bear. But he who suffers for love does not 
suffer, and this suffering is fruitful in God’s sight. It follows, 
friends, that by contriving to die in God gladly, we go scot-free 
from suffering. To practise this is to be really dead. So to die 
in God, help us O Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen. 

Here the aforementioned daughter comes to her confessor, 
beseeching him, ‘ Sir, ‘hear me for God’s sake.’—‘* Whence come 
you?’ said he. ‘ From foreign parts,’ said she. He asked, * Of 
what country art thou?’ She answered, ‘ Sir, do you not know 
me ? ’—“ Not I, God wot,’ quoth he. Quoth she, ‘ By the same 

324 MEISTER ECKHART 

token you have never known yourself.’—‘ True,’ he replied, * for 
well I ween that if I knew myself as intimately as I ought, I should 
have perfect knowledge of all creatures.”—‘ You are right,’ she © 
said; ‘ but a truce to this talk, sir. Hear me, in God’s name.’— 
‘ Willingly,’ he said. ‘Say on.’ 

The daughter made confession to her revered confessor, as it 
was now in her to do, in a manner to rejoice his heart. Quoth 
he, ‘ Return ere long, daughter.’-—‘ Gladly, God willing,’ quoth 
she. 

Going off to his brethren he announces, ‘I have just shriven 
someone, whether woman or angel I misdoubt, nay, I wot not. 
If woman, her soul powers dwell with the angels in heaven and her 
soul has received angelic nature. She knows and loves beyond 
anyone I ever met.’—‘ Glory be to God,’ the brethren ery. 

Seeking his daughter where he knows her to be, in the chapel, 
namely, her confessor earnestly entreats her to converse with him. 
--*Do you not know me yet ?’ she asks. He answers, ‘ No, God 
knows.’—‘ Then I will tell you for love. I am the poor soul you 
led to God.’ And she discovers to him her identity.—‘ Alas, 
wretch that I am!’ he cries. . ‘Shame on me in the sight of God 
that having spiritual light so long I am so unfamiliar with divinity. 
Prithee, my daughter, for the love of God, recount to me thy life 
and doings since I last saw thee.’ Quoth she, ‘ That were a deal 
to tell.—‘ Not more than I am fain to hear,’ he said. * Know, I 
have been amazed by what you told me.’ 

Ere taking up her tale the daughter says to her confessor : 
* You must never betray me while I live. —‘ I give you my word,’ 
he answered, ‘ not to divulge thy confession during thy lifetime.’ 
Whereupon she embarks on such a wondrous story he marvels 
any human being could go through so much. Quoth she, ‘ Sir, 
still I fall short. I find that I have conquered all my heart’s 
desires save only that my faith be not assailed.”—* God be praised 
for making thee,’ he cried. ‘Now rest content.’—* Never,’ she 
said, ‘ while my soul has no abiding place in eternity.’ Said he, 
‘I should be well content to have my soul ascend as thine does.’ 
She said, ‘ My soul ascends freely, but it makes no stay. To will 
does not content me; if only I might know the thing to do to 
establish me permanently in eternity!’ He asked, ‘ Is the desire 
so strong?’ She answered, ‘ Aye.’-—‘ Be rid of it,’ he said, ‘ if 
thou wouldst be confirmed.’ Saying, ‘ ’Tis gladly done,’ she sinks 
into destitution. And God drawing her in his divine light she 
weens that she is one with God. While this continues she keeps 
beating back into herself with an overwhelming sense of deity, 
and keeps ejaculating, ‘ I am sure there is no escape for me.’ 

The confessor visits his daughter frequently, inquiring, ‘ Tell 

TRACTATES 325 

me, how goes it now with thee ? ’—‘ Ill,’ she replies. ‘ Heaven 
and earth are too confined for me.’ He entreats her to tell him 
something. She says, ‘I have nothing whatever to tell.’—‘ Just 
a word, for God’s sake,’ he pleads, and wins it for the asking. She 
proceeds to reveal to him such profound and marvellous things 
concerning the pure perception of divine truth that he exclaims, 
‘Thou knowest this is not common knowledge, and were I not 
among those priests who have read it in theology, I had not known 
it either.’—* Much good it is to you,’ she said. ‘I would you had 
a lively sense of it.” Said he, ‘I am this much alive to it, I feel 
as certain of it as of my having said the mass to-day. Natheless, 
this lack of actual experience does trouble me.’ 

With the words, ‘ Pray God for me,’ the daughter returns into 
her solitude to enjoy God’s society. Ere long she appears at the 
door again, demanding her confessor, to whom she says, ‘ Sir, 
rejoice with me, I am God.’—‘ Glory be to God ! ’ he cries.. ‘ Retire 
again into thy solitude ; all joy be thine an thou remainest God.’ 

Obedient to her confessor, she goes into the chapel, into a 
secluded corner. There oblivion descended upon her, and she 
forgot everything named and was so far withdrawn from self and 
everything created that she had to be carried from the church 
and lay till the third day, surely accounted for dead. ‘I misdoubt 
she is dead,’ quoth her confessor. Know, had there been no 
confessor they would have buried her. They essayed by all 
manner of means, but whether her soul was in her body they could 
not discover. They said, ‘ For sure she is dead.’—‘ For sure she 
is not,’ said her confessor. On the third day the daughter re- 
turned. ‘Alas, me miserable, am I back!’ she cried. Her 
confessor, who was already there, addressed her, saying, ‘ Permit 
_me to taste divine truth in the revelation of thy experience.’ 
She said, ‘God knows, I cannot. My experience is ineffable.’— 
‘Hast got now all thou wilt?’ he asked. She answered, ‘ Aye. 
I am confirmed.’ 

Blest and praised be the name of our Lord Jesus Christ who 
showed us the way to conquer by grace what he is by nature. 
It needs a God-receptive man who treads beneath his feet self 
and all creatures. He has five deaths to die. The first is death 
to natural things. Being dead to nature spirit reigns. Never- 
theless he still may lapse into eternal death, as shown by Lucifer. 
Himself pure spirit, from himself he fell, falling eternally. We 
must die in spirit, our spirit being inspired into the spirit of truth. 
Now we begin to live in the life of our Lord Jesus Christ, strictly 
obeying his precepts and example. Thus we die in our Lord 
Jesus Christ in the truth which is himself, even as he died in his 
humanity. And we rise in our Lord Jesus Christ to live again in 

826 v MEISTER ECKHART 

the quick of life. We enter the Father in the Son. Humanity 
receives its coup de grdce, pierced to the heart by light divine. 
Therein man learns to know himself. Forgot are all God’s 
gifts beknownst tohim. Thought, word, will, act, lie strewn before 
him in the reflection of the divine light received from the Father. 
In this divine light the soul sees herself less than creature. She 
finds no place to dwell in. She deems herself the vilest thing God 
ever made. Lucifer is to her so meritorious that she ranks under 
him. Accordingly the masters say, ‘ Christ’s soul and Lucifer’s 
were made in the same light.’ Hence the soul’s grievance and self- 
condemnation. Christ’s soul was the wisest soul that ever was: 
she faced round in the creature and looked towards the creator. 
Wherefore the Father clad her in the divine garment and property 
of his own nature. But Lucifer looked away to the deficiency and 
thereby fell, falling eternally. So fall all they that turn from God 
to things corruptible. In this plight the soul now finds herself and 
is consumed within herself, there thinking to remain eternally, 

- for it is she who is to blame. 

The best authorities aver that from the very lowest angel of 
all those in heaven, there fell one drop upon the highest heaven. 
This started the celestial revolutions, each heaven following the 
course nature laid down for carrying round the drop. From it 
all creatures get their life, those that have life in time; in it all 
creatures hie them back to their first source; in it the soul 
becomes aware that, so little has God become in time, our works 
must be wrought above time, in eternity. Christ taught us 
this. His works are all wrought in eternity. Did God perform 
one act outside himself, he were not God. God’s works are 
wrought so that they remain in him. And our works which 
are wrought thus endure in eternity. Understand, we call mine 
that which is in me, which none can take from me.—Here the 
soul is moved to exclaim: ‘ Alas, that I have wrought so many 
works outside me ! ° 

Concerning nature, the masters speak as follows: Nature and 
naturalness are not identical. The natural state is taken on in 
time ; nature is in itself eternal. This touches the soul. Philo- 
sophers will tell you that thunder is merely the result of opposites. 
Clouds cannot bear being charged with opposites, which crash 
together ; hence lightning and the thunder. So with the wind; 
it blows till foreign matter is expelled, namely, the rain. Creatures 
in general will purify themselves from incompatibles. _ 

Here the soul realizes that she has often harboured incompatibles. 
She says: ‘Creatures all pointed me to my eternal happiness. 
They did not Lucifer: he fell from God for ever because of the 
unlikes he assumed. God kept me in himself. I had no mind to 

TRACTATES | 327 

see it, so I can never look for grace.’ And there she stops, failing 
to rise beyond herself. 

Now theologians say, God is by nature bound to draw his likes 
out of their selfhood into himself just as the sun will draw up 
moisture. Then the soul, merged in the naked Godhead, is no 
more to be found than a wine-drop in mid-ocean. That soul can 
no more sin than God can. The man is said to be conformed to 
God. God is his active principle. He has real perception. Things 
are in him without image, for he is one with God in whom are all 
things. In this case it is true to say, all things are in man formless. 
The masters say: ‘To gauge the soul we must gauge her with 
God, for the ground of God and the ground of the soul are one 
nature.’ The part that gives life to the body is the least part of 
the soul. The man who realizes this has fresh and inexhaustible 
delight. What though he walks in time, he dwells in his eternal 
nature. He inhabits the truth. This man is known by five signs. 
First, he never complains. Next, he never makes excuses: when 
accused, he leaves the facts to vindicate him. Thirdly, there is 
nothing he wants in earth or heaven but what God wills himself. 
Fourthly, he is not moved in time. Fifthly, he is never rejoiced : 
he is joy itself. 

Here the trusty confessor comes seeking his daughter in an 
unknown land, earnestly entreating her to hold converse with him. 
She says, ‘ I can talk with you of outward things.’-—‘ ’T will serve,’ 
quoth he. ‘ Tell me, what, thinkest thou, made thee most ripe for 
the eternal truth?’ She answered: ‘ Leaving myself wherever 
I found myself. Next, never excusing myself from accusations 
which concerned myself alone. Thirdly, whatever my pain, 
wanting still more and compelling myself to bear it equably. 
Fourth, being supple to insignificance, poverty and lack of creature 
comforts. Fifth, never seeing souls sin without rebuke and never 
hearing things against the gospel and the life of Christ without 
I fought them to the death. But know that it has been my 
habit rather to rebuke those persons whose sins I saw were doing 
them a mortal mischief. I never did it save purely out of love 
to God, being moved to pity for them. Many an insult they have 
hurled upon me. Sixth, never avoiding occasion of insult: I 
fled from honour but I stayed for shame. Seventh, never looking 
back when once I knew the way to my eternal happiness; and 
taking no man’s counsel, but plodding straight on. Eighth, being 
never content with present light nor present sight, which were as 
nothing to my certainty. Ninth, never resisting any use God 
chose to put me to. Tenth, rigid discipline, inward and outward.’ 

‘God be praised,’ he said. ‘Thou hast told me thy outward 
rule ; now tell me thy inner.” Quoth she, ‘ God wot, I fear it is 

328 MEISTER ECKHART 

beyond you.’—‘ But just a hint; deny me not,’ he urged. And 
she responded : ‘ At the moment of confirmation there existed in 
me all the works God ever wrought as a little thing inferior to 
heaven. My abode was heaven. I dwelt there with the inmates 
of the Trinity which to me was as familiar as to the householder 
the house he dwells in, and saw the partition between all creatures 
and God’s whole creation : it was as plain as the five fingers on 
my hand.’—‘ He said, ‘ Explain more fully.” She replied, ‘I will. 
I had assembled all my soul-powers. When I saw into myself I 
saw God in me and everything God ever made in earth and heaven. 
Let me explain it better. As you know right well, anyone who 
faces God in the mirror of truth sees everything depicted in that 
mirror: all things, that is to say. Such was my inner habit 
before confirmation. Do you quite take me ? ’—* It must be so, 
of course,’ he said. ‘Is that not thy rule now?’ She answered, 
“No, I have nothing to do with saints nor angels nor crea- 
tures nor anything created; it is all uniform: not merely 
nothing created but nothing uttered concerns me.’—* Explain,’ he 
said. She said, ‘I will. I am confirmed in the naked Godhead, 
wherein is neither form or image.’-—‘ Art there for good?’ he 
asked. She answered, ‘ Yes.” Quoth he, ‘ Daughter, say on, this 
talk delights me.’ And she proceeded, * As I am no creature can 
be, as creature. —‘ Explain,’ he said. Quoth she, ‘I am as I was 
before I was created: just God and God. No saint nor angel 
nor choir nor heaven. Eight heavens are often spoken of and nine 
choirs of angels ; there is nothing of that where Iam, You must 
know that expressions of that sort, which conjure up pictures in the 
mind, merely serve as allurements to God. In God there is nothing 
but God ; no soul gets to God until she is God as she was before 
she was made.’ 

He said, ‘ You speak the truth, daughter. Now do for God’s 
sake counsel me as best thou canst how I may gain possession of 
this good.’—* I will give you sure guidance,’ she said. ‘As you 
are well aware, creatures were made from nothing and must return 
to nothing ere they reach their source.’ ‘True,’ he agreed. 
Quoth she, ‘ Enough said. Tell me now, what is nothing?’ He 
replied, ‘I know what is nothing and I know what is less than 
nothing. Imperfections, I take it, are nothing to God. So that 
anyone subject to imperfections is less than nothing.’-—‘ How so?’ 
— He is the servant of imperfection. Nothing is nothing. The 
servant of imperfection is less than nothing.’ Quoth she, ‘ Pre- 
cisely. The way then to obtain your good is to subordinate 
yourself to yourself and creatures till you can find no more to do 
towards God’s working in you.’—* You are right,’ he cried. ‘ One 
master says, He who loves God as his God, and prays to God as 

TRACTATES 329 

his God and is therewith content, is to me as an unbeliever,’— 
“ Blessed be the master who’said that,’ quoth she. ‘ He knew the 
truth. For you must understand that anyone content with what 
can be expressed in words—God is a word, heaven is a word— 
whose soul-powers, love and knowledge, insist on nothing further 
than what can be expressed, is aptly styled an unbeliever. It is 
the lower senses orfpowers of the soul which grasp things uttered. 
The higher powers are not content with that: these keep on 
pressing forward till they strike the source from whence the soul 
flowed forth. The powers of the soul cannot enter her source. 
All nine powers of the soul serve the man of the soul ; they draw 
him out of nether things and speed him to his source. When the 
soul stands before her cause, superior to things in her main power, 
her powers remain without. Look you, it is the naked soul, naked 
of things nameable, one in the same, that progresses in the naked 
Godhead, like oil that creeps in cloth: so the soul goes creeping 
forward, flowing on and on so long as God ordains her to give life 
to the body in time. Know, while the good man lives on earth his 
soul is progressing in eternity. Hence the good like living.’—‘ True 
daughter,’ he observed. ‘One master says: Suppose there lay 
at point to die two men equally pleasant in the eyes of God, and 
that both died, the one before the other but just long enough to 
give that other time to breathe one sigh for God, to cast one thought 
to the least martyr that God ever led, the lightest word God ever 
spoke, this would entitle him to precedence over the other who 
died first, while God remains eternal.’—‘ That is so,’ she said. 
‘ Know also, as the good shall rise so fall the wicked who are 
in sin.’ 

_ ‘Now prithee, daughter, tell me. We speak of heaven and hell 
and purgatory and read a vast amount about them. We also read 
that God is in everything and everything in God.’—‘ And so it is,’ 
she said.—“ Then, for God’s sake,’ quoth he, ‘ acquaint me with 
the rightful view of it.—* Gladly, so far as I can put it into words,’ 
she said. ‘ Hell is nothing but a state or being, Our being here 
is our eternal being ; we are as it were grounded init. Many people 
fondly imagine here to have creaturely being and divine being 
yonder. That is not so. It is a popular delusion. Purgatory is 
a thing assumed, like penance, and comes to an end. Look at it 
like this. Some souls so reverence God and the friends of God that 
God is constrained to have mercy on them, be it only at their 
end that true repentance comes to them in love and knowledge 
and they rise out of themselves and everything created. Then 
true love is their being and did they go on living they would sin 
no more but suffer for true love’s sake all our Lord Jesus Christ 
suffered, and his beloved. These rise in grace. But people who 

330 MEISTER ECKHART 

go hence in their state of creaturehood are in that state eternally 
which is called hell. Likewise, theré%remains their state to those - 
who suffer naught but God to be in them : God is their being and 
remains their being eternally. 

‘ Again, touching the last day, people say, God shall judge. So 
he shall, but not as they think. Each man is his own judge in 
this sense : the state he then appears in he is ig eternally. People 
frequently assert : The body shall rise with the soul. So it shall. 
But not as they think. ‘The being of the body and the being of 
the soul go to form one being. Those souls who all their days have 
spent their time in God till God has come to be their being, to 
them God stays their being, body and soul eternally. Not so the 
wicked who have squandered their time on creatures ; what their 
state is it continues to be, and this eternal lapsing from God and 
from his friends is called hell. Yet bear in mind that these same 
persons get their being from God or they would not be at all. So 
they are in God and God is in them. You see, they have the being 
of God. Take it like this. They are in God as ’twere a man with 
his life forfeit to some righteous lord whose honour he has stolen. 
and whose friends, and plotted frequently against his life; and 
now his lord, who showed him only kindness in hopes of his 
reform, is vexed to find that he declines to mend. Holding him 
in the grip of justice, his lord forbears to kill. He punishes the 
outrage on himself. First, bound hand and foot, the man is cast 
into the lowest donjon among toads and reptiles and the foul 
water which is wont to lie in deepest donjon-keeps. Fetched up 
from thence, he is disgraced before the world, that they may see 
his open shame and he their joy. So much the more his torment. 
Insult after insult do they heap upon him, shame unthinkable ; 
he is ever.cast back into his donjon, ever in dread of execution. 
Even so it is permissible to say that man is at the court, for the 
donjon is the royal court as much as the hall is where the king 
stays with his friends; but conditions, you see, are different. 
Though not with that celestial race we spoke of. Know that grief 
endures eternally. I marvel that anyone who hears these words 
should dare to sin. Purgatory is so grievous in itself that anyone 
who knows the rights of it would stay no time in sin. Purgatory 
you must know is temporal and notional. A soul which leaves the 
body, as I said, in faith and love and will to do all for God’s sake 
and eschew sin for God, that soul is in dire distress, unable to do 
anything but wait till God shall deign to take compassion on her. 
And though this happen not till doomsday, the hope is her life. 
Doomsday past, this is over. But souls in the divine condition 
are not affected in this sense: on quitting the body such a soul 
remains in a condition of divinity determined by her knowledge 

TRACTATES ; 331 

and love of God, and after the day of judgment the being of the 
body and the being of the soul are one being in the divine actuality. 
According to the most reliable authorities, statements of theirs 
regarding creatures are not to be construed to mean that John 
went body and soul to heaven ; no more did others of our Lord’s 
friends either, of whom report says they are body and soul in 
God, transcending time in eternity. It is not possible. In ‚God 
can be nothing but God, not mouth nor nose nor hand nor foot 
nor any creature pertaining to the body. So they cannot be held 
to have got there in the body. We may reasonably suppose that 
when the time came for John to go, God caused to befall him what 
was due to happen on the day of judgment. He did this for true 
love’s sake, because he was so pure. The being of his soul, taking 
with it, God helping, the being of his body, was drawn up. We 
may take it that his body, which was destined to perish here on 
earth, was disintegrated in the air, so that there entered into God 
only the being of the body, which would have accompanied the 
soul at the last day. Thus it befell Mary and all of whom it is 
related that they attained to God in the body.’ 

“ Tis well argued,’ he said. ‘ But you must know the question 
is in hot dispute among the theologians.’ Said she, ‘I will give 
you the key to its golution. Pass to our Lord Jesus Christ and 
see what happened at his ascension. He was at meat when he 
ascended. As you well know, the food was lost in transit, with 
everything adventitious that Christ had taken on, which all 
remained in time. He could only take with him into the Father 
that which came out of the Father. The being of Christ’s soul 
took with it the being of the noble manhood of our Lord Jesus 
Christ in its divine actuality. The persons subsist in the Father 
as one with the Father. Even so are all those in the Father who 
conquer by grace what Christ has by nature : not that they take 
with them the life of the body when they go hence; that waits 
till doomsday. The being of the body reverts to the being of the 
soul only when all things have perished, according to the vulgar 
teaching. You doubtless know that whom God deigns to favour 
he treats as he treated St John.’ Quoth he, ‘I wot that well. 
If I did as St Dominic, I should be as St Dominic. St Dominic 
sold his book and all he possessed and gave to the poor for God’s 
sake. We do not this, daughter, nor do we practise numerous 
other virtues of St Dominic. We are as we are through pretending 
a priesthood we do not possess. St Francis was a simple soul 
wherefor God greatly favoured him. He approached God in 
perfect simplicity of life and so grew familiar with God. Now 
in those parts there was a priest who sorely hated a profane to 
be so intimate with God. Going to visit him, he said, ““ What 

\ 

332 MEISTER ECKHART 

shall we make of this, brother ? The scriptures say we must rebuke 

men for their sins.” —‘‘ Assuredly,” said St Francis.—*‘ But,” said . 
the priest, “‘ did I rebuke a man, he might repay me twofold.”— 
“How should he ? ” said St Francis. “I can rede you the scriptures 

better than that: we are to cultivate the true and perfect life, 

within and without, till we become a living rebuke to all mankind.” 

—‘‘ True, brother,” said the priest ashamed.—Know that to do as 

St Francis is to become as St Francis. Further, I hold: when 

we depart this life, grace departs from us. And again: to be less 

than St John is to be more than St John.’—* Thank God, you 

know it,’ she exclaimed. He said, ‘I have known it for long, and 

I ween it is true, though I do not live it.—‘ That I rue,’ she 

said. 

Quoth she, ‘ You have told: me of nine heavens. Now tell me 
what I ask. Advise me what sort of life to lead, for you know my 
life better than anyone.’—‘ Indeed I will,’ said he, “and gladly. 
Eat when thou art hungry, drink when thou art thirsty, wear 
fine linen, sleep and take thine ease ; gratify thy tastes in meats 
and drinks and, for a season, study thyself, live for thyself alone. 
An thou shouldst see God’s whole creation swallowed up before 
thine eyes, avert it not with so much as an Ave Maria, but summon 
all creatures at will to do thy bidding to theglory of God. Wear 
delicate, beautiful raiment, and, abiding in one place, carry all 
things up to God. Dost thou choose to enjoy creatures, it is 
seemly so to do, seeing that any creature thou enjoyest thou dost 
render to its cause. Thou wilt know full well that everything 
thou enjoyest is in God to God’s glory.’ She said, ‘I know right 
well that all you say is true but you must understand I never 
shall want anything except to be a beggar till I die. —‘ Thou art 
mistook,’ he said.—‘ Then mistaken I will remain,’ said she. ‘I 
choose poverty and exile; that none can take from me.’—‘ On 
my soul, thou art false to God,’ he cried.—‘ How so ? ’ she asked. 
* Just pleasing thyself,’ he answered. Quoth she, ‘God knows I 
am but keeping on the lines that led me to eternal happiness. 
The natural error of those lines in time and in eternity shall be 
mine too in eternity and time. I will not deviate from the rule 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.’ He said, ‘ Thou shouldst know that. 
God prosper thee.’ Then she: ‘Believe me, I do take more ease ; 
my discipline is not so strict as heretofore. If only I might 
forward on their way good souls approaching their eternal happiness 
but lacking certainty, that I fain would do; I would fain succour 
the whole world from sin for God’s sake. Since our Lord Jesus 
Christ made use of all his faculties up to his death, ’tis meet I 
should do likewise. My outer faculties shall occupy themselves 
with the exalted life and noble manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ 

TRACTATES 333 

and with his lofty teachings, during my life in time. The highest 
powers of my soul will, as you know, be working in Christ’s soul 
in his heavenly Father, subsistent in one nature they never stoop 
from. The Holy Ghost flows from the Father through these 
powers into my soul and back from my soul into God, each 
several power doing its own work, here in the Holy Ghost and, 
in the Father, with his Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Regard it as an 
intercourse. He knows all my days from the time I discerned 
good and evil.’ 

‘Tell me, daughter,’ he said, ‘ doctors declare that in heaven a 
thousand angels can stand on the point of a needle. Now rede me 
the meaning of this?’ She answered, ‘The doctors are right. 
You can see it in this way. The soul that enters into God owns 
neither time nor space nor anything nameable to be expressed in 
words. But it stands to reason, if you consider it, that the space 
occupied by any soul is vastly greater than heaven and earth and 
God’s entire creation. I say more: God might make heavens 
and earths galore yet these, together with the multiplicity of 
creatures he has already made, would be of less extent than a single 
needle-tip compared with the standpoint of a soul atoned in God.’ 
—So the daughter went on, till her talk turning upon God, she 
waxed most eloquent, the father urging her at intervals : ‘ Say on, 
daughter.’ She imparted to him so much concerning the immen- 
sity of God, the might of God and the providence of God, that he 
took leave of his outer senses and they had to carry him into a 
neighbouring cell where he lay for long ere coming to himself again. 
Returning to himself, he desired his daughter to come to him. 
Admitted to his presence, his daughter inquired, * How is it now 
with you ? ’—‘ Excellently well,’ he answered. ° God be praised 
for sending thee to a man. . Thou didst show me the way to my 
eternal happiness, and I have been deep in divine contemplation 
where there was given me the realization of all I have heard from 
thy lips. Daughter I adjure thee, by thy love to God, help me 
by word and deed to win a permanent abode where now I am.’ 
Quoth she, ‘ Impossible. You are not tempered to it. When, 
soul and faculties, you are as used to going up and down as a 
courtier is to going to and fro at court ; when you recognise the 
various members of the heavenly company and everything God 
ever made and fail in nothing but know them as the good man 
knows the members of his household, then you will distinguish 
between God and Godhead; then too you see the difference 
between spirit and spirituality. Till then you are not qualified 
for confirmation. Do not run away ; wrestle awhile with creatures 
till you are independent of them and they, as such, of you. So 
shall you cultivate your faculties without going demented. This 

834 MEISTER ECKHART 

do until your soul-powers are stimulated to the consciousness we 
have been speaking of.’ 

Blessed and praised be the sweet name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Amen. 

Vil 
SIGNS OF THE TRUE GROUND 

According to one master, many people arrive at specific under- 
standing, at formal, notional knowledge, but there are few who 
get beyond the science and the theory ; yet one man whose mind 
is free from notions and from forms is more dear to God than the 
hundred thousand who have the habit of discursive reason. God 
cannot enter in and do his work in them owing to the restlessness 
of their imagination. If they were free from pictures they could 
be caught and carried up beyond all rational concepts, as St Diony- 
sius says, and also have the super-rational light of faith at its 
starting-point, where God finds his rest and peace to dwell and 
work in as he will and when he will and what he will. God is 
unhindered in his work in these so he can do in them his most 
precious work of all, working them up in faith into himself. 
These people no one can make out ; their life is an enigma, and their 
ways, to all who do not live the same. To this truth and to this 
blessed life, to this high and perfect consummation no one can 
attain except in abstract knowledge and pure understanding. 

Many a lofty intellect, angels not excepting (for in life and 
nature an angel is nothing but pure mind), has erred and lapsed 
eternally from the eternal truth and this may happen also to those 
who, like the angels, preserve their idiosyncrasy and find satis- 
faction in the exercise of their own intelligence. Hence the 
masters urge, and the saints as well, the use and the necessity of 
careful observation and close scrutiny to test the light which 
flashes in, the light of understanding and of vision which man has 
here in time, lest he be the subject of hallucination. If you would 
know and recognise the really sane and genuine seers of God, 
- whom nothing can deceive nor misinform, they can be detected 
by four and twenty signs. . 

The first sign is told us by the chief exponent of knowledge and 
wisdom and transcendental understanding, who is himself the 
truth, our Lord Jesus Christ. He says, ‘ Thereby ye shall know 
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another and keep my 
commandment. What is my commandment? That ye love one 
another as I have loved you,’ as though to say, ye may be my 
disciples in knowledge and in wisdom and high understanding 
but without true love it shall avail you little if anything at all. 

TRACTATES | 335 

Balaam was so clever he understood what God for many hundred 
years had been trying to reveal. This was but little help to him 
because he lacked true love. And Lucifer, the angel, who is in 
hell, had perfectly pure intellect and to this day knows much. 
He has the more hell pain and all because he failed to cleave with 
love and faith to what he knew.— The second sign is selflessness : 
they empty themselves out of themselves giving free furlough to 
things.—The third sign: they have wholly abandoned themselves 
to God: God works in them undisturbed.—The fourth sign : 
wherever they still find themselves they leave themselves ; sure 
method of advancement.—The fifth sign: they are free from all 
self-seeking : this gives them a clear conscience.—The sixth sign : 
they wait unceasingly upon God’s will and do it to their utmost. 
— The seventh sign: they bend their will to God’s will till their 
will coincides with God’s.—The eighth sign : so closely do they fit 
and bind themselves to God and God to them in the power of love, 
that God does nothing without them and they do nothing without 
God.—The ninth sign: they naught themselves and make use of 
God in all their works and in all places and all things.—The tenth 
sign: they take no single thing from any creature, neither good 
nor bad, but all from God alone, albeit God effect it through his 
creature.—The eleventh sign : they are not snared by any pleasure 
or physical enjoyment or by any creature.—The twelfth sign: 
they are not forced or driven by insubordination: they are 
steadfast for the truth.—The thirteenth sign: they are not misled 
by any spurious light nor by the look of any creature: they go 
by the intrinsic merit.—The fourteenth sign : armed and arrayed 
with all the virtues they emerge victorious from every fight with 
vice.—The fifteenth sign : they see and know the naked truth and 
praise God without ceasing for this gnosis.—The sixteenth sign : 
perfect and just, they hold themselves in poor esteem.—The 
seventeenth sign : they are chary of words and prodigal of works. 
— The eighteenth sign : they preach to the world by right practice. 
—The nineteenth sign: they are always seeking God’s glory and 
nothing at all besides——The twentieth sign: if any man fight 
them they will let him prevail before accepting help of any sort 
but God’s.—The twenty-first sign: they desire neither comfort 
nor possessions, of the least of which they deem themselves all 
undeserving.—The twenty-second sign : they look upon themselves 
as the most unworthy of all mankind on earth ; their humbleness 
is therefore never-failing.—The twenty-third sign: they take the 
life and teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ for the perfect exemplar 
of their lives and in the light of this are always examining them- 
selves with the sole intention of removing all unlikeness to their 
high ideal.— The twenty-fourth sign : to outward appearance they 

336 MEISTER ECKHART 

do little who are working all the time at the virtuous life, hence 
the disesteem of many people, which, however, they prefer to 
vulgar approbation. 

These are the signs of the true ground wherein lives the image of 
the perfect truth and he who does not find them in himself may 
account his knowledge vain and so may other people. 

VII! 
THE BIRTH OF THE ETERNAL WORD IN THE SOUL 

Now we will speak of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ as 
he is born to-day at this holy season of the Virgin Mary his 
blessed mother and again as he is born of grace in the perfect 
soul for that is the whole end of Christ’s work on earth ; and we 
shall ask nine questions from which any pious man may tell 
whether the eternal Word is born in him or no. 

The first question is, how to prepare for the interior speaking of 
the eternal Word ?—Several things are needed. First, purity of 
life and mind. Next, the peace and freedom of a still and silent 
heart which is speaking to no creature and is spoken to by none, 
whether of the senses or the spirit. And now for a hard saying 
which few will understand : while the soul is speaking her 
_ own word and her noble word, the Father cannot speak his Word 

in her; while the‘soul is begetting her own son, i.e. the noblest 
work of her own understanding, the Father is not able to beget 
his Son in her to her best advantage. - Thirdly, the soul must 
forsake herself in. order to conceive the eternal Word like St Paul 
and Mary, God’s mother; in whom the eternal Word was uttered 
perfectly. The mind must die to itself, disowning itself and 
becoming God’s own. Fourthly, the mind must lift up its intellect 
and see, for seeing is-the lustiest work and noblest of which the soul 
is capable. Mark how eagerly he comes; he says, ‘ Behold I 
stand at the door and knock!’ Fifthly, it behoves us greatly to 
desire this birth, for desire is the root of all virtue and goodness. 

__ The second question is, what is God’s birth in the soul ? 
God’s birth in the soul is nothing else than a special divine 
motion in a special heavenly mode whereby God wrests the 
spirit from the tumult of creaturely unrest into his motionless 
unity where God can communicate himself to the soul in his 
divinity. There man enjoys his Word in the Father in its first 
discriminate emanation and with the Father as essential Person 
and in the Holy Ghost as the limit set to their eternal bliss, 
and it is in the soul as the reflection of her intellectual proto- 
1 See also Greith, pp. 102, 103. 

TRACTATES 837 

type and in all creatures as the preserver of their being. For 
God speaks his Word in every creature, but no creature is aware 
of it save rational creatures only. The soul is reborn into God 
when she turns to God and pursues his eternal Word right into 
his paternal heart where God makes naked revelation of his birth 
to the soul. The soul falls upon this birth which is revealed to 
her, with love and knowledge. As the Father comes into the soul 
in his Word so in the Word the soul is returned into the Father. 
That we may eternally play this game in God, God help us. 

The third question is, can any man be so well prepared that God 
is obliged to speak his eternal Word in him? We know that God 
must fulfil two obligations. First, when God is pledged and bound 
to the soul by the bonds of mutual love. Then God never fails 
the soul provided she is ready ; he is obliged of mutual necessity 
to give himself to her, as Christ said to Zaccheus, ‘ This day I must 
abide with thee in thine house.’ There is another word that must 
be spoken. Every good thing communicates itself to whatever 
is able to receive it; it would therefore be contrary to God’s 
goodness to withhold himself from us if we can take him in. And 
there is a third compulsory utterance, that of some cause or force 
which is inadmissible in God. Theologians tell us that works 
wrought by the soul with God and in his grace God rewards or not 
just as he chooses, for such works are creature and finite and befall 
in time. They are too insignificant and vile to deserve reward 
from God at all. But the work God does in us without our 
co-operation, where the soul’s work fails and God’s activity prevails, 
in that the soul is merely passive and God is the only one who 
works. Works wrought thus by God in the soul it is his bounden 
duty to requite with his own self, for these works are so divine, so 
eternal, so immense and so nearly touch God’s honour, he has no 
guerdon for them but himself. These souls are the noblest product 
of this life and it is of them St John declares, ‘ Blessed are the dead 
that die in the Lord.’ The outward world is dead to them as they 
are also to the world. Their outward man can no more clash with 
their inner man than the dead can with the living and this is due 
to the gift of God and interior prayer and profound humility. 
Which God grant us. 

The fourth question is, what particular place or power of the 
soul the eternal Word is born in? The philosophers and saints 
have many fine sayings about this. Some say, in the intellect for 
that is most like God. Some say, in the will for that is the free 
power of the soul. A third school teaches, in the soul-spark 
because that is most nigh to God. A fourth, in the arcanum of 
the mind for it is there that God is most at home. A fifth school 
says (and it is with this one that I hold), that it is a in the 

338 MEISTER ECKHART : 

innermost being of the soul and all her powers are made aware of 
it in a divine savour, each power in its own mode but intellect is 
the highest power of the soul and therewith the soul grasps the 
divine good. Free will is the power of relishing the divine good 
which intellect makes known to it. The spark of the soul is the 
light of God’s reflection, which is always looking back to God. 
The arcanum of the mind is the sum-total, as it were, of all the 
divine good and divine gifts in the innermost essence of the soul, 
which is as a bottomless well of divine goodness. Which may 
God grant us. 

The fifth question is, what part does the mind play in this birth ? 
It enters a condition of complete passivity leaving God to work his 
will in perfect liberty. Perhaps it may be asked, Is the mind 
aware that God is working init? Ianswer: Virtue, all good works 
wrought by God in man, fervour and devotion for example, a 
man will be aware of, for with works of this kind there is very often 
the evidence of the senses. But when the divine good over- 
whelms with its riches the appetitive faculty and the light of God 
raises the intellect to a higher power, coercing or carrying the mind 
into his divine countenance, then the mind pays no more attention 
to creatures: she is standing face to face with the highest truth. 
Which may God give us. 

The sixth question is, what part is played by the body in this ? 
It is resting peacefully, incapable of movement in any of its 
members, for the superior powers have fetched home the lower, ' 
and the essence of the soul has absorbed her higher powers so all 
is at a stand-still while the eternal Word is being born, in the 
mind and in the body. So help us God. 

The seventh question is, can no power of the soul remain at 
work while the eternal Word is being supernaturally born in this 
way in the soul? The answer is this. The soul has two kinds of 
powers, and of these the outward senses of the body are all at rest 
and also the powers which move the body have been fetched in so 
that none of her powers remain active, but the soul is merely the 
motionless form of the body. As the prophet says, ‘ When all 
things were in mid-silence God spake his silent Word into my soul.’ 
Motionless peace descends upon the body and the mind wherein 
the eternal birth is to be supernaturally conceived. To attain to 
this we must be like the shepherds watching in the night wherein 
Christ was born. So must a man keep watch and ward over his 
own mind, driving his intelligence up into the heights, to those 
eternal laws ordained by God for lost and saved.! Let us beseech 
him daily to carry out in us his eternal laws and rules. For 

1 Referring to the soul-spark or synteresis, sometimes identified with con- 
science regarded as the internal repository of the laws of right and wrong. 

TRACTATES - 389 

priests and religious the seven hours are ordained that they may 
thank God for his death and pray him to accomplish his eternal 
‚rules and laws in us. And you who know this truth better than 
‚others do should let your minds dwell more upon this birth than 
other people can who are ignorant about it. God help us to the 
truth. 

The eighth question is, what fruits or gifts are granted to the 
soul in whom the eternal Word is spoken ? Him four things befall. 
The first is that he is united with God. Next, he becomes God’s 
Son by grace. Thirdly, he is made God’s heir. Fourthly, he is 
loosed from bondage; as St Paul, naming all four perfections, 
says, * In Christ is neither male nor female, neither Jew nor Greek, 
neither bond nor free ; but ye are all one in Christ and are sons of 
God. And if sons of God then heirs of God.’ May we being loosed 
from bondage be God’s sons, so help us God. 

* Now, taking as my text, ‘ This is my beloved Son in whom I 
am well pleased,’ I will set forth the things a man must have in 
order to be God’s Son by grace. First, he must have perfect self- 
control, as the Lord Christ says, ‘I have power to lay down my 
soul and take it up again.’ Meaning, he is not cast down by 
suffering and adversity nor puffed up by worldly happiness and 
prosperity. Secondly, he must have his mind ever charged with 
divine ideas and godly sayings. Thirdly, he must have the 
highest good ever present to his mind so far as his nature will 
allow. Fourthly, he must steadfastly abide therein so far as his 
nature can endure it. Fifthly, if he go out into creatures for the 
needs of life he must not tarry there longer than is necessary. - 
Sixthly, what his mind conceives of from within of divine mystery 
or truth he must protect from nature as a rich man guards his 
treasure from robbers and from thieves. In the seventh place, 
he must make no attempt to express these things in words until the. 
time is ripe, that is, until he puts them into practice. Eighth, he 
must know well enough and consider fit any person he reveals. 
these secrets to: the fool confides in all the world but the wise in 
few. Ninthly, he must be gracious alike to yea and nay. Tenth, 
he must be indifferent about what God has done to him and is 
going to do. [Eleventh, it must not concern him what God has 
done or is to do.] Twelfth, he must behave impartially to those 
whom God has chosen or not chosen [to those to whom his grace 
has or has not been given]; and all these things he:must offer up 
to the glory of God, obeying the divine command that what 
pleases God shall please him also and saying with Christ, ‘ Father, 

1 The rest of this tractate occurs also in Hermann von Fritslar’s Das 
Heiligenleben (see Pfeiffer’s Deutsche Mystiker, vol. i, p. 54), from which the 
words in brackets are added. 

340 MEISTER ECKHART 

thy will not mine be done.’ These twelve.articles, with the pre- 
ceding four, set forth the highest life that can be led in time. Of 
him who has these things may the Father say, ‘ This is my beloved 
Son in whom I am well pleased ; hear ye him.’ And he who has 
them not but defaults therein, his defects are what St Augustine 
calls spiritual sins. . 

The ninth question is, how to recognise these people in whom 
the eternal Word is born ghostly and gratuitously ? I answer, by 
the following signs. The first is that these people are dead to 
flesh and blood and to all natural appetites, as St Paul says, 
‘ Since the eternal Word was born in me I no longer live to flesh 
and blood.’ Secondly the pleasures of the body [the triumphs of 
the world], are like sour breath unto their soul. As St Gregory’ 
declares, ‘ Worldly joys and glories are nothing but untowardness. 
Thirdly, these people are for ever listening for God’s voice in them, 
David says, ‘ I will hearken to what God the Lord shall say within 
me.’ Fourthly, they are not perturbed by the uncertainty of 
things: nothing vexes or depresses them, as Christ said to his 
disciples, ‘In your patience possess ye your souls.’ Fifthly, these 
people turn everything to good account so nothing can corrupt 
them, but they are ever pure in heart; as St Paul says, ‘ All 
things work together for good to them that love God.’ Sixthly, 
they have no desire to vie with anyone; they live in the world 
as though there was no one but themselves and God. Wherefore 
their heavenly Father begets his Son in them unceasingly and this 
birth is for all who give their mind thereto. 

The Lord Christ calls himself the flower of the field, for this 
is common property. Even so this birth is the common property 
of all those who are ready and diligently longing to receive it. 
May we thus desire this birth and eternally enjoy it, So help us 
God. Amen. 

IX 
DETACHMENT ! 

I have read many writings of heathen philosophers and sages, 
of the old covenant and of the new, and have sought earnestly and 
with all diligence which is the best and highest virtue whereby 
a man may knit himself most narrowly to God and wherein he is 
most like to his exemplar, as he was in God, wherein was no differ- 
ence between himself and God, ere God created creature. And 
having approfounded all these scriptures to the best of my ability, 
I find it is none other than absolute detachment from all creatures. 

1 See also Spamer, B. 4. 

TRACTATES 341 

As our Lord said to Martha, ‘ unum est necessarium,’ which is as 
good as saying, He who would be serene and pure needs but one 
thing, detachment. 

Our doctors sing love’s praises, as did St Paul, who said, ‘ What- 
soever things I do and have not charity I am nothing.’ But I 
extol detachment above any love. First, because at best love 
constrains me to love God. Now it is far better my constraining 
God to me than for me to be constrained to God. My eternal 
happiness depends on God and me becoming one; but God is 
apter to adapt himself to me and can easier communicate with 
me than I can communicate with God. Detachment forces God to 
come to me, and this is shown as follows. Everything is fain to be 
in its own natural state. But God’s own natural state is unity and 
purity and these come from detachment. Hence God is bound to 
give himself to a heart detached.—Secondly, I rank detachment 
above love because love constrains me to suffer all things for God’s 
sake : detachment constrains me to admit nothing but God. Now 
it is far better to tolerate nothing but God than to suffer all things 
for God’s sake. For in suffering one has regard to creatures, 
whence the suffering comes, but detachment „iS immune from 
creature. Further, that detachment admits of none but God I 
demonstrate in this wise: anything received must be received in 
aught. But detachment is so nearly naught that there is nothing 
rare enough to stay in this detachment, except God. He is so 
simple, so ethereal, that he can sojourn in the solitary heart. 
Detachment then admits of God alone. That which is received is 
received and grasped by its receiver according to the mode of the 
receiver; and so anything conceived is known and understood 
according to the mind of him who understands and not according 
to its own innate conceivability. 

And humility the masters laud beyond most other virtues. I 
rank detachment before any meekness and for the following 
reasons. Meekness can be without detachment, but complete 
detachment is impossible without humility. Perfect humility is a 
matter of self-naughting ; but detachment so narrowly approxi- 
mates to naught that no room remains for aught betwixt zero and 
absolute detachment. Wherefore without humility is no complete 
detachment. Withal two virtues are always better than one.— 
Another reason why I put detachment higher than humility is 
this: humility means abasing self before all creatures and in that 
same abasement one goes out of oneself to creatures. But detach- 
ment abideth in itself. Now no going out however excellent, but 
staying in is better still. As the prophet hath it, ‘ omnis gloria 
filie regis ab intus,’ the king’s daughter is all glorious within. 
Perfect detachment is without regard, without either lowliness or 

342 MEISTER ECKHART 

loftiness to creatures: it has no mind to be below nor yet to be 
above ; it is minded to be master of itself, loving none and hating 
none, having neither likeness nor unlikeness, neither this nor that, 
to any creature ; the only thing it fain would be is same. But to 
be either this or that it does not want at all. He who is this or 
that is aught; but detachment is altogether naught. It leaves 
things unmolested. 

Here someone may object, But surely in our Lady all the virtues 
flourished in perfection and among them absolute detachment. 
Now granting that detachment is better than humility, why did 
our Lady glory in her lowliness instead of her detachment, saying, 
‘ quia respexit dominus humilitatem ancille sue’: ‘He regarded 
the lowliness of his handmaiden ’ ? 

I answer that, in God there is detachment and humility as well, 
so.far as virtues can be attributed to God. Know, it was his 
loving meekness that made God stoop to enter human nature 
while it remained within itself as motionless, what time he 
was made man, as it was while he created the heavens and the 
earth, as I shall show you later. And seeing that our Lord when he 
chose to be made man did persist in his motionless detachment, by 
that same token did our Lady know that he expected her to do the 
same, albeit for the nonce he had regard expressly to her lowliness 
and not to herdetachment. So remaining unmoved in her detach- 
ment she yet gloried in her lowliness and not in her detachment. 
Had she but once remembered her detachment to say, ‘ He regarded 
my detachment,’ her detachment would by that have been disturbed 
and would not have been absolute and perfect since a going forth 
has taken place. Any event, however insignificant, will always 
cause some troubling of detachment. There you have the explana- 
tion of our Lady’s glorying in her lowliness instead of her detach- 
ment. Quoth the prophet, ‘ audiani, quid loquatur in me dominus 
deus,’ ‘I will be still and listen to what my Lord and my God 
may be saying within me,’ as though to say, if God would parley 
with me then he must come in for I will not go out. It is Boéthius 
who exclaims, ‘ Ye men, why do ye look without for that which 
is within you ?’” 

_ I prize detachment more than mercy too, for mercy means 
naught else but a man’s going forth of self by reason of his fellow- 
. ereatures’ lack, whereby his heart is wrung. Detachment is 
exempt from this; it stays within itself permitting nothing to 
disturb it. In short, when I reflect on all the virtues I find not 
one so wholly free from fault, so unitive to God as is detachment. 

It was Avicenna the philosopher who said, ‘ The mind detached 
is of such nobility that what it sees is true, what it desires befalls 
and its behests must be obeyed.’ For you must know that when 

TRACTATES 343 

the free mind is quite detached it constrains God to itself and could 
it remain formless and free from adventitiousness it would take 
on the nature of God. But God grants this to none beside himself ; 
so God can do no more for the solitary soul than make it a present 
of himself. The man who is in absolute detachment is rapt away 
into eternity where nothing temporal affects him nor is he in the 
least aware of any mortal thing ; he has the world well dead, he 
having no relish for aught earthly. St Paul meant this when he 
declared, ‘ I live and yet not I: Christ liveth in me.’ 

Peradventure thou wilt say, What then is detachment that it 
should be so noble in itself ?— True detachment means a mind as 
little moved by what befalls, by joy and sorrow, honour and dis- 
grace, as a broad mountain by a gentle breeze. Such motionless 
detachment makes a man superlatively Godlike. For that God is 
God is due to his motionless detachment, and it is from his detach- 
ment that he gets his purity and his simplicity and his immuta- 
bility. Ifthen a man is going to be like God, so far as any creature 
can resemble God, it will be by detachment. This leads to purity 
and from purity to simplicity and from simplicity to immova- 
bility ; and it is these three which constitute the likeness between 
man and God, which likeness is in grace, for it is grace which 
draws a man away from mortal things and purges him from things 
corruptible. I would have ycu know that to be empty of creatures 
is to be full of God and to be full of creatures is to be empty of 
God. 

Now it must be remembered that in this immutable detachment 
God has stood for aye and does still stand. Know also, that when 
God created the heavens and the earth he might not have been 
making anything at all for all that it affected his detachment. 
Nay, I say more: prayers and good works wrought by a man in 
time affect no more the divine detachment than if no prayers 
nor virtuous works had come to pass in time; nor is God any 
kindlier disposed towards that wight than if his prayers and deeds 
had all been left undone. Further I declare, when the Son in 
his Godhead was pleased to be made man and was and suffered 
martyrdom, God’s motionless detachment was no more disturbed 
than if he had never been made man. 

Haply thou wilt say, I gather then, that prayers and virtuous 
deeds are all in vain; God takes too little interest in them to be 
affected by them. And yet they say God likes to be entreated upon 
all occasions. 

Now mark, and realize if possible, that in his first eternal glance 
(if a first glance may be assumed), God saw all things as they 
would happen and he saw in that same glance both when and how 
he would make creatures. He saw the humblest prayer that 

344 MEISTER ECKHART 

would be offered, the least good deed that anyone would do and 
saw withal which prayers and which devotions he would hear. 
He saw that to-morrow thou shalt call upon him earnestly, urgently © 
entreating him; and not for the first time to-morrow will God 
grant thy supplication and thy prayer: he has granted it already 
in his eternity ere ever thou becamest man. Suppose thy prayer 
is foolish or lacking earnestness, God will deny it thee not then, 
he has denied it thee already in his eternity. Thus God, who has 
seen everything in that first eternal glance, in no wise acts from 
any why at all, for everything is a foregone conclusion. 

And though God does stay all the while in motionless detachment 
yet are men’s prayers and virtuous works not all in vain, he who 
does well being well rewarded. As Philippus says, ‘ God creator 
holds all things in the course and order he has given them from the 
beginning.’ With him nothing is past and nothing future, who has 
loved all his saints even as he foresaw them ere ever the world 
became. Yet when there come to pass in time the things he 
speculated in eternity then people think that God has changed 
his mind, though whether he be wrathful or benignant it is we who 
change and he remains the same ; just as the sunshine hurts weak 
eyes and benefits the strong ones what time the light itself remains 
unchanged. God does not see in time nor is his outlook subject 
to renewal. Isodorus argues in this sense in his book on the 
Arch-Good. He says, People are always asking what God did 
before he created the heavens and, the earth and whence there 
came to God the new will to make creatures ? His answer is that 
no new will at all arose in God; for what though creature was 
not in itself as it is now yet it’ was from eternity in God and in 
his mind. God did not make the heavens and the earth as we 
should say, man-fashion, ‘Let them be!’ but creatures are 
all spoken in his eternal Word. Moses said to God, ‘ Lord, if 
Pharaoh ask me who thou art, what am I to say?’ And God 
replied, ‘Say, He-who-is hath sent me.’ Or in other words, He 
who is unchanging in himself, he it is hath sent me. 

Here someone may object, But was Christ in motionless detach- 
ment when he cried, ‘My soul is sorrowful even unto death!’ 
Or Mary when she stood beneath his cross? yet much is said 
about her lamentations. How is all this compatible with motion- 
less detachment ?—Know then, that according to philosophers 
there are in everyone two men: one, the outward man, is his 
objective nature ; this man is served by the five senses, albeit he 
is energised by the power of the soul. The other one, the inner man, 
is man’s subjective nature. Now I would have you know that the 
Godly-minded man employs his soul-powers in his outward man 
no more than his five senses really need it; and his interior man 

TRACTATES 345 

only has recourse to the five senses so far as it is guide and keeper. 
to these five senses and can stop them being put to bestial uses as 
they so often are by those who live according to the baser appetites, 
as do the mindless beasts, and who deserve the name of beast 
rather than that of man. What surplus energy she has beyond 
what she expends on her five senses the soul bestows upon her 
inner man, and supposing he has toward some right high endeavour 
she will call in all the powers she has loaned to the five senses and 
then the man is said to be senseless and rapt away, his object 
being either some unintelligible form or some formless intelligible. 
Remember, God requires every spiritual man to love him with all 
the powers of his soul. ‘ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart,’ he says. Some squander all their soul-powers on 
their outward man. Namely, those whose thoughts and feelings 
hinge on temporal goods, all unwitting of an inner man. And 
even as the virtuous man will now and then deprive his outward 
self of all the powers of the soul what time he is embarking on some 
high adventure, so bestial man will rob his inner self of all its 
soul-powers to expend them on his outer man. Withal it must be 
realized that the outward man is able to be active and leave the 
inward man entirely passive and unmoved. Now in Christ too 
existed an outward and an inward man and also in our Lady, and 
what Christ and our Lady said concerning outward things was 
prompted by their outward man, the inner man remaining in 
motionless detachment. So was it when Christ said, ‘ My soul is 
sorrowful unto death.” And despite her lamentations and various 
things she said, Our Lady, in her inner man, stood all the while 
in motionless detachment. Take an illustration. The door goes 
to and fro upon its hinges. Now the projecting door I liken to 
the outward man and the hinge I liken to the inner man. As it 
shuts and opens the door swings to and fro while the hinge remains 
unmoved in the same place without undergoing any change. 
And likewise here. 

What then, I ask, is the object of absolute detachment? I 
answer, that the object of absolute detachment is neither this nor 
that. Itis absolutely nothing, for it is the culminating point where 
God can do precisely as he will. God cannot have his way in every 
heart, for though God is almighty yet he cannot work except where 
he finds readiness or makes it. I add, or makes it, by reason of 
St Paul in whom he found no readiness but whom he did make 
ready by infusion of his grace; wherefore I affirm, God works 
according to the aptitude he finds. He works differently in man 
and in astone, and for this we have anatural analogy. If you heat 
a baker’s oven and place in it the dough, some made of barley, 

some of oats and some of wheat and some of rye, then albeit in 

846 MEISTER ECKHART 

the oven the heat is all the same it does not tell alike on all the 
doughs, but one yields a fine bread, another one more coarse and a 
third a coarser still. The heat is not to blame: it is the material 
which differs. Nor does God tell alike on every heart but accord- 
ing to the readiness and the capacity he finds. In any heart 
containing this or that there is something to hinder God’s highest 
operation. For a heart to be perfectly ready it has to be perfectly 
empty, this being its condition of maximum capacity. To take 
another common illustration.. Suppose I want to write on a white 
tablet, then anything already written there, however excellent it 
be, will interfere and hinder me from writing ; ere I can write 
I must erase completely whatever is already on the tablet which 
is never better fitted for me to write upon than when there is 
nothing there at all. And so for God to write his very best within 
my heart everything dubbed this or that must be ousted from my 
heart leaving it quite without attachment. God is free to work 
his sovran will when the object of this solitary heart is neither 
this nor that. 

Then again I ask, What is the prayer of the solitary heart ? 
I answer, that detachment and emptiness cannot pray at all, for 
whoso prays desires of God something : something added to him 
or something taken from him. But the heart detached has no 
desire for anything nor has it anything to be delivered from. So 
it has no prayers at all; its only prayer consists in being uniform 
with God. In this sense we may take St Dionysius’ comment ön 
the saying of St Paul, ‘ Many there be that run but one receiveth 
the prize.’ All the powers of the soul competing for the crown 
which falls to the essence alone. According to Dionysius this 
running is none other than the flight from creature to union with 
uncreated nature. Attaining this the soul loses her name; God 
absorbs her in himself so that as self she comes to naught, just as 
the sunlight swallows up the dawn and naughts it. To this pass 
nothing brings the soul but absolute detachment. And here it is 
germane to quote St Augustine’s dictum : ‘ The soul has a private 
door into divine nature at the point where for her things all come 
to naught.’ This door on earth is none other than absolute 
detachment. At the height of. her detachment she is ignorant 
with knowing, loveless with loving, dark with enlightenment. 

Here too we might cite a master’s words, Blessed are the spiritual 
poor who have abandoned unto God all things as he possessed 
them when we existed not. This none can do but a heart wholly 
without attachment. 

That God would sooner be in a solitary heart than any other, I 
argue in this fashion. Starting from thy question, What does 
God seek in all things? I answer in his words out of the Book of 

TRACTATES 347 

Wisdom, ‘ In all things I seek rest.” Now there is nowhere perfect 
rest save in a heart detached. Ergo, God is happier there than in 
any other thing or virtue. Know that the more we are disposed 
to receive the inflowing God, the more happy we shall be ; perfect 
receptivity.gives perfect felicity. Now one makes oneself receptive 
to the influence of God only by dint of uniformity with God ; 
as a man’s uniformity with God so is his sense of the inflow of God. 
Uniformity comes of subjection to God, and the more one is subject 
to creature the less one is uniform with God. But the heart 
which is quite detached and all devoid of creatures, being utterly 
subject to God and uniform with God in the highest measure, is 
wholly receptive of his divine inflow. Hence St Paul’s exhorta- 
tion to ‘ Put on Christ,’ 7.e. uniformity with Christ. For know, 
when Christ was made man it was not a certain man that he 
assumed, he assumed human nature. Do thou go out of all things, \ 
then there remains alone what Christ put on and thou hast put 
on Christ. 

Whoso has a mind to know the excellence and use of absolute 
detachment let him lay to heart Christ’s words to his disciples 
touching his manhood: ‘It is good for you that I go away; if 
I go not away the comforter cannot come unto you’; as though 
to say, ye have too much love for my visible form for the perfect 
love of the Holy Ghost to be yours. Wherefore discard the form 
and unite with the formless essence, for God’s ghostly comfort is 
intangible and is not offered save to those alone who despise all 
mortal consolations. 

List ye, good people all: there is none happier than he who 
stands in uttermost detachment. No temporal, carnal pleasure 
but brings some ghostly mischief in its train, for the flesh lusts 
after things that run counter to the spirit and spirit lusts for things 
that are repugnant to the flesh. He who sows the tares of love in 
flesh reaps death but he who sows good love-seed in the spirit reaps 
of the spirit eternal life. The more man flees from creatures the 
faster hastens to him their creator. Consider, all ye thoughtful 
souls! If even the love which it is given us to feel for the bodily 
form of Christ can keep us from receiving the Holy Ghost then how 
much more must we be kept from getting God by inordinate love 
of creature comforts ? Detachment is the best of all, for it cleanses 
the soul, clarifies the mind, kindles the heart and wakes the spirit ; 
it quickens desire and enhances virtue giving intuition of God ; 
it detaches creature and makes her one with God ; for love dis- 
joined from God is as water in the fire, but love in union is like 
the honeycomb in honey. Harkee, all rational souls! The swiftest 
steed to bear you to your goal is suffering; none shall ever taste 
eternal bliss but those who stand with Christ in depths of bitterness. 

348 MEISTER ECKHART 

Nothing is more gall-bitter than suffering, nothing so honey-sweet 
as to have suffered. The most sure foundation for this perfection 
is humility, for he whose nature here creeps in deepest depths shall 
soar in spirit to highest height of Deity ; for joy brings sorrow and 
sorrow brings joy. Men’s ways are manifold: one lives thus, 
another thus. He who would attain unto the highest life while 
here in time, let him take in a few words culled out of all the 
scriptures the summary philosophy which I will now set down. 

Keep thyself detached from all mankind; keep thyself devoid 
of all incoming images; emancipate thyself from everything 
which entails addition, attachment or encumbrance, and address 
thy mind at all times to a saving contemplation wherein thou 
bearest God fixed within thy heart as the object from which its 
eyes do never waver; any other discipline, fasts, vigils, prayers, 
or whatever it may be, subordinate to this as to its end, using 
thereof no more than shall answer for this purpose, so shalt thou 
win the goal of all perfections. 

Here someone may object, But who can persist in unwavering 
contemplation of the divine object ? I answer, no one living here 
in time. This is told thee merely so that thou mayst know the 
highest, that whereon thy aspirations and desires should be set. 
But when this vision is withheld from thee, thou, being a good man, 
shalt think to have been robbed of thy eternal bliss and then do 
thou forthwith return into the same that it may come to thee 
again ; and withal it does behove thee to keep strict watch upon 
thy thoughts at all times, there letting, as far as possible, their 
goal and refuge be. Lord God, glory be to thee eternally. Amen. 

xX 
SPIRITUAL POVERTY 

Beati pauperes spiritu etc. Let us be eternally as poor as we 
were when we eternally were not. Abiding in him in our essence 
we shall be that we are. We shall abound in all things, but in 
their creator. We shall know God without any sort of likeness 
and love without matter and enjoy without possession. We shall 
conceive all things in perfection as the eternal wisdom shows them 
planned out in itself. 

The poor in spirit go out of themselves and all creatures : they 
are nothing, they have nothing, they do nothing, and these poor 
are not save that by grace they are God with God : which they are 
not aware of. St Augustine says, all things are God. St Diony- 
sius says, things are not God. St Augustine says, God is all of 
them. But Dionysius: God is nothing we can say or think, yet 

TRACTATES 349 

God is the hope of all the saints, their intuition of him wherein 
he is himself. He (Dionysius) finds him more in naught ; God is 
naught, he says. In naught all is suspended. All that has being 
is in suspension in naught, this naught being itself an incompre- 
hensible aught that all the minds in heaven and on earth cannot 
either fathom or conceive. Hence it remains unknown to creatures. 
When the soul attains to the perfection of hanging to (being 
suspended from) naught she will find herself without sin. This is 
due to the freedom she is poised in. Then on coming to the body 
and awareness of herself, and again finding sin as before, she 
becomes bound and then she returns into herself and bethinks 
her of what she has found yonder. Thus she raises herself up 
above herself and crosses over to the seat of all her happiness and 
all her satisfaction. St Bernard says the soul knows very well that 
her beloved cannot come to her till everything is out of her. 
St Augustine says, Well and truly loves the man who loves where 
he well knows he is not loved ; that is the best of all loving. St 
Paul, We know right well that all things work together for good to 
them that love God. And Christ said, Blessed are the poor in 
spirit, God’s kingdom is theirs. 

They tell of various kinds of poverty of spirit. There are four. 
What he refers to here is the first poverty of spirit the soul knows 
when, illumined by the spirit of truth, things that are not God 
weigh with her not a jot; as St Paul tells us, ‘ All things are as 
dung to me.’ In this indigence she finds all creatures irksome. 

In the second poverty she considers the merit of her exemplar 
Christ and her own demerits and finds her own works worthless, 
though they be the sum of men’s achievements. Hence she 
laments her in the Book of Love, crying, ‘ The form of my beloved 
passed me by and I cannot follow him.’ To this passing she is 
self-condemned, following the spoor of her quarry, Christ. So 
sweet his scent, she swoons away into forgetfulness of outward 
pain. As St Augustine says, The soul is where she loves rather 
than where she is giving life, and St Peter tells us that our dwelling 
is in heaven. 

The third poverty of spirit is that of the soul wherein her own 
nature is slain; her own natural life is stone dead and there is 
living in her nothing but the spirit of God. As St Paul declares, 
‘I am dead nevertheless I live; yet my life Christ liveth in me.’ 
In this spiritual death she is grown poor, for all she has to leave or 
give has been taken from her; moreover she is poor of her free 
will, for he is doing with it what he will. f 

The fourth poverty is the incomprehensibility of God in her 
mind, her inability to compass him whether with knowledge or 
with works. But the deeper she gets the more the incompre- 

850 MEISTER ECKHART 

hensible splendour of the Deity is reflected in her poverty. For as 
far as with her inner man she has gotten intuition of divinity so 
far she follows with her outer man the willing poverty of her 
pattern Jesus Christ ; or in other words, the power of God having 
deprived her of all selfhood, she uses all creatures as she needs 
them, always without attachment, and if she has them not she can 
do as well without them and with the same detachment. She 
knows of nothing more that she can do but she rejoices in his 
incomprehensible truth and that created things are all as naught 
to him and that his love has.taken to itself her naught which is 
cleaving to him like a tiny spark. It was this poverty St Paul was 
in the time that he declared ‘ he heard in God unspeakable things 
which it is not lawful for a man to utter.’ On that occasion he was 
knit to God so that neither life nor death could separate him from 
his love. Thus it befalls the perfectly lost soul in God, lost, not 
to creatures merely but to herself as well and aware of nothing 
but the pure unclouded radiance of God’s essence. Behold her 
lost in him, her heavenly joy, and all incapable of any real wrong- 
doing. The saints invariably say that nothing whatever can dis- 
turb the fixity they have in God. Real sin is any disobedience to 
the law of divine love, any departure from the life of Jesus Christ. 
He is the form and essence of all things. What then is real 
virtue ? Anything wrought in the soul by divine love alone, for 
that effects naught but its like. 

Such is the doctrine of spiritual poverty. Into this u poverty 
lead us, O superfull goodness of God. Amen. 

f 
XI} 
x 1 

We read in the gospel that our Lord fed the multitude with 
five loaves and two fishes. The first loaf was, the duty of knowing 
ourselves: what we have always been to God and what we are 
now in relation to God. The second was, the duty of compassion 
towards our evenchristian in his blindness ; his misfortune ought 
to touch us wellnigh as keenly as our own. The third was, that 
it behoves us to study the life of our Lord Jesus Christ and copy 
it exactly so far as that is possible. The fourth, that it behoves 
us to recognise the justness of God. All accounts of hell-torment 
are true. St Dionysius has explained that absence from God is 
hell and God’s presence is heaven. The fifth is, that it is for us to 
have intuition of the deity flowing into the Father and filling him 
with power and flowing into the Son filling him with wisdom, 

1 See also Spamer’s Texte, B. 4. 

TRACTATES 351 

they being one in nature. Christ himself declared, ‘ Where I am 
there my Father is and where my Father is there I am.’ And they 
flow into the Holy Ghost filling him with goodwill. As Christ said, 
‘I and my Father have one Spirit’; and the Holy Ghost flows 
into the soul. 

The soul by nature has received two powers. One power is 
understanding which can conceive the Holy Trinity and all its 
works, enclosing it, as one would fill and close a cask. The full 
cask comprehends its contents : it is in union with what it compre- 
hends, what it is full of. And so is understanding in union with 
what it understands, what it conceives. It is one therewith by 
grace as the Son is one with the Father by nature. 

The second power is will. It is the nobler in that by nature it 
can reach to the unknown, God namely. Will seizes God above 
knowledge, and in grasping what he wills the impress of the 
unknown God is sealed and stamped into the will so that the will 
contains God and becomes one with God, and will brings memory 
and all the soul-powers in its train, therefore the soul is one with 
God by grace as the Holy Ghost is one with the Father and the 
Son by nature. She is really in God more than in her own person. 
As St Augustine says, ‘ The soul is where she loves rather than 
where she is giving life.’ To rest in this union were better than to 
do all the works of all creatures, for so her higher power absorbs 
her lower ones and the soul can do nothing but divine work. 
But since this may not be, therefore the highest power, seeing her 
stability in God, communicates it to the lower ones so that they 
may discern good and evil. In this union Adam dwelt, and while 
the union lasted he had all the power of creatures (i.e. all creatures _ 
in posse) in his highest power. When a lodestone spends its force 
upon a needle and attracts it to itself, the needle gets sufficient 
power to pass on to the needles underneath, which it raises and 
attaches to the lodestone. Part the top needle and all the rest 
drop off. It was like this with Adam: when his highest power 
parted from God, down fell all his powers. Creatures are dis- 
joined through failing to agree among themselves, one wanting 
one thing, one another. The powers decay through creatures right 
down to the lowest. The power of gold, for example, cannot 
give gold but gives silver, and this degradation goes on in silver, 
from which we get iron. Even so man’s powers peter out to 
nothing. This accounts for the various creatures. 

But now all creatures which came forth from God must strive 
with all their powers to make one man who shall return into the 
union wherein Adam was before he fell and who shall raise all 
creatures up again into the selfsame power wherein they were, 
in human nature. This is accomplished in Christ, as he himself 

352 MEISTER ECKHART 

declared, ‘When I am lifted up I will draw all men to me.’ He 
meant that when he was risen in our mind he would recollect us 
to himself. In this sense all creatures are one man and that man 
is God. Human nature has not ever been as such. God is from 
himself eternally and the Father made all things from nothing. 
That he is in himself he is by his own nature, which is free from 
becoming and becomes not any thing, and all things’ becoming ends 
in not-becoming. The Son is the same as the Father except that 
he receives from the Father all that he has and of all becoming 
he is the form. Withal he is one in the not-becoming. The Holy 
Ghost is the tie between the Father and the Son and is one. with 
them in the not-becoming ; he is the author and agent of becoming 
in eternity and in time. This temporal becoming ends in eternal 
not-becoming, and the eternal not-becoming is the work of the 
eternal nature and has neither end nor beginning. , 

God is his own form and matter; his form emerges from his 
matter and according to this form does he form all things that 
become. But his simple nature is in form formless, in mode 
modeless, cause uncaused, being without becoming which trans- 
cends all things becoming and all that becomes comes to an end 
therein. 

God is eternal and all things have been in him eternally. They 
were not in themselves. Ere God created creatures he was nothing 
whatever to creatures, in their understanding, though in himself 
he was to them eternally the same as he is now and always shall 
be. No Creature could say God what time itself was not. What 
minds ignore they count for naught: Creature did not know God 
when she herself was not, therefore she could not speak him. 
This is denied by heretics who state that Christ brought human 
nature with him out of heaven, but that is not true. He got his 
manhood from our Lady Saint Mary, withal abiding as before in 
the Godhead ; and the Almighty knew in his eternal wisdom the 
ordering of all things, to wit, the Holy Ghost. This Trinity poured 
forth into time into the naught of human nature. Thenceforward 
human nature was changeable in time and God donned human 
nature. In him human nature was God and human nature knew 
it with the three powers she has gotten from the blessed Trinity 
and gave God thanks therefor and loved him with infinite love. 
By this God sets such store that he loves human nature back with 
a love so great, any man who knows it possesses heaven incarnate. 
I charge you, my brothers and my sisters, that ye wax in knowledge 
and give thanks to God while ye are still in time for having made 
you from naught aught, and unite yourselves with his divine 
nature. Once out of time and your chance is gone. But if so 
be ye cannot apprehend God’s nature then believe in Christ and 

TRACTATES 358 

follow his example steadfastly ; Jews, heathens, evil Christians, 
all who fail to exercise their God-consciousness, are lost, barring 
infants not arrived at knowledge of themselves and who are 
properly baptized into his name: in the enjoyment of Christ’s 
name they are holding fast the knowledge wherewith he knows the 
Father eternally. 

Rejoice, all ye powers of my soul, at being joined to God so that 
none can part you. But I can neither glorify God nor love him 
to the full therein; so, dying to the virtues I plunge me in the 
naught of the naked Godhead where, sinking eternally from naught 
to aught I pass with naught to aught. 3 

Though I should live here in the flesh until the judgment day 
bearing the pangs of hell it would be small matter by reason of 
my Lord Jesus Christ, since I have received from him the cer- 
tainty of never being parted from him. While I am here he is in 
me: after this life I am in him. All things are possible to me 
united as I am with him to whom all things are possible. Before 
‚that I was at a loss to know if we are God by nature or by grace. 
Then came Jesus with the light of his own nature and then I 
spied my memory under my understanding issuing from the 
essence of my soul and my understanding flowing out of memory 
and will out of them both. Essence is revealed by the powers 
and the powers by their works. What my knowledge gave me 
that I loved ; what I did not know I could not love, and to will 
all things were possible. At one time I was sore perplexed as to 
whether we are God by nature or by grace. Fear led me to Christ 
who in truth knows the answer. He gave me light of grace 
whereby I saw in the divine nature three Persons, his Father being 
the begetter of all things. According to the words of St James, 
* Every perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights.’ The 
Father is the light itself, self-luminous in Person and in essence. 
In the unborn essence he is essential, essence without personality : 
essence self-manifest as impersonal being. The Father is that same 
being essentially. In the essence the Father loses his fatherhood 
completely ; nor is he Father there at all. The Father’s know- 
ledge of himself in himself, essential and personal, he draws from 
his unborn essence through the exalted root of his personality. 
So far as he takes in his unborn essence he is paternal, Father 
essentially. This exalted light has been for ever flowing in his 
heart and it is flowing out of him into his Son, as essence and as 
Person, and it is flowing from them both into their Holy Ghost, in 
essence and in Person, and these three shed one light essential and 
personal. The Father sheds on both the light of his essence and 
his Person ; and the Father and the Son shed on the Holy Ghost 

the light of both essence and Person. The unborn eg being 

354 MEISTER ECKHART 

the oneness of the three Persons and the born essence is God as 
begetter so far as it flows into the Persons and so far as it emanates 
with the Persons. Not that the essence begets ; essence begets 
not. The Son and the Holy Ghost are twin lights of the God- 
bearing essence in the paternal source where the Father is drawing 
his born being out of his unborn essence. The Father knows 
himself with his Son, perceiving himself in himself. For this the 
Son is the light ; and he wills himself in himself and for this the 
Holy Ghost is the light. Father and Son have one will and that 
is the Holy Ghost : it graces the soul, this divine nature, and so 
suffuses the powers of the soul that the soul can do nothing except 
_divine work. Just as a spring in its bed at the roots of the flowers 
gives them itself and the flowers grow verdant and coloured on the 
spring water, so deity giving itself to the powers of the soul makes 
them grow in the likeness of God. His image appears in her 
powers, his likeness in her virtues. The more divine nature the 
soul receives the liker she grows to the nature of God and the 
closer becomes her union with God. Her union may become so 
strait that God on a sudden absorbs her in himself and that without 
remainder whether vice or virtue, nor can the soul distinguish 
aught that might be taken for herself. God takes her for a 
creature. Be not deluded by the light of nature. To a soul on 
the ascent to higher knowledge in the light of grace, dimmer and 
dimmer glows the light of nature. If she would know the very 
truth itself she must make certain whether she is detached from 
things ; whether she is dead to self ; whether she loves God with 
his own love and without self-intent and has nothing to hold her 
back and keep her from him ; and whether God alone is alive in 
her. If so then she has lost herself as Mary lost Christ. Three 
days she sought him knowing all the while that she would find 
him. And Christ, meanwhile, was at his Father’s school of higher 
learning all unheeding of his mother’s quest. The noble soul which 
goes to school in God learns to know what God is in the Godhead 
and what God is in the Trinity and what God is in humanity and 
‘gets to know his will. : 
fi God in, the Godhead is spiritual substance, so elemental that 
‚we can say nothing about it excepting that it is naught. To say it 
‘is aught were more lying than true. God in the Trinity is the 
| living light in its radiant splendour, a complex of one nature with 
‘distinct Persons. The (light) that is life is not this light. Though 
‚one might predicate three natures to these (Persons or) distinctions 
‚there is but one nature to their union for they all act together 
exactly like one, working all at once in all creatures. According 
‚to St Augustine, the precision (or justice) of God in the Godhead, in 
the Trinity and in all creatures is the chief delight there is in heaven. 

TRACTATES 855 

God in human nature is a lamp of living light and this light 
shines in the darkness and the darkness comprehends not this 
light. Darkness ever flees from light as night does from the day. 
Thence comes her knowledge of God’s will. Now St Paul says, 
“It is God’s will that we be sanctified.’ And our sanctification lies 
in this, in knowing what we were before time, what we are in 
time and what we shall be after time. Lost during these three 
days, soul pays no heed to body till it joins her in the temple and 
is subject to her without murmuring. 

The Trinity is the heart of divine and human nature and human. 
nature flows into the Trinity in a steady stream of love. Supposing} 
the soul crosses over, then she sinks down and down in the abysm 
of the Godhead nor ever finds_a footing unless it be that she has, 

_taken with her some temporal thing-;—resting.on temporal things. 
“brings her back into the Trinity. Things fashioned in time have, 

a ground of their own whereon they can rest; they light on no \“ 

ground in the Godhead. By this same token the soul knows that 
she is creature, for all she has she has received in time from the three 
Persons. She flows out and in in the three Persons. The reason 
why Christ’s soul did never plumb the deeps of Godhead is that- 
she too is creature made in time. God is indeed the matter of the 
“soul, of her energies but not—of_her creation. Her energies are 
eternal because he is eternal. This matter never fails her. When 
fire lacks fuel it goes back to its own land. So would the soul come 
to naught were her matter to fail. When all her work is done 
she with her powers remains in God her matter ; she casts herself 
in her impartible essence into the passive, immaterial Godhead ; 
that is her native land. Then the Godhead is to her all things in 
a single passive power, and she withal all things to it, just as the 
heart of the sea gives forth in the bowels of the earth the waters 
which circulate back to the heart of the sea on the face of the earth. 
Suppose one dropped a millstone from the sun to earth, the earth 
being pierced straight through the centre, the millstone would 
stop falling at the centre of the earth. Here is the heart of the 
earth, the stopping-place of everything on earth. So is the 
Trinity the stopping-place of creatures as a whole, all the Godhead 
has being gotten impartible and eternal from itself. The Father 
is the manifestation of the Godhead, the Son is the image and. 
countenance of the Father and the Holy Ghost is the light of his 
countenance and the love of them both: all they have have they 
gotten eternally from ‘their own selves. But the three Persons 
“stooped in compassion towards human nature and the Son was 
made man and in this:world was more despised than any man on 
earth, suffering want and pain from creatures himself had made 
in conjunction with his Father, by whose will he became man. 

. 

856 I MEISTER ECKHART 

Christ lived in time down to his death and then, arising from the 
dead, this most despised of men is seen united with the Godhead | 
in the Person of the Christ who came on earth. Human nature 
wedded with the divine nature; her eternal portion, fellowship 
with divine nature in the same Person. 

Q1 

This is God’s good will, that we should know ourselves and that 
we should know God, and our salvation lies in putting our know- 
ledge into practice and loving in God all that we know. He who 
knows God in very truth is bound to love and will nothing but what 
God loves and wills. As St Paul says, ‘I do good and doing 
naught but good to me all things are possible. Many a thing is 
lawful for me which I do not lest I sin.’ Our Lord commands 
us to be without sin. To whom all things are possible it is also 
possible to keep this commandment. 

The saints declare that all things are in God as they have been 
in God eternally ; not that we were in God in the gross nature 
we have here : we were in God eternalwise, like art in the artist. 
God saw himself and saw all things. God was not therefore 
manifold as things are here in separation. Though creatures 
here are manifold they are but one idea in God. God in himself 
is just the one alone. When creature goes back to her first cause 
she knows God simply as one in form and essence and threefold 
in operation. What intellect knows is knowledge and knowledge 
stops at what is known, with what is known becoming one. Into 
the simple idea no knowledge ever entered, for this impartible 
exemplar after which God created all creatures towers God-high 
above creatures. Creature in pursuing God to his eternal heights 
must mount above all creatures, nay, beyond her very self, her 
own wont and uses, and follow agnosia into the desolate Godhead. 
St Dionysius says, ‘God’s desert is God’s simple nature.’ A 
creature’s desert is her simple nature. In the desert of herself 
she is robbed of her own form and in God’s desert, leading out 
of hers, she is bereft of name; there she is no more called soul, 
she is called God with God. 

Peradventure ye will say, ‘ Being in this exalted state why does 
the soul not raise the body above necessity of earthly things ? ’ 
To which I answer, at this stage the soul has a body of perfection 
which uses all things to the glory of God, there being now betwixt — 
God and the soul no barrier nor hindrance. So far as the soul 
has followed God into the desert of his Godhead so far the body 
follows Christ into his desert of willing poverty and is one with 

1 See also Jostes, No. 37; Greith, p. 195 et seg.; and Büttner, vol. i, No. 17. 

TRACTATES | 357 

God. Well may the Father say, ‘ This is my beloved Son in 
whom I am well pleased : follow ye him.’ All creatures are with 
God : the being that they have God gives them with his presence. 
Saith the bride in the Book of Love, ‘ I have run round the circle 
and have found no end to it, so I cast myself into the centre.’ 

This circle which the loving soul ran round is all the Trinity has 
ever wrought. 

Why is the work of the Trinity called a circle? Because the 
three Persons have wrought their own likeness in all creatures 
which are rational. The Trinity is the origin of all things and all 
things return into their origin. This is the circle the soul runs. 
When does she run in this circle ? She does so when she muses : 
All this that he has made he could make again a thousand times 
if he were so minded. So she goes round in endless chain. The 
least of all his creatures she can find no end to nor can she appro- 
found its worth. Spent with her quest she casts herself into the 
centre. This point is the power of the Trinity wherein unmoved 
it is doing all its work. Therein the soul becomes omnipotent. 

The three Persons are one omnipotence. This is the motionless 
point and the unity of the Trinity. The circumference is the 
incomprehensible work of the three Persons. The point is fixed. 
The union of the Persons is the essence of the point. In this point 
God runs through change without otherness, involving into unity 
of essence, and the soul as one with this fixed point is capable of 
all things. But her powers, wherein she imitates the Trinity, 
with them she cannot apprehend its unity. The work of the 
Trinity has proved the undoing of many Paris theologians: en- 
grossed in the working of the Trinity they have never gotten at 
their unity. The centre is equally near to all ends, like time in 
all lands. Now is the time here and now is the same time in 
Rome. 

Saith the bride in the Book of Love, ‘ He has wounded me with 
a glance of his eye.’ This refers to the unitive force which streams 
down from the point, isolating the soul from creatures and changing . 
things and gathering her up again into the point therewith to be 
united and therein to be eternally established. . 

One is conscious of this glance within the confines of the soul 
when she is quite unoccupied, innocent of the practice whether of 
vice or virtue. During this quiet state intuitive perception is 
most vivid, so it is then he stabs her with his glance to make 
her really feel how he has known and loved her while she herself 
was not. This serves as a piercing reminder to the soul to go out of 
herself. Whom this glance wounds not is not nor ever has been 
wounded by love. [Concerning it St Bernard says, ‘'To him whose 
spirit has felt this glance it is unutterable ; to him who knows it 

358 MEISTER ECKHART 

not it is incredible.’ ”Tis an arrow shot without anger and felt 
without pain. ‘Thence starts the clear and limpid stream of healing 
grace which enlightens the inner eye to perceive in blissful behold- 
ing the delight of the divine affliction wherein we share unheard of 
spiritual graces, favours untold, not preached nor written down in 
any book.] 

(Saith the soul), ‘Lord, thou thyself declarest that thou hast 
made me like thyself. That passes the ingenuity of man, for no 
philosopher is sage enough to fabricate the double of himself. 
Lord,’ she cries, ‘if thou hast made me like to thee, grant me to 
see thec seized of the power wherein thou hast created me, to know 
thee in the wisdom wherein thou hast known me, to conceive thee 
as thou conceivest me; and grant me Lord that by thy grace I 
be made one with thee in nature as thy Son is one with thy nature ~ 
eternally, and that thy grace may be my nature ; for, Lord, thy 
grace becomes thy nature and in thy nature we become God, as 
the Father in his nature is God by nature.’ 

Christ exhorts us to be perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect 
in his nature. He says, ‘ God is more near to you than ye are to 
yourselves.’ And in the same sense St Augustine says the soul 
has private entry to the divine nature, where things for her all 
come to naught. Then she is ignorant with knowing, loveless 
with loving, dark with enlightenment. Then to know God would 
be an imperfection ; to know herself in God would be an imper- 
fection or to know God in her would be an imperfection. The 
incomprehensible essence she absorbs above all knowledge. by 
grace, as the Father does by nature ; and the born essence being 
gotten in her understanding as the Father has gotten it in him, 
she steals out of herself and pierces the naked essence there to 
retain no more of things than when she issued forth from God. 
She comes so utterly to naught that there is nothing left but God ; 
God outshines her as the sun the moon, and she in God’s own subtile 
nature flows into all that God is flowing in eternally. 

If thou hast apprehended me, there are two points to notice 
in these words. First, the soul knowing she was made from 
naught desires to see who made her. And secondly, her words, 
‘Grant me to see thee as creating me,’ mean that she wants to 
feel the faith and love wherein she was created. For then the soul 
sees God though she does not see through him. She knows God 
although she cannot fathom him ; she apprehends God but cannot 
comprehend him as he comprehends himself. St Paul says, ‘ Then 
we shall know as we are known.’ Stripped of her own being, with 
God her only being, the soul sees God with God, knows and con- 
ceives God with God. One high authority declares that the soul 
sees, knows, apprehends God with his very own essence which is 

TRACTATES a 359 

the very essence of the soul. The soul sees, knows, conceives God 
as she is herself conceived in the pure intellect of the Deity. Then 
soul is comprehender as well as comprehended. But no man in 
this body and after the mode of his own mind can understand 
how soul is both conceiver and conceived be he not wholly sunk 
into himself, into pure knowledge of his own God-nature where 
no created thought did ever enter. ; 

Now mark. The naught whereby soul comes to naught is the 
turning from images and forms to stay at none of them, for the 
divine nature is neither form nor image. And soul divorced from 
images and forms is like to the formless nature of God. This is 
the secret passage of the soul into divine nature. The soul which 
has nowhere to turn is ready to turn to the image of God. In 
other words, she goes with naught to naught: to the divine nature 
whereto none may attain be he not stripped of all mental matter. 
Alas ! how sorely they obstruct this secret passage, those who so 
lightly stay at temporal things! Dionysius exhorted his disciples 
in this sense, saying, ‘ Wouldst know the hidden mystery of God ? 
then transcend whatever hinders thy pure perception, whatever 
thou canst grasp with thy understanding. God has nothing so 
hid as to be beyond the ken of a soul that has the wit to seek it 
right diligently and with prudence.’ 

A hard saying this, there is nothing in him so hidden as to be 
beyond her ken. Yet mark these facts. 

The power of things resides in essence. Now the soul is capable 
of knowing all things in her highest power, she being all closeted 
in her secret chamber. To the soul thus freed from things there is 
disclosed his secret essence. She is able to receive his arcane 
power. As St Paul says, ‘I can do all things in him that strength- 
eneth me.’ Up, noble soul! seek thee no other place than this 
unnecessitous naught that did create thee, the same in its im- 
movableness shall be thy place; there shalt thou be more 
motionless than naught.—But this is traversed by some learned 
men who hold it is impossible. Naught, say they, is motionless, 
so how can the soul be more motionless than naught? The soul 
is a created aught which can be moved: she is a variable ; 
naught is a constant. The soul, for instance, goes from light to 
light until she finds the sovran truth where all things end. So 
too the soul is moved in that she is aware of things other than 
herself. Naught has no awareness. Therefore aught is more 
movable than naught. So runs the argument against our thesis. 
Now to prove that the soul is more motionless than naught. 

The arch-good, God, is more motionless than naught. And the 
most perfect likeness of this motionless arch-good is also most 
immovable. Haply thou wilt object: Naught is the same as 

360 MEISTER ECKHART 

God for both of them are non-existent.» Not so. For naught is 
nothing to itself or any creature. But God is to himself his aught 
and naught to the mind of any creature. Withal the creature 
aught tells forth God’s aught by nature rather than its own. 
God’s aught is intellectual being. Dionysius says, ‘The intel- 
lectual light that God is, gat its own image in the rational soul.’ 
Now if God is more motionless than naught, it follows that the soul 
as reflected into her motionless aught, God namely, is- more 
motionless than naught. Naught is movable out of itself when 
naught becomes aught and always is moved when aught is pro- 
duced out of naught. Not so the soul: she always is aught 
and can never be naught. Behold the soul more motionless 
than naught, God having set her free, free to assert her own 
free will. 

Her motion is the quest of him who has never loved nor was ever 
loved. Which may be interpreted thus. The soul, uplifting with 
all her might and main herself above herself to love the sovran 
good, sees clearly she can never reach the divine aught accom- 
panied by any of her powers. So down she goes again into 
herself, and the motionless aught bides unbeloved of her and of all 
that is not its very self. Thus the divine aught is never loved by 
her nor by anything that is not itself, nor has it ever loved. You 
can. put it like this. He loves nothing but himself or his image 
in all things. But since he is not love nor anything named, there- 
fore he loves not neither is he loved. This is the meaning of St 
Dionysius’ words, ‘God dwells in motionless calm.’ And the bride 
says in the Book of Love, ‘I have crossed all the mountains, aye, 
even my own powers, and have reached the dark power of the 
Father. There heard I without sound, there saw I without light, 
there breathed I without motion ; there did I taste what savoured 
not, there did I touch what touched not back. Then my heart 
was bottomless, my soul loveless, my mind formless and my nature 
natureless.’ 

Now what does the soul mean by ‘crossing all the mountains ?’ 
She means she has transcended her own rational powers and 
gotten ‘to the dark power of the Father’ where all rational dis- 
tinctions end. ‘There heard I without sound.’ Hearing without 
sound means intuition, direct apprehension. ‘ There saw I without 
light.’ Seeing without light means undefined, vague perception 
in the naught. ‘ There breathed I without stir’: the inspiration 
of unity wherein all things are still. ‘ There tasted I what savoured 
not’: over all sensible things hangs the motionless haze of unity. 
‘There did I touch what touched not back’: alien, unalloyed 
essence of all creatures: the substance of all things substantial. 
‘Then my heart was bottomless ’: the overwhelming wonder of 

TRACTATES 361 

my powers. ‘And my soul loveless’: powers and senses blotted 
out. ‘And my spirit formless’: the sealing of the mind in the | 
unformed form and image of God. ‘ And my nature natureless ’ : 
my own nature withered away till nothing is left but the one 
unique is. This is-ness is the unity, the being of itself and of all . 
things. St Dionysius says, ‘ The one alone is the life of lives, being 

of beings, reason of reasons, nature of natures, light of lights and 

yet not light, not life, not nature.’ Of it St James declares, ‘ The 

most perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights.’ Again 

St Dionysius says, ‘ The First Cause is above all names and tran- 

scends love; it is superessential, superintelligible, super-rational 

and supernatural. The First Cause is neither light nor darkness.’ 

Behold how different from all caused things. é 

Saith the soul in the Book of Love, ‘No one is God to me and 
I am soul to none.’ By ‘no one is God to me ’ she means merely 
that no entity, nothing nameable, is her God. Again the words, ' 
“I am soul to none’ mean that she is so void of self she has not 
got it in her to be aught to anyone. This is the state in which 
the soul should be: in utter destitution. The soul cries in the 
. Book of Love, ‘He is mine and I am his.’ It were better she had 
said, * He is not mine nor am I his,’ for God who is in all is therein 
all his own. She can lay claim to naught: she has lost every 
whit whereto any wight could in anywise be aught or she withal 
be aught to any wight. No one is her God and she is no one’s 
soul, wherefore she cries in the Book of Love, ‘Fly from me, 
beloved, on the feathers of the wind.’ 

What is the meaning of these feathers of the wind whereon the 
soul rides ? The feathers are the choirs of Seraphim. The wind 
of their feathers is their clear seraphic knowledge. Above this 
dwells the soul. But not till she has left behind all images and 
forms, not harbouring any, not resting upon any. She must have 
lost her individual motion. And thus divested of her creature- 
hood, having no hold on anything at all, she sinks into downright 
nothingness ; there she is concealed from every creature. To 
this same naught no Seraph’s understanding can attain ; in this 
naught dwells the soul, super-seraphic, above all such knowing. 
Thus the soul rides on the feathers of the wind. 

But what a perfect life this man must lead! How dead his 
soul to every kind of motion! St John declares, * Blessed are the 
dead that die in God.’ To this end, O man, do thou free thyself 
from every sort of sensible affection. God is exempt from such, 
and it behoves thee, man, to be the same if thou wouldst solve 
his hidden mystery. For this, look you, soul must be stripped of 
all her senses. St Dionysius spoke of this to Timothy, one of his 
disciples, when talk arose about St Paul who had been put to death. 

362 MEISTER ECKHART 

‘ Alas ! my friend ’ (said Timothy), ‘ and shall we never hear again 
the loved voice of our master?’ The saint replied, ‘ Friend 
Timothy, my counsel is to leave behind us corporal things and go 
to God. But this we cannot do save with blind eyes and alien 
senses ; not that we ought to have misleading senses: we must 
transcend sense and knowledge to get to his mysterious unity.’ 
Anent which St Augustine says, ‘ The soul has a private door into 
divinity where for her all things amount to naught.’ There she is 
ignorant with knowing, will-less with willing, dark with enlighten- 
ment. To wot of self would mean her imperfection ; to wot of 
God would mean her imperfection ; to wot of self in God or God 
in her would mean her imperfection: self is reduced to utter 
naught and there is nothing left but God, for God outshines her 
as the sun the moon and she with God’s all-penetrativeness 
streams into the eternal Godhead where God keeps ever flowing 
into God. 

Nothing is without beginning, and since nothing is without 
beginning God could make us from nothing better than nothing, 
like himself. Alone God’s power did make the soul, so she like 
him is free from matter. And soul could have no homelier road into 
divinity than by way of nothing to nothing, for nothing unites 
like natural affinity. But St John Chrysostom declares that none 
can take it till his outward and his inward senses are focussed to 
clear vision of the Deity. 

The naught we were before we were created was indigent of 
naught. Moreover of itself it could do absolutely naught and 
naught withstood creatures : all but the power of God ; it was this 
caused naught to stir when God made all things from naught. 
Now we have got to be more motionless than naught.—‘ But how ?’ 
Mark how. God gat the soul the mistress of herself, not overriding 
her free will nor once exacting from her aught that she will not ; 
so whatever in this body she elects of her free will she is free to 
carry through. Say she chooses to need nothing and to be more 
motionless than naught, then assembling all her powers into her 
free will so as not to be hindered by herself or any thing, she centres 
herself in the motionless God who was n’er moved by any act 
done by the blessed Trinity nor is not indigent of any thing the 
blessed Trinity has ever wrought. To reach this point of needing 
naught and being more immutable than naught, soul must be 

‚sunk so deep in the bottomless well of the divine naught that 
nothing can draw her thereout to spend herself on mortal things, 
but there she steadfastly abides ; as the heavenly Father is ever- 
abiding in his nature without let or hindrance so the soul abides 
therein without let or hindrance, as far as that is possible to 
creature. 

TRACTATES 368 

—-‘ Pray, Sir, how should it be impossible seeing that the soul 
was created to that end ? ”—-Because, you see, if she does stoop 
to baser things to let herself be satisfied with these, then that which 
is above her is beyond her reach, whereas God keeps no secrets 
from the soul whose lofty nature is equal to the quest. Up, 
noble Soul! - Out of thyself so far thou never comest in again 
and enter into God so deep thou never comest out again: there 
stay nor ever deign to stoop to creature ; and burden not thyself 
with things made clear to thee, nor wander among objects presented 
to thy mind, nor be not hindered from achievement by any service. 
Steadfastly pursue thy simple nature and the unnecessitous 
nothingness, seeking no other place than this unnecessitous naught. 
God who made thee out of nothing, he in his unnecessitous nothing- 
ness and immovableness shall himself be thy place. There thou 
shalt be more immovable than nothing. 

3 

They that serve God for gain with outward works reap their 
reward in creatures, such as heaven and heavenly things. But 
they that serve God by interior acts are rewarded with the un- 
created, namely, the works of the blessed Trinity. 

Mark this. No fire no light, no earth no life, no air no love, 
no water no place. Ergo, God is not light nor life nor love nor 
nature nor spirit nor semblance nor anything we can put into 
words. ' God flows into God and God flows out of God and God 
knows himself God in himself and knows himself God in his 
creatures in general and he knows himself God in the noble soul 
in particular. The Father is almighty in the soul; the Son all- 
wise, the Holy Ghost all-loving, loving all creatures with the same 
love. But he manifests as different and the soul is destined to 
know things as they are and conceive things äs they are when, 
seized thereof, she plunges into the bottomless well of the divine 
nature and becomes so one with God that she herself would say 
that she is God. The soul withdrawn into herself till nothing 
made or named takes shape in her and she is bare as God of any 
name, gathers herself up above herself into her God and takes 
herself cum God for God. God is not black nor white, nor large 
nor small, he has no place nor any past nor future time, and the 
soul is like him only in so far as she can project herself above all 
_ creatures. ' 

The soul is a creature receptive to everything named, but the 
nameless she cannot receive until she is gotten so deep into God 
that she is nameless herself. And then none can tell if it is she 
that has gotten God or God has gotten her. Dionysius says, 

‘ 

364 MEISTER ECKHART 

‘God has conceived himself in her, so utterly absorbing her that 
she is now no longer self but God.’ And the soul’s inferior powers 
have distinction of person, love uniting the persons not the essence. 
The soul is destined to this knowledge when, on the ebb-tide 
of God’s glory, she is borne back into the bottomless ground of 
the fount whence she flowed. forth and finds she is not from ~ 
herself. 

The highest boon, the chief good of the soul, is not from herself. 
Christ himself declared he was not from himself. The truest 
thing we have is our intuition of not being from ourselves and that 
we ourselves are not of ourselves. 

God has done all things for himself and he has made the soul 
like to himself, over all things, under all things, in all things, out 
of all things and withal abiding in herself impartibly. But she 
is noblest keeping to the desert wherein she is naught and there is 
nothing doing. St Dionysius prays, ‘ Lord, lead me into the desert 
where thou art formless that in thy solitude I may lose all form.’ 
The soul is in all things in her subtile nature wherein she inhabits 
all things without affecting them or being affected by them. 
Thus transcending things she cries, * Lord, fetch me into thy 
Godhead where thou art naught, for what is aught I deem to be 
not God.’ The soul is over all things in her freedom; she knows 
none can compel her, not even God himself. Surrendering her 
free will to God she plunges into her own emptiness, beseeching, 
‘ Lord, take me into the gloom of thy Godhead that in thy dark I 
may lose all my light, for nothing that can be revealed do I account 
as light.’ She is out of all things in her power of understanding, 
which makes her so elastic she is able to hold God as well as all 
his creatures. Embodying God thus she is more God than her 
own self. This is hers by grace. Aught of God is God entire and 
aught of him holds his whole being. This he is in the lowliest as 
much as in the loftiest nature. A small bung stops the barrel 
no less well than the biggest. | 

Comprehension belongs to his paternal power. He grasps him- 
self in himself in all creatures and grasps himself in his countenance 
whereto he admits no creature and whereinto no creature can get. 
And this comprehension he veils in a cloud of distortion so that 
no creature can grasp him as he grasps himself. What the soul 
grasps in the light she loses in the darkness. Yet she makes 
for the cloud, deeming his darkness better than her light. There 
she suddenly loses her light and herself in his darkness. 

The soul cries in the Book of Love, ‘ No one is my God and I 
am no one’s soul, and nothing manifest to me do I take for God. 
I flee from God for God’s sake.’ St John says, ‘ God is love.’ But 
theologians argue that if he means the love wherewith the soul loves 

TRACTATES 865 

God, this is not true. Were that love God, wherewith the soul can 
love, it would not fail her as it does. This is a natural love, the 
virtue. But suppose her will is turned toward God, then God 
draws love from nothing and pours it into the virtue, so her love 
is both nature and grace. In grace God gives himself to the soul 
and the Holy Ghost unites with her love, and the love which is 
the Holy Ghost is God, and the love which is grace is the nature 
which unites the soul with God, and in this union the soul is 
absorbed into God and loves God with his own love in God, which 
in herself she cannot do. 

The Father is the revelation of all things and the Son is the 
image of all things and the Holy Ghost is the fulfilling of that 
order. Philosophers say that things in contact with God are not 
God but his works. The soul is self-motive before she is moved 
and her being moved is the work of God, the soul being the agent 
while the work itself is creature. The power which perfects the 
soul, which sweeps her out of herself without her aid or abetting, 
is God. I can touch the minster, not carry it off. That we 
attribute to God matter and form and work is due to our gross 
senses. Theologians tell of the light which gives no light, which 
has no form nor matter and is yet a creature. To know God as 
he is we must be absolutely free from knowledge. Thus St Augus- 
tine says, ‘ Lord, I know not what I love in thee if it be not light.’ 
As God is timeless and modeless so he is also nameless. St Paul 
says, “ There be many that run but one receiveth the prize.’ All 
the soul-powers run but pure nature alone receives the crown, for, 
according to Dionysius, this race is nothing else than the flight 
from creatures to unite with their creator. Atoned with her 
creator the soul has lost her name for she herself does not exist : 
God has absorbed her into him just as the sunlight swallows up 
the dawn till it is gone. 

Tell me, where is the soul’s abode ?—Upon the pinions of the 
wind. The pinions are the powers of divine nature. The wind 
is the waging of the powers of the soul’s divine nature. When he 
thrusts her sins under her eyes she sinks down into him like a fish 
in the sea. All creatures lose their names on entering human 
nature. Hence Christ’s exhortation, ‘Preach the gospel to all 
creatures.’ He meant only human beings. 

Observe when a man is all creatures. When he has the power of 
them all. When a man, knowing with his outward senses all 
corporal things, detaches himself from them and abides therein 
without attachment; when, knowing with his interior senses all 
spiritual things, he detaches himself from these and abides therein 
without attachment, then at length that man is all creatures ; 
then, not till then, that man has come to his own nature and is 

866 MEISTER ECKHART 

ready to go into God. If we fail to find God it is because we seek 
in semblance what has no resemblance. The scriptures tell us 
more of his unlikeness than his likeness. Origen says the soul’s 
quest of God comes by self-observation. If she knew herself she 
would know God also. If she pietures herself or pietures her God 
that comes of over-defining. On merging into the Godhead all 
definition is lost. 

Dionysius says to Timothy, ‘Friend Timothy, if thou dost view 
the spirit of truth, pursue it not with mortal senses. It is so swift, 
it comes rushing.’ God must be sought in estrangement, forget- 
fulness and non-sense ; for the Godhead has in it all things in 
posse without the least likeness to anything. The supremely pure 
splendour of the impartible essence illumines all things at once. 
According to Dionysius, beauty is order : symmetry with supreme . 
lucidity.” In this sense the Godhead is the beauty of the three 
Persons. And it behoves the soul to order her lower powers to 
her higher and her higher ones to God ; the outer senses to the 
inner and the inner ones to reason ; thought servant to intelligence, 
intelligence to willand her will to their unity, then the soul will 
be a unity with nothing flowing into her except pure deity as it is 
proceeding from itself. Concerning this St Dionysius says the 
soul has flung her faculties into her pure being and only her chief ~ 
power remains at work. And one doctor says that when the chief 
power takes command the rest all enter into it losing their own 
activities, so now behold the soul in her proper order and in her 
pure nature, her pure nature being her exalted light-nature which 
is potentially all things. 

The Godhead flows into the Father, into the Son and the Holy 
Ghost, into itself in eternity and in time into creatures. It gives 
to each as much as it can hold: to stones existence, to the trees 
their growth, to birds their flight, to beasts their pleasures, to the 
angels reason and to man free nature. God was made man and 
_ took upon himself by grace the nature of all things in time even 
as in eternity he has them all by nature. St Paul says, ‘ Christ 
is to me all things.’ One Person with two natures. Each seems 
all things to each. It is a play of the light and reflection of his 
own nature. God’s being is first being, flowing being, fixed 
being, initial being and final being. 

From essence in general emanates power and work. The three 
Persons are in this respect the storehouse of divinity, and the three 
Persons descend into the essence of the soul by grace, and the 
Persons bring divine nature into the soul in their train, one nature 
coursing through the other. The higher powers of the soul fiow 
out of the essence of the soul as the three Persons issue from the 
Godhead. And when God pours his grace into the soul he pours 

TRACTATES 367 

it into the essence of the soul, for into the essence of the soul no fleck 
can fall let her powers do what they may. The higher powers 
of the soul draw their seeming from the essence of grace in the 
essence of the soul, and her chief power transcends the lower ones 
in nature. 

Mind big with the conception of God’s nature is the corollary 
of Christ’s Person in human nature. When the soul is absorbed 
into God’s nature her sins and shortcomings are stripped off and 
she becomes God, divine in nature ; she enjoys divine nature in 
herself just as the Father does in him. She gets it not from her 
own nature: she takes divine nature from God into her. nature. 
She receives perfection and power. Hence the words of St Paul, 
‘I can do all things in him that strengtheneth me.’ Wisdom 
springs up in understanding ; it begins in understanding and ends 
in desire and has neither heart nor thought. As St Dionysius 
says, ‘ When the soul, finding this outlet, has a footing in eternity 
and in time in her own understanding, therein she shall return into 
the flow where God is flowing back into himself, and does not 
flow away.’ 

God is flowing back into himself, recking no more of creatures 
than he did when they were not. And the soul shall do the same. 
She shall with her humanity conceive the Person of the Son-and | 
with the Person of the Son she shall apprehend the Father and the 
Holy Ghost in both and them both in the Holy Ghost ; and with 
the Person of the Father she shall grasp his impartible nature and 
in his nature discerning the abyss she shall flow into the, void 
bereft of matter and of form. Form, matter, mind and mode she 
loses in the unity for she herself has come to naught : God is doing 
all her work, he preserves her in his being and leads her in his 
power into his naked Godhead. She flows with his deity into all 
that God is flowing in. She is all things’ place and has herself no 
place. This is the spirit of wisdom which has neither heart nor 
thought. 

Soul flowing in the Deity is so nearly God that in the 
power of the Father she receives divinity, (she) by grace as the 
Father does by nature. St Paul says, ‘ In one image shall we go 
from glory to glory.’ Meaning that we shall receive the impartible 
Godhead with all that flows therefrom and shall therein conceive 
the Deity as the Deity conceives itself. Her will and God’s will 
shall be one, and wherever God has gotten himself there she is 
with God. To this none may attain while in this body except 
God grant his best gift to the soul, namely, the vision of God 
which confirms the soul in the Trinity and in the image of the 
Godhead. 

368 MEISTER ECKHART 

XII 
THE DROWNING 

Though there be neither hell nor heaven yet will I love God : 
thee Father and thy sovran nature wherein the Trinity abides in 
the unity whence it gets its power.—Now you desire to hear about 
this hidden and exalted nature of the Trinity. The Persons are 
God in their personality, Godhead by nature in their oneness. 
But you must know what God and Godhead are. The former has 
distinctions ; which the soul of me explains by the reflection of the 
exalted unity. This shines in its own essence wholly indiscriminate. 
Therein is contained its unity entire, including the distinctions of 
lofty personality. The river is fontal wherein unity abides ; the 
one alone is unnecessitous, poised in itself in sable stillness. In- 
comprehensible and yet self-evident. Light is the first thing to 
appear; it beguiles the mind into the unknown without itself, 
everlasting, in-drawn, plunged in gloom. There it is befooled, 
there it is bereft of light’s darkness, losing them both in the abyss ; 
there that mysterious thing the mind is estranged in the unity 
which is withal its life. 

O unfathomable sink, in thy depth thou art high and in thy 
height profound !—How so ?—That is hidden from us in thy 
bottomless abysm. St Paul declares that it shall be made known 
to us. In this gnosis the mind transcends itself; it has been 
absorbed into the Trinity. There the mind dies all dying in the 
wonder of the Godhead, for with that unity it is confused; the 
personal losing its name in sameness. There mind, atoned, is 
accounted naught ; there it loses the means of divinity. Light 
and darkness, it is rid of both, matter as well as form. The spark 
thus bare, made naught from its own naught, is swallowed up in 
its naught’s aught. This same naught is poverty in the Persons, 
which beguiles the mind and reduces it to unity. In the embrace 
of this sovran one which naughts the separated self of things, 
being is one without distinction although a thing created in its 
individual nature. The one I mean is wordless. One and one 
uniting, void shines into void. Where these two abysms hang, 
equally spirated, de-spirated, there is the supreme being ; where 
God gives up the ghost, darkness reigns in the unknown known 
unity. This is hidden from us in his motionless deep. Creatures 
cannot penetrate this aught. 

Well that this aught transcends us. 
Even so loving it transcendently, 
_ Plunge in: this is the drowning. 

TRACTATES 369 

THIS IS THE GLOSS ON THE DROWNING 

It is true spiritual perfection to love God for his own sake 
regardless of hell or heaven. We must love the three Persons in 
their unity of nature and their one nature in the three Persons. 
The Trinity has its power in the unity and the unity has its 
dignity in the Trinity. It belongs, moreover, to the noble mind to 
perceive the distinction between God and Godhead ; how it is 
the three Persons in him have gotten his unity as their natural 
being. Each Person has for nature his unity entire, so each of the 
Persons is in himself God and in his nature Godhead. God is 
God in the Persons and Godhead in his nature: in his impartible 
nature. The unity shines forth in the Trinity as articulate 
speech. But the perfect reflection of the one is shining by itself 
in lonely silence, there safely pent as one and indivisible. ‚Further, 
the three Persons in their utterance keep their distinctive pro- 
perties. The Father is source of the Son and the Son is the river 
thereof eternally flowing out of the Father as Person; while 
abiding within him in essence. The Father and the Son give forth 
their breath (or spirit). Thus the originated river with its original 
source is the origin of the Holy Ghost. , Unity which, logically 
speaking, is the condition of the öriginal source is also the condition 
of the river which, together with its source, is source of the Holy 
Ghost. And as this oneness is the nature of them both so too it 
is the nature of the breath exhaled by both. This river then is 
fontal. The unity which is in them both is unnecessitous, it has 
no need of speech, but subsists alone in unbroken silence. Not 
that the utterance dies, i.e. the spoken essence. But where speech 
beats into the silence of its nature both have one common character, 
the character of sameness. What is this? It is the motionless 
dark that no one knows but he in whom it reigns : the one with its 
selfhood. First to arise in it is light. Lo, this is the originated 
river, and origin itself, which has the character of light as proceed- 
ing forth in its individual nature. And what here streams forth 
to view will reveal itself and that from which it springs. In its 
interior procession this originated river, which is also the origin 
itself, has the nature of obscure, unmanifest intelligence, but the 
light proceeding forth brings revelation to the mind, beguiling it 
out of itself into its mysterious indwelling cause. There it is 
shorn of light’s illusion. Of everything, that is, which has been 
revealed to it in the form of light. Thereof it is despoiled, but 
now it finds another and better than this light-like understanding. 
Light has mode without knowledge. Darkness is knowledge 
without mode, a thing, that is, we can in nowise have. The mind 

24 

370 MEISTER ECKHART 

is rid of light when it is rid of mode ; and it is rid of darkness when, 
letting go of all natural things, it sinks in nameless actuality. 
Then it loses both light and darkness in the abyss that creature 
in its own right never plumbs. Such is the estrangement in the 
one as foreshadowed in the ordinary mind, but the realization of 
unity which the blessed have lies in the exquisite consciousness 
of another than themselves. 

O unfathomable void, bottomless to creatures and to thine 
own self, in thy depth art thou exalted in thy impartible, imperish- 
able actuality ; in the height of thy essential power thou art so 
deep thou dost engulf thy simple ground which is there concealed 
from all that thou art not ; yet those whom thou wouldst commune 
with shall know thee with thyself. As St Paul declares, ‘ Then 
shall we know as we are known.’ This knowledge the mind gets. 
not from its individual nature: the unity hales it in the Three 
into itself, that is, to its true and natural abode where it transcends 
itself in what inhales it; where ‘the spirit dies all dying in the 
wonder of the Godhead.’ This dying of the spirit means its con- 
fusion with the one essential nature though it remains discrete 
in the Persons of the Trinity. This shows the activity of spirit ; 
its having variety of Persons. But by their union is shed a single 
light, for the three Persons are aglow with one intrinsic nature, 
like three lights with one shine. According to St Augustine this 
essential light is cast by the Persons into the pure spirit. At its 

- glance the spirit forfeits self and selfhood and the uses of its powers. 
Such is the effect of the shaft of pure impartible light of unity 
which this spirit is rather than itself when it is reduced to nothing 
but the same. We call the unity naught because mind has no 
notion what it is; what the mind does know is that it is upheld 
by another than itself. Its upholder then is aught rather than 
naught, though mind has no idea what it can be. It is more real 
to him than his own self in that it belies his personal naught. 
For mind, as actually dwelling there, loses every means of divine 
nature, which to him is all things. He loses his individual nature 
and yet he does not die ; he wins the nature of divinity although 
not God by nature but by grace. Now remember, he is something 
created out of naught. Yet he, a mere created wight, is drawn 
by the power of God’s essence into his unity, a thing unknown in 
anywise to any creature. This unity which is in nowise creaturely 
is poverty, for it is poor of creatures, its content being that of 
simple actuality. This modeless creature-essence is the being of 
the Persons who alone contain it in its most primitive and simple 
form as their nature. This knowledge de-ments the mind. This 
spiritual dementia means the absolute modelessness of the unity 
which the Persons have in actual mode. The spirit broods in 

TRACTATES arı 

sameness without light or darkness. Sans light, in its impene- 
trable actuality ; sans darkness in its lack of any special name. 
The spirit free from matter and from form has taken on the form 
of God. Thus the mind attains to its eternal image which is one 
in its essential nature and threefold as uttered in the Persons. 
Though the spirit in this image has an eternal nature of its own yet 
in itself it is a thing created. This created thing is mens ; by mens 
being meant the spark, the living principle of spirit. This is the 
spirit in itself. Its eternal image is another ; that is really God. 
When the spirit in itself turns from all things becoming into the 
not-becoming of its eternal object in the Persons, whence it comes, 
then the mind is said to return to its exemplar. Then void shines 
into void: the purified becomingness of mind turns to the pure 
not-becoming nature of its eternal idea. In this embrace is 
consummated that exalted union wherein at length the spirit 
at one with all its nature is in divine atonement. Where 
these two meet in one, equally spirit and not-spirit, there is 
beatitude. 

Now consider what the spirit of God means. The most signi- 
ficant and subtile word that creature can employ is spirit (breath 
or ghost) and that is why we call God spirit. But creature has 
no proper name for the nameless God and therefore to our mind 
God is not spirit. 

Mark too the meaning of spirituality of soul. It means that, 
aloof from the coil of nether things, she is living at her summit in 
thought and love. Here she is one spirit with God. Spirituality 
of soul, besides, means that in her aught she is no more material 
than in her naught wherefrom she was created. Such is the 
spiritual nature of the soul. But she is de-spirited (de-mented) 
when, at her absorption, she is what is his rather than her own, and 
this is the perfection of her sanity. The interior spiration of God, 
again, is his hidden nature, the quarry of the mind which it 
escapes ; for this mysterious and silent one lies hid in depths of 
stillness that no creature ever plumbs. This being is beyond our 
grasp, whereat, rejoicing greatly, let us hasten to seize it with itself: 
this is our highest happiness. So be it, by thy help, O divine 
Trinity. Amen. 

XII! 
THE FLOW INTO THE FATHER 

Concerning the flow into the Father, note as follows. 
The Godhead is contained in the Father as nature, wherefore 

1 See Spamer’s Texte, B. 2, from which the words in brackets are taken. 

372 MEISTER ECKHART 

he is omnipotent and receives naught from aught that he is not 
himself in his divine potentiality, seeing that he has it in him in 
essence, as his own. Nevertheless, speaking of the Father we mean 
the Person of the Father, and speaking of the Godhead we mean 
his nature, his impartible substance, that is to say. Now since: 
this nature stays brooding in settled immoveable stillness, moving - 
all things which have proceeded in eternity in the word of his 
power (or potential Word), it follows that, as power, it has ever been 
flowing into the Father making him able to beget a Son like unto 
himself. We can prove it thus. The Persons are impotent as 
Persons ; anything they do is done in virtue of their nature which 
is their real being. So much for the flow into the Father which 
he has of his own nature wherein he is omnipotent. 

Now mark. The soul has received two powers by nature. The 
first of these powers is understanding. This comprehends the 
Trinity, although it is incomprehensible, and all its works. Observe 
how understanding comprehends the Trinity, and all its works, 
despite its being incomprehensible. The soul in her understanding 
is the image of the Son and the Son is the Father’s understanding. 
So when the soul is empty of her own understanding, and only 
the Son is her understanding, she understands with the Son the Son 
and the Father and their common Spirit. That is how the soul 
comprehends the Trinity and all its works. 

Her other power is will. It is its nature to cast itself into the 
unknown which is God. God is said to be -unknown because no 
creature knows him as he knows himself; as known to himself he 
is unknowing to all creatures. Hence we call God agnosia. Now 
the chief power of the soul is too fastidious to dally with temporal, 
known things, so free will boldly disregards the known and cleaves 
to what it knows not. As St Paul says, ‘I know not; God 
knoweth.’ 

Christ says, * When I am ascended I will draw all things to me.’ 
He means that when he dawns upon our heart and understanding 
he gathers us up into himself. In this sense all creatures are one 
man and that man is God. [In this sense man is all things. For 
he has the nature of all creatures, and souls joined to Christ are 
in this sense one man with him. He is the head and they are his 
members, who are in his charity.] In Christ his all was assembled 
into one. His higher and his lower faculties, and the senses of 
his outward and his inward man were in harmonious union with 
his highest power, conceived there by divine conception, which 
was united with him in one Person. And so with the man in 
whom all creatures end, in whom all multitudinous things have 
been reduced to one in Christ : man is then one in God with Christ’s 
humanity. Thus all creatures are one man and that man is God 

TRACTATES 373 

in Christ’s Person. As one master says: With God one spirit and 
with Christ one body, that is unity indeed. 

With the powers received from the Trinity the soul knows the 
ordering of all things ordained by God in such exalted fashion. 
But those that turn away their eyes from God relapse into the self- 
same naught wherein they were before they had received the 
likeness of the Trinity, this likeness of the Trinity aye informing 
them of the dark nothing back to which they wend. In this 
darkness gather all the pangs of hell. The dark enwraps them and 
hides the sight of God ; it burns them past soothing by their created 
aught. This is bitter to their conscience which damns them to all 
time. In this pit of nothingness they sink for evermore, powerless 
to grasp the naught they were before they had the likeness of the . 
Trinity. 

And now, my children, let us examine these dark sayings 
carefully. You will see the obvious meaning of these damned. 
But another, ghostly, sense lies hid therein, which it behoves you 
to note specially. This applies to the elect who turn away their 
mind from God and flow back into that same naught, for when the 
soul is carried by her understanding above all things and beyond 
the scope of her own understanding to the understanding of the 
sovran good she sees that to all creatures this is unintelligible. 
So down she goes with her own understanding. 

The fastidious soul can rest her understanding on nothing that 
has name. She escapes from every name into the nameless nothing- 
ness. Escaping her own nature she falls clear of her own aught. 
The naught she falls into is the unknowing, which is called the dark. 
‘In this dark gather the pangs of hell,’ where the soul is plunged 
sheer into the void. This only happens when she is perfectly 
devoid of knowledge. The slightest trace of knowledge or under- 
standing of the naught that she is plunged in would be hell- 
torment to her. All sense and knowledge of the naught ends in 
this darkness. ‘The darkness burns them past salving by any of 
their kind. Bitter is this conscience which damns them to all 
time. In this abyss of nothingness they sink for evermore, 
failing to grasp the naught they were before they took the likeness 
of the Trinity.’ By virtue whereof they have their being. To 
approfound the naught wherein they drown they are as helpless 
as they were when they were not. All sense and knowledge end 
in the darkness of their naught. For this darkness is the incom- 
prehensible nature of God. She sinks for evermore in the depths 
of this naught. She sinks and drowns; she drowns to her own 
aught. Her aught, surviving, sinks as naught to naught. But 
the naught that sinks can never comprehend the naught it sinks in. 
Every virtue mastered and transcended, the soul cries; ‘ Even 

874 MEISTER ECKHART 

so I cannot glorify and love God to the full. I die then to the 
virtues casting me into the naught of the Godhead to sink eternally 
from naught to aught.’ The highest meed of love and praise the 
soul can lavish on the sovran good is given in the knowledge that 
all her love and praise fall short of God. So down she goes through 
the little she can call her own and dying to her virtues is cast into 
the naught of her own self. 

Two points mark here. She casts herself with the naught of 
herself when, self-bereft of her exalted power she ever regards her 
own insignificance. 

The other naught she plunges in is the naught of the Godhead. 
Seeing that she herself is naught and not disposed to stay at 
aught, the soul casts herself into the naught of the Godhead and 
so comes with naught to naught. She wants the aught she 
recognises in herself to perish in the naught which is its very 
aught and so subsist in unity. She sees we cannot love and 
glorify God better than by recognising how inadequate all love and 
glory are. Wherefore she holds her peace. St Dionysius being 
bent on lauding Mary’s virtues found them so inconceivable he 
held his tongue. By his dumbness the worthy Dionysius did 
Mary highest honour. Thus it befalls the soul on being ravished 
into God’s incomprehensibility. Her lips struck dumb, °O 
groundless Truth,’ she cries, ‘ how paltry is our praise!’ So she 
attains to union close enough for God to pour himself into 
her every whit and snatch her every whit into himself, leaving 
no trace of either vice or virtue; nor does the soul know any 
difference. 

For you must know that to the soul in her perfection goodness 
would come quite natural; she would not merely practise virtues, 
but virtue as a whole would be her life and she would radiate it 
naturally. We seem to be vicious or virtuous from being now the 
one and now the other. This should not be : we ought to be always 
in a state of perfection. That is one thing to note. 

Further, God absorbs the soul, leaving no trace. This means 
that the soul ravished by God into the peace and quiet of his 
secret self makes little show save to her kind. There the soul 
knows no separation, for he who has absorbed her has merged her 
in himself. She well knows that she is but knows not what she 
is.—The sun in certain countries is too hot for fruits to flourish 
on the surface of earth, but, on the other hand, the sun produces 
gold in plenty in the bowels of earth. And so with the soul in 
whom the bright sun of the divine nature shines: it produces its 
like there, scattering the darkness and bringing about perfect 
unity. Look you, it behoves us to be very merciful to these, for, 
withdrawn into his hiding, they are out of touch with the profane. 

TRACTATES 375 

St Chrysostom says, ‘It is not yet manifest what we are, but 
‚when we are changed into him we shall show what we are.’ What- 
ever she may take herself for, to God she is creature. 

The Godhead is a spiritual substance, so impenetrable that none 
can say what manner of thing it is. They say: God in the 
Trinity is the living light in its visible radiance. In other words, 
the three Persons are but one in nature though distinct in Person 
in the same sense that the source of light is not the light nor is the 
source its shine. Applying this to the three Persons, the source 
is the Father, the Son is the light and the Holy Ghost is the shine. 
The Father is the living source in whom all things have lived 
eternally without themselves as in their cause. The light is the 
Son in whom all things appear eternally as in their idea. The 
shine is the Holy Ghost in whom all things are one eternally as in 
their naught. Not that one Person is the life and another the 
light : the three Persons are one life, one light. 

The Trinity is the heart of the divine nature. As you may 
prove. For in human life it is the heart which beats in all the 
limbs, energising, co-ordinating them. Because the limbs receive 
from it, therefore it is called the heart. Now touching the God- 
head, this is not active in its nature, but anything it does it does 
with the Persons, and the Trinity is called the heart of divine 
nature because this works by means of it, and because it (the 
Trinity) is the origin of all things and all things flow back into it 
and end. This heart’s heart, again, is the paramount power of 
the unity wherein and whereby it is omnipotent. Human nature 
flows in love into the Trinity as into its universal origin. The 
unity of the Trinity is bottomless and nothing is contained therein. 
In the embrace of unity the naked soul sinks down for aye nor 
ever touches bottom. Her temporalities (7.e. the created natures 
of her powers) stop at the Persons, whereas her pure essence is 
received by the pure unity of God without return. 

Behold the soul divorced from every aught. For he who stoops 
to aught that is not God can never be received into God’s unity. 
This unity is causeless: it is self-caused. Of bottomless depth 
the floor, of endless height the roof, of boundless space the rim. 
I refer to the Trinity of Persons: the unity underlies it, holding it 
together; it overtops it, energising it ; it surrounds it, ending its 
distinctions. Thus the Trinity is in the unity and the unity in 
the Trinity. As saith the psalm Quicumque vult. 

That we should know ourselves and God so far as we are able, 
that is God’s will. If we would know ourselves we have to recog- 
nise that we are nothing but the raw material of God for the 
blessed Trinity to work in. It behoves us therefore to be vastly 
careful not to hamper in any way the work which the exalted 

376 MEISTER ECKHART 

workman designs to carry out in us to his glory, but so to maintain 
ourselves that the material is always ready for the workman to do 
his work in us. St Paul says, ‘ The spirit of the Lord descends 
from on high in secret, working in whom it will and when and 
where and how it will in him in whom it meets no hindrance.’ 
In the children of God. They are led by this spirit.—It is thus ye 
shall know yourselves. Next, we have to know God. To this 
St Dionysius exhorted one of his disciples, saying, ‘ Up, friend, 
divest thyself of things and put off thyself that thou mayst under- 
stand the Sovran Good.’ Of it three things are predicated. F irst, 
it is a unique force entire in everything; next, a unique good 
embracing everything. (Thirdly) to know God really ye must, 
know him as the unknown. So Dionysius says. 

God’s will is our welfare, and our welfare consists in knowing 
God and doing accordingly. Here timorousness mutters in the 
soul, both she will and she will. not. And hard on this comes 
rage of soul. When she divines that it remains for her to be 
somewhat that he is not, she is transported with ire. She 
would sooner come to naught than have or take aught that 
belongs to him. ‘Lord,’ she cries, ‘my welfare lies in thy 
never calling me to mind; and forbid, I pray thee, any creature 
ever to console me. I rejoice that my powers never come before 
thy face.’ 

See what the soul means by her strange words: ‘my welfare lies 
in thy never calling me to mind.’ She wots right well that she has 
never been one instant out of his mind and that is her felicity. 
She begs not to be comforted by any creature, because she is in 
indigence right comfortless where her disconsolateness is her one 
consolation. And when she says her powers come not before his 
face? Observe what God’s face is. We see ourselves best in 
what is called our face. So too where God is manifest to himself 
in the mysterious stillness of his own essence. This revelation is 
called the face of the Godhead. The soul is well aware that, 
accompanied by her powers, she can never enter the absolute 
stillness where he is manifest to himself. Hence she desires her 
powers not to come before his face, i.e. his self-revelation. See, 
her powers halt at its reflection in the Trinity and only the pure 
essence of her spirit is flashed from the stillness of her own power 
straight into this perfect revelation. As a master says: ‘ Where 
pure and purified are one the powers of the soul are at an end.’ 
Meaning that in the one perfect nature the pure nature of the 
spirit transcends all its powers. St Paul says, ‘ He who is joined 
to God is one spirit with him.” Amen. 

TRACTATES 377 

XIV 
ST JOHN SAYS, ‘I SAW THE WORD IN GOD’ 

St John says, ‘I saw the Word in God.’ God is abstract being, 
pure perception, which is: perceiving itself in itself. St John means 
that the Son is in the Father, in his nature. ‘I saw the Word 
with God.’ Here he is referring to the intellect which, flowing 
into God eternally, proceeded forth from God in distinction of 
Person, namely, the Son. ‘I saw the Word before God.’ This 
means that the Son is ever being born of the Father and that he is 
the image of the Father. ‘In the Word there is only the Word,’ 
refers to the eternal emanation of creatures in the Word. ‘I 
saw the Word under God’; the Son become man, as God said, 
“I have loved you in the reflection of my darkness.’ God’s dark- 
ness is his nature which is unknowable. Good people know it 
not and no creature can divine it; therefore it is a darkness. 
While God was flowing in his own darkness the Son was not 
distinct from him. In the darkness of his nature the Father 
flowed as Person so far as he was pregnant. ' The Father gave his 
Son birth and gave him his own nature; he gave him not his 
Person: his nature he can give away but he can give to none his 
Person for that is the product of his unborn essence. The Father 
spoke himself and all creatures in his Son; the Father spoke 
himself to all creatures in his Son. The Father turning back into 
himself speaks himself in himself ; he flows back into himself with all — 
creatures. As Dionysius says, ‘ God proceeded into himself,’ mean- 
ing that his hidden nature suffices him, which is concealed from 
creatures. The soul cannot follow him into his nature, except he 
absorb her altogether, and then in him she is made dark of all created 
lights. The darkness of creatures is their incomprehensibility in 
their simple nature, that is, in the nothing from which they were 
created. In this uncreated light they discern his uncreatedness. 
Into his uncreatedness they flow in the reflection of his darkness. 

—‘ Tell me, good Sir, do Father, Son and Holy Ghost speak the 
same word in the Godhead or has each a different word ? ’—In 
the Godhead there is but one word ; in it the Father in the Godhead 
speaks into his unborn essence and into his born essence, the 
Father flowing into his Son with all that he is and the Son speaks 
the same word, and the Father and the Son flow into the Holy 
Ghost and the Holy Ghost speaks the same word. They speak 
this one simple word in their essence and each speaks the same word 
in his own Person, and in their common nature they discourse 
the truth and the Persons receive the essence as it is essentially. 
Yet the Persons receive from one another. They bow down to 

378 MEISTER ECKHART 

the essence in praise, lauding the essence ; and the unborn essence 
pronounces its unborn word in the Persons, lauding the Persons, 
and the Persons receive the essence every whit and pass it on to 
one another. This unborn essence is self-sufficient, without birth 
and without activity. Birth and activity are in the Persons. 
The Persons say they are the truth and that creatures have none 
of the truth. When the soul attains to this divine speech she 
speaks this very truth and is the Deity to every creature as well 
as to herself. This comes of her indivisible nature and therein 
creatures are a matter of the will. The bad are bad and the good 
good, the Persons preserving justice in the Godhead. They give 
the bad ‘their due and the good theirs. 

St Dionysius says, ‘ God is the Prime Cause, and God has fashioned 
all things for himself who is the cause of all; and his works are 
all wrought in the likeness of the First Cause.’ Father and Son 
show forth the first cause, and the Son is playing in the Father with 
all things for he proceeded forth from him. The Son plays before 
Father with all things, the Son plays below the Father with all 
things. The Father begat the Son with his Godhead and with 
all things. The Father begat his Son in his Godhead with all 
things. The Father begat his Son into his Godhead with all 
things. The Godhead is the several Persons and the fullness of 
the Persons. The Godhead is not given to any thing. On coming 
to its knowledge the soul sees God and glancing back into herself 
she sees that the Godhead is in all things. Receiving into her the 
likeness of the creator she creates what she will but cannot give 
it essence: she gives it form and is herself its matter and its 
eternal activities are in her; these are in the eternal birth. Its 
temporal activities are in time, where God gives his works essence, 
form and matter out of nothing, which the soul is unable to do; 
God reduces his works to the unity of Christ and this order shall- 
not pass away but shall be raised up to the glory of the one. Soul, 
transcending order, enters the naked Godhead where she is seen 
when God is seen in the soulas God. This soul has God as God in 
her, she has gotten in her the image of her creator. 

Now mark the difference between the work of God and creature. 

God has done all things for himself, for he is the universal cause 
and all his works are wrought in the likeness of the first cause and 
creatures all work according to the likeness of the first cause. That 
is the intention they have towards God. God made all things 
from nothing, infusing into them his Godhead so that all things 
are full of God. Were they not full of the Godhead they would 
all perish. The Trinity does all the work in things and creatures 
exploit the power of the Trinity, creatures working as creatures 
and God as God, while man mars the work so far as his intention is 

TRACTATES 379 

evil. When a man is at work his body and soul are united, for 
body cannot act without the soul. When the soul is united with ‘ 
God she does divine work, for God cannot work without the soul 
and the soul cannot work without God. God is the soul’s life 
just as the soul is the body’s, and the Godhead is the soul of the 
three Persons in that it unifies them and in that it has dwelt in 
them for ever. And since the Godhead is in all things it is all 
sdul’s soul. But in spite of its being all soul’s soul, the Godhead 
is not creatures’ soul in the way it is the Trinity’s. God does one 
work with the soul; in this work the soul is raised above herself. 
The work is creature, grace to wit, which bears the soul to God. 
It is nobler than the soul as admitting her to God; but the soul 
is the nobler in her admissibility. This creature which has neither 
form nor matter nor any being of its own, translates the soul out 
of her natural state into the supernatural. 

To his eternally elect God gives his spirit as it is, without 
means; they cannot miss it. Creatures God is going to make at 
his good pleasure he has known eternally as creatures, for in God 
they are creatures albeit nothing in themselves : they are uncreated 
creatures. Creatures are always more noble in God than they are 
in themselves. In God the soul shall see her own perfection 
without image and shall see the difference between things un- 
created and created and she shall distinguish God from Godhead, 
nature from Person, form from matter. The Father is the begin- 
ning of the Godhead, he is the well-spring in the Godhead, over- 
flowing into all things in eternity and time. , The Godhead is a 
heaven of three Persons. The Father is God and a Person not 
born nor proceeding from any ; and the Son is God and a Person 
and born of the Father ; and the Holy Ghost is God and a Person 
proceeding from both. St Paul speaks of the uncreated spirit 
flowing into the created spirit (or mind). This meeting which 
befalls the created spirit is her saving revelation ; it happens in 
the soul who breaks through the boundaries of God to lose herself 
in his uncreated naught. The three Persons are one God, one in 
nature, and our nature is shadowing God’s nature in perpetual 
motion ; having followed him from naught to aught and into that 
which God is to himself, there she has no motion of her naught. 
Aught is suspended from the divine essence; its progression is 
matter, wherein the soul puts on new forms and: puts off her old 
ones. The change from one into the other is her death: the one 
she doffs she dies to, and the one she dons she lives in. 

St John says, ‘ Blessed are the dead that die in God: they are 
buried where Christ is buried.. Upon which St Dionysius com- 
ments thus: Burial in God is the passage into uncreated life. 
The power the soul goes in is her matter, which power the soul 

380 MEISTER ECKHART 

can never approfound for it is God and God is changeless, albeit 
the soul changes in his power. As St Dionysius says, ‘ God is the 
mover of the soul.’ Now form is a revelation of essence. St 
Dionysius says, ‘Form is matter’s aught. Matter without form 
is naught.’ So the soul never rests till she is gotten into God who 
is her first form and creatures never rest till they have gotten into 
human nature: therein do they attain to their original form, God 
namely. As St Dionysius hath it, ‘ God is the beginning and the 
middle and the end of all things.’ 

Then up and spake the loving soul, ‘ Lord, when enjoyest thou 
thy creatures ? ’—‘ That do I at high noon when God is reposing 
in all creatures and all creatures in God.’ St Augustine says, 
‘ All things are God,’ meaning, they have always been in God and 
shall return to God. So when St Dionysius says, ‘ All things are 
naught,’ he means they are not of themselves and that in their 
egress and their ingress they are as incomprehensible as naught. 
When St Augustine says, ‘ God is all things,’ he means he has 
the power of all things, one more noble than he ever gave to. 
creatures. And St Dionysius’ dictum; ‘ God is naught,’ implies 
that God is as inconceivable as naught. As King David sings, 
‘God has assigned to everything its place: to fish the water, 
birds the air and beasts the field and to the soul the Godhead.’ 
The soul must die in every form save God : there at her journey’s 
end her matter rests and God absorbs the whole of the powers of 
the soul, so now behold the soul a naked spirit. Then, as St 
Dionysius says, the soul is not called soul, she is the sovran power 
of God wherewith God’s will is done. It is at this point St Augus- 
tine cries, ‘ Lord thou hast bereft me of my spirit!’ Whereupon 
Origen remarks, ‘ Thou art mistaken, O Augustine. It is not 
. thy spirit, it is thy soul-powers that are taken from thee.’ The 
soul unites with God like food with man, which turns in eye to 
eye, in ear to ear. So does the soul in God turn into God: com- 
bining with each divine power she is that power in God ; and God 
combines with the soul and is each power in the soul; and the 
two natures flowing in one light, the soul comes utterly to naught. 
That she is she is in God. The divine powers swallow her up out 
of sight just as the sun draws up things out of sight. 

What God is to himself no man may know. God is in all things, 
self-intent. God is all in all and to each thing all things at once. 
And the soul shall be the same. What God has by nature is the 
soul’s by grace. God is nothing at all to anything ; God is nothing 
at all to himself, God is nothing that we can express. In this 
sense Dionysius says, ‘ God is all things to himself for he bears the 
form of all things.’ He is big with himself in a naught : there all 
things are God, and are not, the same as we were. When we 

' TRACTATES 381 

were not then God was heaven and hell and all things. St Diony- 
_ Sius says that ‘God is not’, meaning that he bears himself in a not, 
namely, the not-knowing of all creatures, and this not draws the 
soul through all things, over all things and out of all things into 
that superlative not where she is not-known to any creature. 
There she is not, has not, wills not, she has abandoned God and 
everything to God. Now God and heaven gone, the soul is 
finally cut off from every influx of divinity, so his spirit is no longer 
given to her. Arrived at this the soul belongs to the eternal life 
rather than creation; her uncreated spirit lives rather than 
herself: the uncreated,. eternally-existent which is no less than 
God. Wherewith being all-pervaded to the total loss of her gwn 
self, the soul at length returns without herself to eternal indigence, 

for what is left alive in her is nothing less than God. Thus she is 
poor of self. This is the point where soul and Godhead part and 
the losing of the Godhead is the finding of the soul, for the spirit 
which is uncreated drawing on the soul to its own knowledge she 
comes nearer to the not-being of the Godhead than by knowing 
all the Father ever gave. [The gift of the Father is the positive 
existence of all creatures in the Person of his Son and with the Son 
the Holy Ghost as well. For the Persons must be looked on as 
inseparate, albeit distinct illuminations of the understanding.] 
And so far as she attains this in the body she enjoys the eternal 
wont and escapes her own. 

We ought to be eternally as poor as when we were not and then 
our kingdom shall not pass away, abiding as it does in God whose 
it is eternally. The Godhead gave all things up to God; it is as 
poor, as naked and as idle as though it were not: it has not, 
wills not, wants not, works not, gets not. St Dionysius says, 
‘ Be the soul never so bare the Godhead is barer’: a naught from 
which no shoot was ever lopped nor ever shall be. It is this 
counsel of perfection the soul is straining after more than after 
anything that God contains or anything she can conceive of God. 
Saith the bride in the Book of Love, ‘ The form of my beloved 
_ passed by me and I cannot overtake him.’ It is God who has the 
treasure and the bride in him, the Godhead is as void as though 
it were not. God has consumed the form of the soul and formed 
her with his form into his form. Now she gets all things free 
from matter, as their creator possesses them in him, and resigns 
the same to God. 

Ours to contain all things in the same perfection wherein the 
eternal wisdom has eternally contained them. Ours to expire 
them as the Holy Ghost has expired them eternally. Ours to be 
all things’ spirit and all things’ spirit to us in the spirit. Ours to 
know all and deify ourselves with all. Ours to be God by grace 

882 MEISTER ECKHART 

as God is God by nature ; ours to resign the same to God and be 
as poor as when we were not. In this state we are as free as when 
we were not: free as the Godhead in its non-existence. Christ 
says, ‘ Blessed are the poor in spirit.” These same poor in spirit 
enjoy the Father without let or hindrance. The Father knows 
no difference between this soul and him save that he has by nature 
what she has by grace. For as Christ declares, ‘Them that 
follow me I will bring to where I am.’ ‘Blessed are the poor in 
spirit: God’s kingdom is in them.’ These spiritual poor are 
those who have abandoned everything to God as he possessed 
them when we were not and the naught itself. In this naught 
dwells God and in God dwells this soul. There she has no dwelling 
and thereinto no creature can get in its own right and no creature 
can go higher. 

XV 
THE THREE CREATIONS 

The three Persons made creatures out of nothing to enjoy the 
uses of the blessed Trinity. There is difference of wont in the 
Persons and their powers; for the essence being self-sufficient 
there is nothing in the essence to enjoy excepting unity, so the soul 
demands nothing, knows nothing, wills nothing. 

As to the Persons, the one knows the others so far as they are 
Persons, for one Person begets the others. Essence begets not. 
In the domain of Person, one is receiving from another. The Son 
receives all he possesses from the Father ; the Holy Ghost receives 
all he possesses from the Father and the Son, and each of the 
Persons receives from the others presence and well-being and 
co-operation and mutual delight. As to their activity, each one 
finds itself entire as essence in the others and each enjoys the 
others as Persons and itself in both the others. 

We speak of three creations. Birth is called creation, and being 
made from nothing, and being raised in grace to higher grace. 
The same applies especially to Christ. If birth is a creation then 
Christ was the creature of his Father in his eternal birth of Person 
and of nature. Christ himself declared, ‘ Wisdom created wisdom.’ 
The creation of the Son has ever been to him his whole existence, 
who is still being born of the Father eternally with all that he 
is, and this birth remains in the Father eternally. St Dionysius 
says, ‘God created a God as good as God.’ Inasmuch as the 
Father conceives himself of himself he is his own creation. 
As St Dionysius says, ‘God is his own self-begotten Son.’ In 
eternity, that is. Creatures abide in eternity as being in the 
God-bearing Godhead. The Son knows all things essentially in the 

TRACTATES 383 

essence of the Father who, essentially, has the potentiality of all 
things that shall happen and shall not happen. He has in his 
Person the universal image, so that he knows all things in common 
with the Father and wields joint power over what has happened, 
what is happening and what is still to happen, as well as’ over 
what God could do an he would that never happens. As the 
Father stretches his will to things that are to happen so the Son 
stretches his wisdom to effect their happening ; and as the Father 
directs his will towards things that shall not happen, the Son 
directs his wisdom to prevent them happening. 

The second creation is that of all the three Persons at once 
who are one in their work of making all things from nothing. 
This applies pre-eminently to Christ’s soul, for she was created 
from nothing in time. The images existing in the middle Person 
are imprinted in his soul’s potentiality so that she knows ideally, 
all things past, present and to come. But things that are not 
going to happen, things which God in his omnipotence could do 
but which will not take place, albeit possible essentially, these his 
soul does not know for that belongs to God alone. This light is 
creature, created from nothing and is supernatural to the soul. 
His soul has one light in common with the angels. This is the 
image impressed in her wherein she perceives in herself things 
that have happened and are happening; but in this image she 
sees nothing of those things which are going to happen except 
God grant her knowledge of them. And this is supernatural to 
the soul. 

The third creation is the raising of his body from grace to higher 
grace, that is, something extra to his animal nature. In his 
animal nature he cannot see into peoples’ consciousness ; in his 
animal nature he could give no sign nor know about the future 
unless God granted it. Christ was so foolish as a child he did not 
know his father or his mother. St Ambrose says: ‘He was 
created from grace to higher grace when he rose from death to 
immortality.’ Christ sees in heaven, with his fleshly eyes, only 
what is before him; he must turn round to see what is behind 
him. So the Son has never known the Father in that funda- 
mental mode wherein the Three are united in one nature. That 
mode Christ’s soul was sharing when, at the moment of her 
creation she was bereft of it and prevented from seeing her divine 
nature. Christ’s soul enjoys divine nature by grace as God does 
by nature. This is so far removed from creature that never a 
drop has ever leaked into any creature. The furthest limit of 
man’s knowledge is an intuition of how the three Persons enjoy 
their divine nature. To this none can attain unless his soul is 
plunged into the consciousness of the created and uncreated 

384 MEISTER ECKHART 

natures confluent in her where she stands in the midst and, seeing 
straight into them both, has at that point pure intuition of her 
wont and how what she enjoys there is withdrawn from her and 
how, though borne along with and by grace, she is still unable to 
apprehend God’s nature. She clearly sees that she is God’s and 
not her own at all. She is acutely sensible that enjoying and 
suffering are identical. That Christ should have action and 
passion both in one, bodily, that was the wonder. His soul must 
have suffered in all her powers. Her highest power suffering as 
much more than the rest as it was more capable of suffering. 
One wise doctor says, ‘In this intuition the soul has perfect joy, 
for perfect joy is perfect knowledge.’ Christ says, ‘They that 
know thee Father and thy Son whom thou hast sent, have life 
eternal.’ Also he says, ‘ Pray, that your joy may be full.’ St 
Dionysius says, fullness of joy is perfect consciousness, a balanced 
interchange of nature, whereby the soul beholds herself in the 
mirror of the Godhead. God is the mirror, unveiled to whom he 
will and veiled from whom he will. St Peter says, ‘ God fashioned 
his nature and the Persons in that nature and chose the nature 
not the Persons.’ St Dionysius says the soul has a light that 
lights her to work. By the light God casts on the angels next 
him they cast themselves back into God with all they are. As 
St Bernard observes, ‘Minds do not flow back into God in their 
natural light ; the Godhead absorbs them in its own light without _ 
their seeing.” Now St John says, ‘God is love, and he who 
dwells in love dwells in God and God in him.’ When God reveals 
himself to the soul and the soul loves God, she is in God and God 
is in her. When the sun shines and the eye sees it, the eye is 
in the sun and the sun is in the eye. Well then, friend mine, 
here you have the notion, which it defies me to express in words, 
for the divine nature in the Persons is a mirror, beyond the reach 
of any word. In so far as the soul can project herself beyond 
words so far she approaches that mirror. In that mirror the 
union is simply one of likeness. 

When, Lord, I was in thee I was unnecessitous in my nothing- 
ness ; it was thy look, thy notice of me, that made me indigent. 
If it be death for the soul to part from God, then it is death to 
her to emanate from God. All change is a dying. Wherefore we 
die from time to time and the soul dies all-dying in the wonder of 
the Godhead, impotently grasping at the divine nature. In the 
naught she is undone and comes to nothing. In this not-being 
she is buried, in un-knowing she is merged in the unknown, in 
unthinking merged in the unthought-of, in un-love one with the 
unloved. Death’s grip none can unloose: it severs life from 
limb and the soul from God and casts her into the Godhead 

TRACTATES 385 

wherein, sepultured, she is ignored by every creature. She is 
forgotten-as one changed within the tomb nor is she held in any 
man’s embrace. She like God is incomprehensible. For the dead 
who have died in the Godhead are beyond our ken, like the dead 
are who die here to the body. That death is the soul’s eternal 
quest. Slain in the three Persons she loses her naught and is 
hurled into the Godhead. Where she discovers the face of her 
naught. ‘Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee,’ 
says our Lord ; and of his incomprehensible beauty she declares, 
“ Thou art more fair.’ There she sees the secret art of God: 
how marvellously God contrived that nothing should be indigent, 
yet without detriment thereto. St Dionysius says: ‘ No wonder 
God made the soul indigent with a look, when the sun, unbidden, 
gives life to mites and worms in rotten wood.’ The soul, perceiving 
God’s immensity and her own insignificance, casts herself out of 
God’s heart and out of all creatures and rests upon her naked 
nothingness: the divine power has her in its keeping. As 
St Dionysius says: ‘ All things are naught at the command of 
God.’ Again he says: ‘ The look which goes from God into the 
soul is the beginning of faith whereby I believe things not revealed 
to me.’ So far as the soul sinks down in faith into the unknown 
good, so far she is one with the unknown good and is unknown to 
self or any creature. She well knows that she is but knows not 
what she is. Not till she knows all that there is to know does she 
cross over to the unknown good. This crossing is obscure to many 
a religious. 

The nature of the soul is such that where she is at all there she 
is altogether. She is entire in every limb, for where her nature is 
at all there it is wholly. So is the Godhead in all places and in 
all creatures and in each wholly. 

Unnatured nature is natured only so far as it is natureable. 
It natures not itself but the Father natures his Son in natured 
nature, for the Father is as much natured as unnatured nature, 
seeing that it is one with him. The Father is alone in unnatured 
nature and is the first in natured nature. And in natured nature 
the Son is naturing with the Father, for (Father) and Son nature 
the Holy Ghost and the Holy Ghost exists with the Father and the 
Son in natured nature and natures not. In (un)-natured nature 
they are one, natured nature distinguishing the Persons; and 
the Persons are as eternal in their Persons as the unnatured nature 
in its nature and their natured nature is as eternal in them as 
their unnatured nature, and this is nothing else than one God in 
three Persons, who nature creatures, each in its own nature, and 
give them the power and activity that is best suited to them. So 
dear each creature holds its nature that it would have no other. 

25 

386 ‘ MEISTER ECKHART 

A master says, ‘ If sorrow could befall the Father he would rue 
his inability to make all things divine by nature.’ When the soul 
in her simple nature turns into God’s nature forthwith she is 
made one with God, but to heed discrete powers and persons and 
virtues hampers the soul’s divine unity. Her common sense 
endows the other senses with sight, hearing, touch and savour, 
albeit in itself no more than one. And the perceptions of the 
outward senses are all referred to common sense. Discursive 
reason sorts out what is good and, leaving out the animal and 
gross, presents it to the memory for union with the soul. Her 
highest power introduces it to her understanding which has 
intuition of God’s will, and so it is conveyed into the soul who 
harmonises all with God’s good will. 

God in himself is simple good and undivided. The names the 
soul gives God are taken from herself. Albeit threefold in his 
Person, God is the one and only good by nature. He is omni- 
potent good in the Father, clear wisdom in the Son and pure 
goodness in the Holy Ghost. He is threefold and he is one in 
creatures generally ; and of those burning spirits who are con- 
sumed in the fire and brought to naught in him he is the impartible 
substance. When, having harmonised all things in herself, the 
soul is reduced to her impartible substance, then she inhales the 
powers of the divine nature and exhales them from her being into 
the being of the divine nature which permeates her throughly, 
the two beings meeting in one point which is common to the 
soul and God and the variety of Persons hinders not their unity 
nor does their nature interfere with the variety of Persons. He is 
threefold and one in every Person in his born and unborn natures 
severally and the Persons are not admitted to the essence. 
To receive one Person is to receive the divine nature threefold in 
its unity. For one Person in essence is as good as three distinct. 

Happy the soul who, taking this transcendental flight, receives 
all things in the naked Godhead. That soul is buried in the face 
of God ; she is rapt into heaven wherein the three Persons dwell 
in the oneness of their nature. This is the hidden Godhead 
whereof no man can speak. Blessed are they who make this 
passover: all things are known to them in truth and they 
themselves unknown to any creature. So far as they are above 
creatures they are God and super-creaturely, owing to their unity 
with God. God’s face conceals them, every shadow of them, in 
itself. Where two unite, the stronger draws the weaker to it. 
Christ says, ‘ Ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you.’ 
Blessed are the chosen, they bear God’s image. Christ says, 
‘Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of God.’ 
The poor in spirit are those who have abandoned all to God as 

TRACTATES 387 

he possessed them when we were not. God’s kingdom means the 
soul being full of God and nothing of herself. In this nothing God 
dwells and the soul dwells in the same nothing. There she changes 
not and thereinto no creature can get in its own right, and creature 
can rise no higher. St Dionysius says, ‘God dwells in the nothing.’ 
O Dionysius, that is not enough! God dwells in the nothing-at- 
all that was prior to nothing, in the hidden Godhead of pure 
gnosis whereof no man durst speak. Unity is of God alone. As 
St Dionysius says: ‘Did God not dwell in the naught things 
would all perish.’ St Dionysius, that is not enough! Did God 
not dwell in the nothing-at-all sustaining creatures with his 
might, they would all come to nothing for they by nature pass 
away into the nothingness from which they were created. There- 
fore God dwells in the nothing-at-all that was prior to nothing. 

Creature has access to God, who is her being, energising in the 
power which moves her to rise from naught to aught. Now St Paul 
asks, and Augustine too, ‘ How did I get from naught to aught, 
from worm to God, from creature to creator?’ The soul shall 
be so one with God she weens that nothing is save God alone and 
that God made no creature save herself alone. The soul that 
makes this transcendental passage enters the universal peace. 
She is God as he is in himself. Christ says, ‘ I have been man for 
you and if ye are not God for me ye wrong me.’ God became man 
that we might become God. God in his God-nature lay hid in 
human nature so that we saw naught but man. And so this soul 
shall hide her in God’s nature until we can see naught but God ; 
not putting on a Person as Christ did but wholly immersed in 
the divine nature. God is not a nature like a creature is which 
has some quality another lacks. The brewer who is also baker we 
cannot simply call a brewer for he is baker too. God is the nature 
of each nature: -he is all natures’ nature undivided. He is the 
light of lights, the life of lives, the being of beings, the reason of 
reasons. He is all natures’ common nature. As Dionysius says : 
“We cannot say he is a nature seeing that he is impartible and 
there is nothing like him.’ And again St Dionysius says: ‘ We 
know God only in unknowing.’ 

When God enters the soul he comes in with all things. Although 
in God there is but one thing simply, the soul possesses it as ~ 
separate notions, angels and devils and all. The soul is able to 
conceive all things in God and to discern what God is in them 
and what they are in God by soaring up to the supernal simplicity, 
into unknowing. St Dionysius says, ‘ That is Lordship, tran- 
scending earthly things and the likes of them and raising them to 
the heights.” Christ says, ‘ Them that follow me I will raise to 
where lam.’ The Father speaks himself into the soul in his Son, 

388 MEISTER ECKHART 

Now the Son is the Word of the Father, so the Father reveals to 
the soul in this wise that he is shapeless in his divine nature. 
The soul, speaking herself back to the Father in the selfsame 
Word, says she has no shape either in her naught, so she abandons 
her naught in the Word and plunges shapeless into the unshapen. 

The Godhead is an abstract simple thing, omnipotent above all 
Person as well as having the power of the inseparate three Persons : 
giving to none, receiving from none, save as therein subsisting. 
St Dionysius says, ‘ The Godhead has gotten all things.’ The three 
Persons are in the Godhead ; they reveal of it to creatures and 
each other as much as they are able to receive. The Father 
reveals the Godhead to himself and to his Son and Father and Son 
reveal it to the Holy Ghost and the three Persons reveal it to 
creatures and the Godhead wantons with the Word and before 
the Word and above the Word and the Word cannot comprehend 
it. Were the three Persons undistinguished in the Godhead, 
the Godhead would not. be revealed at all and creatures would 
not have been created. The eternal activities are the cause of 
creatures. The Father reveals the Godhead, the Son reveals the 
Father, the Holy Ghost reveals them both : This revelation the 
Godhead gets from things beneath it. The supreme perfection 
is indigent of creatures. So it befalls from time to time that 
when the moon, shooting below the sun, monopolises all the 
sunlight and the sun is said to be eclipsed, that then a star exerts 
its force upon the moon and drawn it off the sun; thus the sun 
owes its light to things beneath it. 

The soul gets from the Trinity those finite things commensurate 
with her powers. Out of the naked Godhead there shines into the 
simple being of the soul a single light invisible to her powers, 
both high and low. For though the Godhead has in it all things, 
it has them all in one, not piecemeal. It begets not, so it is not 
Father ; it receives not, so it is not Son nor Holy Ghost. The 
three Persons are God in person and in nature Godhead. The 
Godhead shines through the distinction of Persons and through 
separate creatures down to the very lowest, illuminating them and 
illuminating itself in itself. And when the soul in her naked 
essence enters into the Godhead, all things are within her ken 
even the meanest creature; then she illuminates herself and 
“ everything in her and discerns in the Godhead the divine nature 
and in the variety of Persons she loses her name and the Persons 
lose their names in the unity and everything the unity compre- 
hends loses its name in the unity. And here the soul, as good 
now as her naught, both draw together to their close in the God- 
head’s naught, where her powers are useless. As St Diony- 
sius observes, ‘ God passes away.’ By which he signifies that the 

TRACTATES 389 

soul in her naked essence has escaped her powers. Her powers 
have lost their deity, and the pure substance of their deity as well, 
to the Persons and their powers, which powers react upon the 
essence by hindering the swing-back of the Three to unity. Here 
love loses her name and all things in the Godhead’s naught, now 
the soul has flowed into her aught. In the Godhead’s naught, 
the Father has his consummation and the three Persons their 
one nature wherein they give to creatures the perfection of their 
created aught and the soul in her aught in the Godhead’s naught 
courses through all things all undisturbed in her being’s aught. 
As St Dionysius says, ‘ The soul is not moved in her naught in 
the Godhead’s naught neither does the soul move the Godhead 
in its naught. There she is so great . . ., she flows to him as it 
were in a light.’ St Dionysius says, ‘The Godhead has come to 
naught for the powers of the soul cannot comprehend it.” 

Blessed and praised be the Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the 
unity of their divine nature. Blessed and praised be Jesus 
Christ the Son of the living God, one Person of divine nature and 
human nature. 

XVI 
THE SOUL’S RAGE 

The soul is furious for self-knowledge. Her face is lit with | 
passion, red with rage for the arrears withheld from her in God, | 
because she is not all God is by nature, because she has not all | 
God has by nature. 

The masters say there is no fiercer appetite than a friend’s 
desire to possess his friend and all that he possesses. The soul 
proclaims her rage so boundless she cannot be appeased by him. 
The bonds of love are all too cruel for her. Alas! she cries, 
who shall console me? My misery is too deep. Were I the 
one creator, beginningless and endless, and had I made creatures 
and were he soul like me, then I would go straight out of my 
estate and let her enter in and be God while I was creature; 
and if it were an obstacle to God to get his being from me, he 
would be welcome to efface me for I would perish sooner than be 
a hindrance to him. But seeing it is common to everything © 
created to have somewhat of the eternal in man’s nature ever 
present in it, therefore I know not where to turn to find a place. 
So I take refuge in myself and there I find the lowest place, aye, 
one more base than hell for even thence do my shortcomings 
hound me. It seems I cannot then escape myself. Here I sit 
me down and herein will I stay. And I beseech thee, Lord, that 
thou never callest me to mind and forbiddest any creature ever 

890 MEISTER ECKHART 

. to console me and deniest to my powers that ever any one of them 
should come before thy face, lest I offend thee. So I go out and. 
let the soul go in. 

The third rage of the soul is that she should be God and that 
there should not be a single creature, like when God was in his 
eternity ere he created creature, so that she may enjoy God- 
nature in its simplieity as he did before. But then his love were 
lacking to him, for it is the nature of good things to communicate 
themselves. 

Fourthly, she rages to be absolutely nothing but the naked 
‘essence, there being neither God nor creature. She asks, What 
) is the good of the three Persons in the Godhead and what is the 
| use of creatures? But hold, she cries, except for them there 

' would be no creatures. That must be the reason why there are 

| three Persons in the Godhead: they are the cause of creatures. 

| God is God-exalted: the creatures he has made cannot exalt 

‘him. All that creatures do to God is themselves: such glory as 

\ they can give to God is the same as they are. 

XVII 
THE TWOFOLD WAY! 

Ego sum via, veritas et vita, “I am the way, the truth and the 
life,’ says our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark specially the words, ‘I 
am the way.’ In a twofold sense we take Christ as the way: 
according to his manhood and according to his Godhead. His 
manhood was the way of our own manhood. This we have to 
follow, both the counsel of perfection as a whole and also in its 
parts. If but one of our members leaves the way of his example 
we are thereby deformed. St Paul declares we ought to live so 
that God may find in us the perfect reflection of all his divine 
works, i.e. we must copy the exemplar he has set before us. That 
is true spiritual life. But this is greatly hampered by numerous 
defects ; mainly numerous interior shortcomings due to the powers 
of our soul being disorderly. The joy of the soul should be so 
set upon its proper work that no created things can gladden her 
but only the fact that her consciousness is clear. As Christ said 
to his disciples, ‘ Rejoice not in anything except in this, that your 
names are written in the book of life.” And the fear of the soul 
should be so well controlled that she fears nothing under God 
either for person or possessions, nor aught that may be inflicted 
upon her whether by God or creature. And similarly with the 

1 See Pfeiffer, Zt. f. dtsch. Alt., Bd. 8 (2), 1850, and Preger, Zt. f. hist. Theol., 
_ Bd. 34, 1864 (two versions). Also Jostes, Nos. 18 and 19. For authorship sce 
Preger’s Geschichte, vol. i, p. 318. 

TRACTATES 391 

other powers, desire and thought. The entire soul, in short, has 

to be gathered up into the impartible simplicity of her will and her 

will must fly at the highest good and fasten itself thereto. But 

S Paul says, * He who is fastened to God becomes one spirit with 
im. 

Behold how rich is the spirit grown thus one spirit with God ! 
No things can enrich it though it hold sway over them all. For 
things are necessaries whereas its riches consist in its dwelling in 
a nature superior to creaturely necessity. He who has nothing 
and needs nothing is richer than the man who possesses all things 
with necessity. St Paul says: ‘ Our sufficiency is in God alone 
whose able ministers we are.’ 

Nor do the virtues enrich the spirit. Doctors declare that it 
is not, properly speaking, the virtues which enrich the spirit but 
the fruit of virtues. The soul has virtues of necessity. But 
virtues being a necessity, the spirit is of necessity not enriched 
by them. The utmost a spirit can attain to in this body is to 
dwell in a condition beyond the necessity of virtues; where 
goodness as a whole comes natural to it so that not only is it 
possessed of virtues but virtue is part and parcel of it: it is 
virtuous not of necessity but of innate good nature. Arrived at 
this the soul has traversed and transcended all necessity for 
virtues : they are now intrinsic in her. Now she has reached the 
goal whither the virtues merely pointed her, to wit, the infusion 
of the Holy Ghost. This is the fruit of virtue ; this alone serves 
to enrich the spirit. Concerning this St Paul says: ‘ Put on the 
new man, Christ,’ who was in this way our way. 

The other way is the way of his Godhead. 

— What way has the Godhead and where can it go seeing it is 
in all places; and wherewithal does it go seeing that it has no 
feet nor anything bodily ? 

—The way of the Godhead is the unity wherein the three Persons 
run together into one essence. The going of the Persons consists 
in their mutual knowing and loving, each knowing and loving 
itself in the others. Thus do the Persons walk together in unity. 

The feet with which the Godhead enters the Persons and the 
Persons the essence are: the one foot of the Godhead is foresight 
of all things ; the other, pleasure in the things eternally foreseen, 
for God enjoys eternalwise the contingency of things. This refers 
to the eternal image. He enjoys only good in all things : image 
of all things which is very God. 

It may be questioned, What pleasure does God enjoy ? 

All things must needs please him for he who saw was God and 
what he saw was likewise God. In their eternal image which is 
God himself, God saw himself and saw things as a whole. God 

392 MEISTER ECKHART 

enjoyed himself, God being in himself the unique one. The soul 
sees her impartible idea in God, which has never come out of him. 
This her multiform image does, and the consummation of her 
spirit lies in the reduction of its here created aught to the naught 
of its eternal prototype. God is the origin of the spirit and the 
spirit never rests till it returns into its origin, to its eternal proto- 
type. Essentially this prototype is God wherefore it aye eludes 
the spirit which is never able quite to apprehend it. Yet it divines 
how it has been in God eternalwise without itself; and the 
supremest bliss the spirit knows is to relapse into its origin, to its 
eternal image, wherein, as self, it is lost altogether. There the 
spirit loses its uses not its essence. The essence of the Godhead 
sucks the spirit out of itself into itself, making it as itself, so that 
there seems now but one essence. As though I were to take 
blood of a serpent—which is very red—and pour it into a trans- 
parent glass; the glass would lose its seeming not its substance. 
So in this union the divine light illuminates and outshines the 
spirit which shines one light with it. The spirit loses its seeming 
not its substance for God has fetched the spirit out and united it 
with himself. Natheless the spirit in this union can never plumb 
the depths of Godhead. As St Paul discovered when, caught up 
to the third heaven, he saw things not permissible, nay, not possible 
to speak of, and cried out : ‘ O thou depth of the riches of wisdom 
and knowledge, how unsearchable are thy judgments and thy 
ways past finding out.’ God’s riches consist in having nothing 
and being nothing that can be clothed in words. His wisdom 
consists in the well-ordering of things. God’s knowledge is his 
conception of himself in his supernal light. Concerning which 
St Dionysius says, ‘ The light God dwells in is his own nature 
which is known to none besides himself.’ This is the highway of 
the Godhead which no creature ever trod. Of it God spake by 
his prophet: ‘ As the heavens are higher than the earth so are 
my ways higher than thy ways.’—St Augustine says, There is 
nothing more difficult and more exacting nor at the same time 
more useful and salutary to the soul than excursions in the science 
of the holy Trinity and unity. 

Mark well, therefore, the meaning of the Persons and the 
essence. 

—What is a Person in the Trinity ? 

—A Person is that which preserves its own rational individuality 
apart from any other distinct Person. One Person is not another. 
The work of the Persons consists in the genesis and output of 
things. Genesis belongs to the Father alone; outputting of 
things to the Trinity jointly. 

—What is the essence of the three Persons in the Trinity ? 

TRACTATES 393 

—That which, impartible, contains all things impartibly while 
of itself as essence it neither generates nor produces things. That 
is done by the three Persons which activate the essence or it 
could do nothing. Nevertheless the Persons do not act as three : 
they work as one God. 

—What is the potentiality of the essence ? 

—The potentiality of the essence lies in not being a rational 
Person: in persisting in its essential unity. Not that it differs 
from the Persons ; this same essence is the essential nature of the 
Persons and the being of all things. Existence of all existing 
things, life of all living things, the light of lights and nature of 
natures: all this it is in its impartibility. Not so with the 
Persons ; they are not the personality of things as essence is the 
essence of all things. The Father is not able to be anybody’s 
person but his own. He gat another Person out of his Person 
not out of his essence: with his nature in his nature. That the 
Father was able to produce a Son so rarely, so consummately his 
like, a God as perfect as himself, is due to his essential nature. 
When he begets the Son the Father gives him another Person 
than his own Person but not another nature nor another essence 
than his own. It follows that the essence is revealed in the 
procession of the Persons. The Persons are able to reveal the 
essence which cannot of itself reveal itself, seeing that of itself, 
as essence, it neither gets nor bears. This impotence of the 
essence is its chief potentiality ; nevertheless it is revealed to 
itself. 

The Persons know and comprehend the essence equally. The 
essence hears the same relation to all the Persons. Now it is a 
question among theologians whether or no the personality has 
basic knowledge and comprehension of the essence, seeing that 
the essence is comprehended only by the essence ? 

The Persons have basic knowledge and comprehension of the 
essence because this is the Persons’ own essential nature; more- 
over, the essence is not comprehended wholly save by the three 
Persons, whose nature it is. The Persons comprehend the essence 
wholly, they being God in Person by reason of their comprehension 
of his essence which is their own essential nature. And so far as 
the soul comprehends this essence she too is divine. Though 
what she comprehends of it is no bigger than a drop compared 
with all the boundless ocean. Still it is God whole. The surplus 
good which is ever baffling her apprehension, that is the shadowy 
abyss wherein, self-lost, she sinks eternally. 

It may be questioned, Why is there not one Person like one 
essence ?—I answer that, existing things exist not from themselves 
but in eternity are descended from an origin which is the origin 

894 MEISTER ECKHART 

of its own self and in time have been created out of nothing by the 
blessed Trinity. Their eternal origin is the Father and the 
universal image in him is the Son; love to this same image is the 
Holy Ghost. Had not this archetype of all things been always 
in the Father, the Father could never have wrought anything at 
all. That is, in his modeless essence. There must be more than 
one Person, for it was in the eternal procession (that is, in the 
begetting of) the Son that things as a whole emanated from the 
Father and not from themselves. This eternal procession is the 
cause of things on their eternal side, but in time they were created 
from nothing and in this sense they are creatures. In the eternal 
procession wherein they flowed without themselves, they are God 
in God. For as St Dionysius says, the Prime Cause generates all 
things in the likeness of itself. 

Now mark the difference of this emanation in eternity and time. 
What is the (temporal) emanation? It is the indulgence of his 
love of clear discrimination. So we come forth into time by 
constraint of his love. The eternal procession is the revelation 
of himself to himself. The knower being that which is known. 
This is the eternal flow no drop of which did ever fall into any 
created intelligence; it is the Son from the Father. In the 
temporal emanation things flowed forth finite. In the eternal 
emanation they remain infinite. The flow goes flowing on in 
itself. As St Dionysius hath it, ‘God is a fountain flowing into 
itself.’ 

The Father is the origin of his Son, in his eternal child-bearing ; 
Father and Son originate their Spirit, in the eternal out-pouring. 
But, someone may question, how about the Father-nature? Is 
it the cause (of the essence or is the essence cause) of the 
Paternity ? 

What follows needs clear thinking. Essence as essence neither 
gives nor takes. Now were the essence origin of the Father then the 
essence, being parent, would not be essence, it would be Person. 
But it is not; for essence in its unity is not Person. Again, 
were paternity the origin of essence the cause of this would be 
the paternal Person. But this is not so either. The Father in 
Person is a cause but not of essence; for paternity and essence 
have the same characteristic. That is why, in his paternity, he 
is the omnipotent cause. The essence cannot be apart from 
Person nor can Person be apart from nature, as ye can see. For 
nothing that exists can be without its nature, since it cannot take 
leave of itself ; it must be what it is. Now the Father is a Person 
and he cannot be a Person without a nature nor can his nature 
be without a Person. Given his nature, there must be someone 
whose nature it is. Note then that the essence can in nowise 

TRACTATES 895 

exist without distinction and hypostasis. Person and hypostasis 
can in nowise be without their nature, to wit, their essence. 

Thus it is demonstrated that neither is the essence cause of 
paternity nor paternity cause of the essence, for neither can be 
without the other. The Son cannot be without the Father nor 
the Father without the Son nor the twain without the Holy Ghost 
albeit they have three properties to distinguish them apart. 
Not so with paternity and essence. Neither of these can be 
without the other. For albeit essence is not Person nor Person 
essence yet paternity and essence have the same nature so 
that neither can be said to be the origin of the other; for it is 
with one and the same nature that the Father originates his Son 
and these twain originate their Spirit which is of one nature with 
them both. 

All hail to the exalted spirit that is received into this full, this 
naked knowledge which is unknown to those that are not naked 
of themselves. For the soul to be naked she must turn away 
from all the images and forms spread out before her and stop at 
none of them. For the divine nature is no form nor semblance 
that she can understand. Being turned away from these towards 
what transcends them—divorced, that is, from images and forms 
—the soul receives the likeness of the formless nature of God whose 
real form has never been revealed to any creature. This is the 
secret door into the divine nature, which the soul has in the image. 
For when the soul has naught to stay her, she is ready to pass into 
the image of God whereto none can attain be he not stripped of 
spiritual matter. Alas, how they obstruct this secret passage, 
those who so lightly stop in temporal things! Wherein I also 
acknowledge my wretchedness. In this sense St Dionysius exhorted 
his disciples, saying, ‘ An thou wouldst know the hidden mystery 
of God, transcend whatever hinders thy pure perception.’ When 
with her pure intellect now illumined with divine light, the naked 
soul sees God, then she knows herself. And when she sees how apt 
she is to him, how she is his and how they are both one, then, 
the burden of the body permitting, she remains thus always. 
This lofty intuition the soul has of the hidden mystery of God is 
that of which Job tells: ‘In the horror of a vision by night he 
cometh and whispereth in the ears of men.’ What does he mean 
by the horror? Solieitude for this perception we are speaking of. 
The nocturnal vision is the revelation of the hidden truth. And 
the whispering is the flowing union wherein knower and known 
are one. 

This book is difficult and obscure to many people. Publish it 
not I pray you for God’s sake, for it was forbidden to me to do so. 
If any condemn it, forsooth it is the fault of his blindness for it is 

396 MEISTER ECKHART 

the absolute truth. But if there be in it things inaptly expressed, 
do not wilfully misunderstand it, for words fail in speaking of 
the divine nature. Its meaning is clear in the truth which is 
with Christ and in Christ. Wherefor may he be blessed and 
praised for ever. Amen. 

XVIII 
COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPEL OF ST JOHN 

The profound Gospel of St John begins: in principio erat 
verbum, that is to say : 

‘In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God 
and the Word was God.’ He who would grasp the interpretation 
of these abstruse writings of St John, which with God’s help I 
shall unfold, let him turn his mind from created things and from 
his own understanding, that being illumined by God’s spirit he 
may apprehend the meaning I shall give to these dark sayings. 

To start with, I premise from his words, ‘ in the beginning,’ a 
beginning without beginning. In God’s name I proceed. In 
the beginning was the Word : in the source of the effulgent formal 
light of rational creature and in the origin of its radiance the 
Word subsisted as the perfect Word, perfect in its wordless 
potentiality, and this wordless word was with God. This gives 
me a. hint of some distinction, the word being with God. Now 
bring your best intelligence to bear on this. When the bound 
word of the Persons’ unity remained unuttered by the omnipotent 
intellect, then the Word, suspended in its divine origin tran- 
scended all words and names. When it was with God in the 
providential light dawning devoid of the created universe, then 
God was manifest to the world. Wherefore I, Meister Eckhart, 
do affirm: as soon as God was he created the world, the world 
being with God distinct in name. Whereas God in his motionless 
power was free from God and every name, God was the unspoken 
word in the bottomless abyss of his divine nature wherein the 
Word as such did never throughly understand itself. A thing 
that understands itself waxes and wanes in the act of understand- 
ing, but this word does not wax or wane, it is unchanging in itself, 
so it has never understood itself in itself albeit it is the 
intellect of the Father. It was in the beginning of the new 
procession of the Son that that the Son proceeded forth into the 
time of natural images united with the word ever-abiding in the 
paternal source. This same Word wrought its entire work of 
nature after the fashion of a person, humanly, and the bound 
Word itself energises in the Father in his characteristic nature, 
this same word being eternally immanent by nature. And such 

TRACTATES 397 

being the nature of the Word it is therefore porssible to say, 
‘ In the beginning was the Word.’ 

I will now give the psychic interpretation, which whosoever 
cannot understand let him go to the truth for enlightenment. 

In the beginning of the divine nature the soul is seeking herself 
above the points of time. Cast into the abysmal naught of the 
divine nature, her receptivity all gone, her portion in her felicity is 
the perfect naught that distinguishes her from creatures generally. 
As our Lord says, ‘ Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is 
perfect.’ But were it that the soul could know God with his own 
peculiar nature she would be loving something above God. Accord- 
ingly I say, that this word subsisting in the essential activity of 
the divine nature is the soul wholly deprived of receptivity, for 
with this she would be loving herself and all she is with a personal 
nature. So she may properly affirm herself to be the work of 
God in the beginning where, albeit she is formless, she is expressing 
form. But the form she gets from God is gotten by the sealing 
in the soul of God’s own nature. In the beginning of her nothing- 
ness was the word and the word was with God as Son and the 
Word was God. 

He goes on to say, ‘ The same was in the beginning with God.’ 
Mark, I have just said, ‘ In the beginning was the Word.’ Now 
I say, ‘and the Word was in the beginning with God.’ From 
these cryptic statements it appears that the Word was with God 
‘in the beginning. Now I suggest an obvious rational meaning. 
* The word was in the beginning with God.’ I say, in the principle 
of paternity this same principle is to the Father the source of his 
entire Godhead, personal and essential, of Son and Spirit. 

St John says, ‘The word was in the beginning with God.’ 
Since there is in the Father an outpouring of his causeless divinity 
into the Word of his Son, this must occur in the paternal mind 
when, looking upon himself in the light of his abiding intellect, 
he perceives himself in the answering reflection in his divine 
essence ; or, in other words, the conception of the Word is God. 
Moreover by this reflection of his divine nature the intellect of 
the Father fashions or utters itself in imitation of his nature. 
So the Word is Son and it is in the divine substance, to wit, in the 
intellectual reflection of the Father, that occurs this birth of the 
Word proceeding, thus it is one in essence and distinct in Berson, 
Hence we may say: ‘ The same was in the beginning with God ’ 
and because introspection and reflection of the divine nature are 
involved in its continuous thinking of itself, therefore this birth 
is eternal. For if once this reflection were to stop, if mental 
holiday, inertia, should once supervene, there would remain one 
God without distinction of Persons. Thus the Word of the 

398 “MEISTER ECKHART 

Father subsists eternally in its parental origin. Thereby it is ever 
being conceived and being born and born. The same was in the 
father-principle with God as distinct Person. This may well 
stand in lieu of my former explanations of the passage, ‘ In the 
beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the 
Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.’ This 
is now fully explained. 

Next come the words, ‘ All things were made by him and 
without him was not anything made.’ Examine this carefully. 
Granting that all things were made by him and that without him 
nothing was made, then supposing someone asks me, * Can God 
do anything without me seeing, that all things were made by him 
and without him was not anything made?’ I answer, No. 
God made all things with me standing in the groundless ground 
of God; God made all things through me while I stood in 'him 
idle. While the Father was performing the act peculiar to his 
nature I was standing right in the gate through which all things 
return perfectly free to their supreme felicity. As our Lord said, 
‘ Father, to know thee one true God and only Son, that is eternal 
life.’ If life eternal be aught beside the rational soul I have no 
knowledge of it. 

To return. Since I was lying dormant in the personal nature of 
the Father when he created creatures as a whole in his own nature, 
it follows that I was working with him ; I was the work of God 
wherein he wrought all things as giver, I being then conscious in 
my Personal nature of co-operating with the divine nature in this 
divine process. All the while I was working with him I was 
resting in God’s nature exactly as I was in God before I was 
created. God made the universe and I with him, standing as I 
did all undefined albeit substantial in the Father. 

Observe further, ‘ All things were made by him.’ If everything 
was made by him and without him nothing was made, then I 
affırm there is a power in the soul centred in the perennial now in 
the paternal heart and in the nature of God; nor does it differ 
from the essential nature of God save in being the created image 
of God, as one saint observes: ‘ What the soul cannot conceive 
by nature can never be hers by grace.’ Like corn-seed dropped 
into the ground and lost to view, even so the seed or spark in the 
soul is shed from the essential nature of the Father, and is 
shining back into the incomprehensible essence, into that wherein 
the soul conceives superintelligibly, beatifically. There, in beatific 
mode, bereft of life and power, she returns to the uncreated 
good where, robbed of every faculty, she is the image in the 
Trinity, as our Lord said, ‘ Father, make them one with us.’ And 
when my soul, doffing her beatific habit, is buried in the paternal 

TRACTATES 399 

field, in the living vine, as the gospel says: when in this sense I 
lose myself and come into my own as the rightful Son, then I 
with God do make all things and the Word is in the beginning with 
God. 

Take the next words, “and without him was not anything 
made.’ I offer this interpretation of them. In all rational 
creatures I find the quest of God. They forge ahead according 
to the time and will bestowed upon it. But without him nothing 
is accomplished, in those creatures namely who, even as the brutes, 
stop at their outward powers; their mental works are worthless, 
lacking as they do the divine light and spiritual freedom which 
gives them permanence. Christ says, ‘ What my heavenly Father 
planted not shall be plucked up, yea by the very roots.’ That is 
all I want to say about this passage. 

Take the next, ‘ What was made, in him was the life.’ To see 
what this means, turn O ye blessed and commune with the under- 
standing of your uncreated intellect. ‘ What was made, in him 
was the life.” In this eternal procession, wherein all things pro- 
ceeded forth without themselves, they were now; but in time they 
were created from nothing and their life is in him. Thereof they 
are the creatures, the effect of that cause, the patent of his power 
resplendent in luminous detail. Thus we came forth into time; 
but the revelation of himself to himself is in his eternal procession 
where the knower is the same as what is known, to wit, the eternal 
emanation which is the Son from the Father, in whom all things 
flow forth. Thus what was made was the life in him. 

Look you. All rational creatures proceeded from God alike, 
‘ wherefore I say: all things participate in every intellectual 
mode. I hold that in her abstract understanding every rational 
soul knows the uncreated image which is her life. Now if my life 
and the life of all creatures is in God, I ask then, Can God know 
himself in me without my soul? I answer, No. Man knows heat 
apart from the fire and light apart from the sun but God cannot 
know himself without the soul. And why? Because the soul is the 
out-flowing stream of the eternal deity and she is sealed in the 
image of the blessed Trinity. By this she knows she is God’s 
creation. Therein I know the love of the divine fire whereby 
rational creatures are illumined. Isay: as the Father made me 
naked and free that I might stay and make my home in the 
groundless ground of the innermost heart of the Godhead, even 
so my soul must be utterly despoiled if I am to be beatified with 
God. As St Paul observes, ‘ He who is joined to God is one spirit 
with him.’ The Father cannot know himself without me, seeing 
that I stand in the ground of his eternal deity wherein his whole 
incomprehensible work is wrought with me and what is compre- 

400 MEISTER ECKHART 

hended that I am. By which I mean the light of the divine 
Sun, the universal life-giver, therefore I see that God cannot 
know himself without me. ‘ The life was the light of men,’ St John 
says. 

Der realize the marvellous significance of this. What I say is: 
the life which is the light of men is man himself understanding 
(conceiving) himself in the wonder of the primordial power of 
the Father, in the leaping forth of his mysterious naught, in the 
blinding light of his indwelling Word brought forth in eternal 
creation, albeit the uncreated nature of the nameless. essence. 
It is his nature and his wont, with perfectly receptive understand- 
ing, to take the incomprehensible essence for his own nature 
whereby the wonders of the negating naught are revealed to him, , 
the night of the mind becoming bright like noon in the light of 
his pure primitive perfection and his distinct ineffable perfections 
shine out as clear as day. As David says, ‘ The truth shall not 
be hidden from thee and thy night shall be as light as day.” And 
as his light is so is his enlightenment for in the naked essence 
man knows himself even as he is known. Which knowing, our 
Lord said, ‘I am the door of my sheep-fold.’ In these words he 
invites us. to enter by the door of his emanation and return into 
the source whence we came forth, for this gives promise in us of 
something more than is afforded by the soul’s beatitude. 

Haply thou wilt say, ‘Good Brother, if the life is become the 
light of men enabling them to know themselves as they are known, 
is it then possible for me to know myself the very Son of God ?’ 
I answer and say, that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, is 
so attached to the Father’s nature that never for an instant does 
he quit the paternal mode of deity. He wrought his whole work 
in that nature and into that nature which gives being to all things 
and he did so freely, in absolute idleness, for no reason at all. 
Here, bound to human nature, I have to work above nature 
freely, in absolute idleness or motionless quiet, so as not to be 
hindered by myself and by my personal nature and by things 
which are conditioned by time and temporalities; for to know 
all things in the cause of their existence I must soar beyond all 
lights, temporal and eternal, and plunge into the causeless essence 
which gives mind and being to my soul. Drowned in this being, 
aware of self and things merely as being, my soul has lost her name 
and there remains no nature but that which, in the Father, is 
eternally in travail with the Son and as such I am a new man born 
in his nature and doing all I do supernaturally in the divine nature. 
As our Lord said, ‘ When I am lifted up I will draw all things 
after me.’ So I being lifted up with all my powers into the. 
uncreated good do be with Christ one body and with God one 

TRACTATES . 401 

spirit and do draw all things to me in one pure, perfect nature. 
As the gospel says, ‘ This is my beloved Son in whom I am well 
_ pleased.’ Knowing myself none other than the Son of God, in 

that same sonship I am cast into my middle power and that in 
the perennial now, thus the eternal Word is born in me unceasingly, 
as our Lord says, ‘ Father, glorify thy Son.’ In this interpretation 
lies the explanation of the words, ‘ How hardly does the rich man 
enter the kingdom of heaven.’ Christ says in effect that the life 
is none other than the naked spark alight within the soul, which 
in the groundless Godhead knows itself none but God; to wit, 
the light which in rational creatures is splendid with the truth. 
I might give another meaning but I fear ye could not follow it. 

To continue: ‘ The light shineth in the darkness and the dark- 
ness comprehendeth it not.’ I make no comment here save to 
lament to the eternal truth what numbers fail to realize the high 
perfection, the deep happiness, glowing unseen within the soul. 
Christ says, ‘ Blessed be the eyes which see the things ye see.’ 
He did not mean our bodily eyes, he meant those eyes, twin powers 
of the soul, set in her mind. As the gospel says, ‘ There was a 
man sent from God whose name was John.’ Verily, be they male 
or female, these souls are John, for John denotes the grace of God. 
What is grace ? There is a power in the soul which is idle and does 
no work ; this is none other than the image of God, not that grace 
is itself this image, it is its form which reforms and transfigures 
the soul; and in this re-formation wherein she has no form, in 
this transformation in which she has all forms, the omniform form, 
there is this quiet the soul has, she being self-contained because 
the truth is in her: not as hers nor as a quality. As Christ said, 
‘ He that enjoyeth me liveth eterfially.’ Such an one is sent from 
God but is not God-forsaken. Christ says, ‘He that sent me 
-sendeth me not alone, he sendeth also every one that doeth the 
will of my Father.’ 

_ There are four signs to tell a man that he is sent from God. 
First, that in time he is superior to time and temporalities. 
Secondly, being therein he is detached from creatures. The 
third is, that he is idle or quiet-minded. The fourth is, that 
he is not changeable by nature. Christ said, ‘I am that I 
am.’ Possessing these a man may take it that he is sent from 
God and his name is John for he is the grace of God itself. 
Hence Paul’s words, ‘ God is my soul’s new form wherein she is 
formless.’ 

Pass on to the next. ‘ He came to bear witness to the light that 
“all might believe in him.’ Examine this carefully. The words 
are open to a purely figurative interpretation. Just as he (John) 
bore witness to the light of the divine unity concealed * Christ 
2 

402 MEISTER ECKHART 

in order that all might believe in him, so forerunning intuition 
tells the soul of insight into the innermost recesses of the mind 
where shines the spark which knows itself none other than the 
uncreated good of the ineffable Deity. Then the soul with all 
her powers acknowledges and affirms the Son eternally in the 
Father and eternally born of the Father who is without beginning. 
As Christ said, ‘ Whoso heareth my Word and keepeth it liveth 
forever.’ 

Now take this in another sense. I will put a question and 
answer it myself: What reference has this to the true light ? 
Look you. There is a power in the soul called mind, God sent it 
with the soul, it is her storehouse of incorporeal forms and intel- 
lectual notions. This soul-capacity the Father fashions in his 
outflowing divinity whereby all the words of his divine essence 
flow into the word in our mind in distinction of Person just as 
memory pours out treasure of images into the powers of the soul. 
When the soul sees in this power the form of a rational creature, 
an angel’s or her own form, the idea of the Father is clearly 
impressed in the soul angelically. But on penetrating deeper, into 
the very centre of the soul, intellect finds God there in this power 
face to face, and in this capacity, if she recollect herself to con- 
template the vision of God in her, there wakes another power of 
the soul called understanding and the eternal Word is born, 
conceived by the soul while subsisting eternal in the Father, 
these two powers forming one amicable disposition which gives 
direction to the intellect and is its will towards its source. When 
the spirit is flowing from the Father and the Son into this power 
and into all the powers she has, the soul, oriented to God, grows 
cognisant of his image as her eternal prototype in God and she 
perceives too how the holy Trinity is sealed in her. Thus the 
energies of the soul all bear witness to the light of the blessed 
Trinity that gives light to all mankind and they acknowledge and 
affirm and believe in the Son born in this man without ceasing. 
As the gospel says, ‘ He was not the light but bare witness to the 
light.’ 

Mark what follows. ‘That was the true light, which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world.’ Throw wide now the ears 
of understanding to catch the arcane meaning of the boundary 
between created and uncreated light which is plainly indicated in 
St John’s words, ‘ That was the true light.’ Taking the name 
John to mean the light of grace, as said above, then I propose to 
show what may be rightly termed ‘ the true light that lighteth 
every man,’ which we receive direct. 

I distinguish five lights. The first is devilish light, the second 
natural light, the third is angelic light, the fourth is spiritual 

sd 

TRACTATES 403 

ee the fifth is divine light. Mark carefully how these five lights 
iffer. 

The first or devilish light leads all astray from the truth. This 
can be seen in cases where the outward man is not entirely in 
sympathy with the inward man. Supposing then that the in- 
ward man is sunk into his inner mind, where the eternal Word 
is born in the perennial now, the sudden shock of seeing the out- 
ward man pictured in the uncertain, fluctuating light of time, 
will distort the light of his understanding and stop the eternal 
birth from taking place. This shows it to be devilish light and it 
behoves you therefore to turn away from it to the peace and quiet 
of your higher mind. By this means Mary in her virginity, being 
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, contrived to shun ideas ofıtemporal 
things and thus, transcending time, to harmonise her inner and 
her outer man into one settled calm, quite free from images, and 
this shows you the difference between this devilish light and the 
divine light. 

_ The second light is natural light. The line of demarcation 
between natural light and the divine light comes where soul sees 
spirit direct in very truth. Thinking in natural light, in random 
images, human nature is changing, waxing and waning, sensible 
of weal and woe, as Christ shows by his death and passion. But 
when human nature is face to face with her proper self she is 
reflected into the divine nature. I ask then, does the soul in this 
natural light remain changeless in time? I say, no. That is a 
supertemporal state of union with the divine light and by the 
grace of God. Being drawn or caught up into the suavity of the 
indwelling spirit of God, the soul loves universal human nature 
as her own nature, as God has been loving it eternally, where this 
nature is set over time in the light of glory. Apart from this light, 
this man has the natural light of indwelling grace and at the point 
where he expresses the idea everything in this light of nature 
must needs fade away out of time, as I have said. Even so Mary 
was changeless by nature inasmueh as she was free from sinful 
accidents in the idea of her created nature wherein she knew 
and loved all mankind. Here ye have the difference between the 
light of nature in time and light of that nature beyond time in 
eternal glory. To me it proves that all creatures are one man, 
loving God by nature. 

The third light is angelic light. Now you must know that every 
individual angel is always open to any ideas that he may choose, 
one more than another according to the idiosyncrasy of his angelic 
nature. Their stability is not impaired thereby provided they 
know and will and love in idleness. This uncreated understanding 
Lucifer had, and if Lucifer in his creaturehood had seen into the 

404 MEISTER ECKHART 

light of nature, if his creature nature had veered round in his 
angelic nature to his formless divine nature, he would never have 
fallen from the truth. As Isaiah observes, ‘ The angelic light in 
man is the means.’ In the divine light the soul is not subject to 
ideas nor can any shape appear to her now that she knows, with 
knowledge that transcends the soul’s, of the incarnation of the 
Word. Even so Mary, aloof in absolute purity of mind and body, 
knew creatures as a whole in super-angelic light and her mind 
conceiving no form save the unformed form of God, she knew 
herself to be the ornament of God not fashioned in the form of any 
creature. Wherefore she cried, ‘ My spirit hath rejoiced in God 
my saviour.’ 

The fourth light is spiritual light, which is moreover the medium 
of the light of grace in the mind. In this light of the spirit ye 
know how to order things in your mind with a view to the con- 
templation and enjoyment of the groundless essence in your soul. 
Absorbed therein ye are aware that the divine deep transcends 
the highest height of creatures. Why, I ask, was Peter oblivious 
of himself upon the mountain when Christ was transfigured before 
his three disciples ? I answer, that the spiritual light of his mind 
was eclipsed by interior vision of the divine light : he forgot his 
own form on perceiving himself in this glory as the reflection 
ever streaming back to its paternal source. By formlessly appre- 
hending in itself the bound Word whereto Christ knew himself 
united, he was taking the Christ-image for his own image. How- 
beit he was not ravished into the divine light of the perfect intellect 
but he was caught up into the spiritual light of its reflection 
shining back into its actual self. Beyond this spiritual light 
Mary was ravished when at the annunciation she conceived the 
Word in the word begotten according to the love of men. 

The fifth light is divine light. Therein stood Mary always, 
bearing her gracious child. But Christ was born of her bodily. 
This birth transcends all sense and reason and whoso is rapt away 
into this unveiled light perceives himself none other than that 
essence wherein God has his being, his very Godhead. An we 
would bear with Mary this eternal Word we must be caught up 
past the four lights into this fifth where we are ever giving 
birth to God in spirit as Mary bare him in the flesh. _ 

To continue. ‘ He was in the world and the world knew him 
not,’ vide what was said above anent the difference between created 
and uncreated light. I say, this means in the world of his pro- 
vidential knowledge. What time the world was in the Father 
as uncreated essence, his light, his flowing intellect to wit, was 
shining on this world-stuff wherein the world subsisted in the 
Father in uncreated formless simplicity. But in its first eruption 

TRACTATES 405 

the world leaps forth manifold albeit this multiplieity is one 
essentially. In this eruption this world was self-luminous light. 

Mark a second interpretation of the words, ‘He was in the 
world and the world was made by him.’ By this world I under- 
stand none other than the divine man. See how this divine light 
may be called the world. Isay, man has within his soul the power 
of being all creatures, stones, trees and all the rest of them, 
and that in this same potentiality his mind has gotten the universal 
prototype of creatures discriminately. So within the ambit of 
her five senses the soul compares with rational and irrational 
creatures. In this sense the soul has gotten both the form and 
matter, the rational and irrational natures of creature generally. 
In this sense all things were made in man. And by the same 
token, before God made everything as such, hell, purgatory, 
everything, was God: this man is the world this light was in, 
this is the world that was made by him. John says, ‘ All things 
were made by him and without him was not anything made.’ 
From which I can only gather that multitudinous man too is the 
world, to wit the world of darkness which comprehended not the 
light referred to in Christ’s words, ‘I am the light of the world 
and whoso walketh in me walketh not in darkness.’ Here our 
Lord is inviting rational men to follow his example. 

He goes on to say, ‘ He came into his own and his own received 
him not.’ This refers to Christ and I apply it to the individual 
soul as well. He is come into his own and his own have neither 
known him nor accepted him. Isay : whatever is found in Christ’s 
nature is found in the highest power of the soul, therefore God is 
man’s own, but his own is not received. by him. I refer to the 
intellectual five senses. Clearly we have a parable of this in the 
woman at the well to whom Christ said, ‘ Show me thy husband.’ 
The woman answered, ‘I have no husband.’ Christ said, ‘ Thou 
sayest truly: thou hast had five husbands and him whom thou 
now hast“is not really thy husband.’ I take it that her interests 
had lain in her five senses. Christ’s words, ‘ him whom thou now 
hast is not really thy husband,’ I interpret to mean that she was 
neglecting the intellect she had so it was no true man to her. 
When God comes sensibly to the soul, which is his own, he is 
received by what is not his own, to wit the outward senses and 
inward faculties of the soul. When God is conceived by the soul 
insensibly then we can say, ‘our abode is in heaven.’ This 
passage is clear in the light of the foregoing. 

I Brother John, propound two questions. They concern the 
statement, ‘ But as many as received him, to them gave he power 
to become God’s sons, even to them that believe in his name.’ 
I ask in the first place, does the power to become God’s sons lie 

406 MEISTER ECKHART 

with us or with God ? In the second I ask, what name do we 
believe in? My answers are briefly as follows. 

To start with it must be borne in mind that God is without 
will, without love, without justice, without mercy, nay without 
divinity or anything we can ascribe to him or predicate of him or 
attribute to him (for any good attributed to God or predicated of 
him simply reduces God to naught), so it is with the soul that lies the 
power, the ability to make this her own will; in her real will she 
is incapable of stooping to anything opposed to the nature of that 
will, and at the point where God and spirit vanish, in that same 
point I am the Son of God, begotten of God eternally according 
to Christ’s words, ‘ I am the only-begotten Son of God,’ for I am 
free from self in all creaturehood. Where I am God is and where 
God is I am and our joint love is God and he who dwells in this 
love dwells in God and God in him. Then mine is the highest 
angel God has in heaven, as much as he is God’s, by whose power 
and by whose might we make ourselves God’s sons, for he em- 
powers us with himself, penetrating the will of the soul even as 
Father and Son permeate their common Spirit. That is the 
answer to the first question to the best of my knowledge at present. 

Now to answer the second question: What divine name do we 
believe in? That is written in the gospel in Christ’s words, 
‘Father, this is eternity or eternal life, to believe in thee the true 
God, i.e. truly as God.’ Truth is God, and love, as truly as God 
is God. If God is free from names then, I durst not think I have 
the name of Henry nor of Conrad nor of Ulric for by adding any- 
thing to God I block him with an idol ; but he who believes in the 
name of God rejoices in the universal name, to wit the divine 
name which we believe in. In this unfathomable light of faith, 
faith makes us of multitudinous knowledge ignorant, of multi- 
tudinous will without volition, in multitudinous form unshapen. 
And so with the prophet, ‘I say, ye are Gods.’ Believing in the 
name of God we are God’s sons. If anyone is able to give a better 
answer to these two questions I would fain hear it. 

(He goes on to say, ‘ Which were born not of blood nor of the 
will of the flesh nor of the will of man ’) for flesh and blood and 
human will unconquered cannot possess the kingdom of heaven 
till they are born again in God. This is quite clear, the meaning 
is patent to all. But I desire to speak briefly on the subject of 
manhood. 

Isay : the highest power of the soul is the man, her will namely, 
which always stands bare and uncovered. The second power is 
intellect, the woman, who is always veiled, and the lower is raised 
up to the higher. Now when the power we call the man, i.e. 
the will, is joined to the power we called the woman, the intellect, 

TRACTATES 407 

that is to say, then the woman brings forth fruit in the perennial 
now. When the male is parted from the female power man’s will 
is wavering in false light. The apostle truly says, ‘the Word was 
made fiesh.’ The manhood of Christ as seeing in[to God] has a 
reflection in the Father’s personal nature. In the groundless 
substance of the Godhead human nature stands perfectly steady, 
gazing down in the transcendent light for love of creatures. Thus 
divine and human nature’are atoned in human nature. And by 
the same token, even if Adam had not fallen yet would Christ 
have been made man by reason of the love proceeding which is 
ever being born in eternity in the divine nature and was bound to 
become man in Christ owing to the idiosyncrasy of that nature 
which flowed for aye out of the groundless ground of God. The 
smallest spark falling from out the least and lowest of the angels 
would illuminate and outshine this world and it would dim the 
brightest lights of human and angelic nature did it shine next to 
God. So Christ restores human nature not angelic nature. As his 
divinity lay hid in his humanity when ‘ the Word was made flesh ’ 
in him, so let us hide our human nature in his divine nature in 
that same Word which was incarnate. By living the Christ life 
more than my own life I am Christ rather than myself and my 
proper name is Christ rather than James or John, and so this 
befall beyond time I am changed into God. 

Now listen to another meaning, the incarnation of the Word 
in the sacrament. Just as he made his body in the sacrament 
by word and knowledge and took and gave it to his disciples 
idly, without motion or passion, that is to say, nor was this 
sacrament consummated by knowledge alone but by words as 
well, even so I observe that in the highest power of the soul, 
corresponding to the Father-nature, intellect begat itself in the 
image of Divinity to smite into this Word as perfect will and in the 
groundless love of this same will the Holy Ghost was gotten in the 
Word with this same intellect. And still this birth is ever going on 
in the sacrament to those who are Christ properly so called : these 
people are true priests and in the truth, for their going is above the 
angels and they are not to be touched by temporal things. As 
Christ said to Mary Magdalene, ‘ Touch me not for I am risen,’ 
so verily these souls are risen with Christ. God gives himself 
freely, idly, as he gave himself to his disciples in token of the 
love which works the same in us, and those who take this sacrament 
as freely and resignedly and unselfhindered, do receive it as really 
as the giver gives it and he who takes it otherwise does not wholly 
and solely resign him to the truth. When in the sacrament I 
receive God from God thus supersacramentally, I am actually 
changed into the same that I receive, thus the Word is made 

408 MEISTER ECKHART 

flesh and dwells among us mystically and wherever this is realized 
there is the proof of the divine spark, moreover I make bold to 
say, were anyone prepared for outward food as for the sacrament 
he would receive God as much as in the sacrament ; which is to 
many people a hard saying albeit quite consistent with the truth, 
for the gift prepares for its own reception and I should be the 
thing prepared for that which has prepared me. St John says, 
‘ We have his glory, the glory of the only-begotten of the Father 
full of grace and truth.’ From which I gather that anyone who 
knows the joys of the divine life is shining within and without 
like the only Son of God, as St Paul says, ‘ I live not but Christ 
liveth in me in his love.’ 

Consider what is meant by sons of God and children of God. 
To be God’s children in the sense that he created us is not enough. 
For instance. If I paint my likeness on the wall, he who sees the 
likeness is not seeing me; but anyone who sees me sees my like- 
ness and not my likeness merely but my child. If I really knew 
my soul, anyone who saw my conception of it would say it was 
my son for I share therewith my energy and nature, and as here so 
is it in the Godhead. The Father understands himself perfectly 
clearly so there appears to him his image, that is to say, his Son. 
The Father is light, the Son is light and image and the Holy 
Ghost also is light and image and inasmuch as the Father imagines 
(or conceives) his Son he is called Son and inasmuch as he endows 
him with his nature he is called his child. Likewise that man is 
the image of God who, being detached from things, is living as 
spirit in the spirit of God and such have glory and honour as the 
only Son of God full of grace and truth of the reflection of God, 
and really containing and possessing God in them; thus the 
kingdom of God is within us. 

Here endeth the Commentary on this Gospel. 

XIX? 
THE BEATIFIC VISION 

King David said: ‘Lord in thy light shall we see light.’ 
Doctors debate as to the medium in which we shall see God. 
The common doctrine is that it will be in the light of glory. But 
this solution appears to me to be unsound and untenable. From 
time to time I have explained that man has within him a light 
called the active intellect : this is the light in which man will see 
God in bliss, so they seek to prove. Now man according to his 
creaturely nature is in great imperfection and is unable by nature 

* See Preger, Geschichte der deutschen Mystiker, vol. i, p. 484, 

TRACTATES 409 

to discern God otherwise than as creatures do, by images and 
forms, as I have elsewhere demonstrated. The soul is unable of 
herself and by her own innate power to transcend this state ; that 
must happen in some supernatural power such as the light of grace. 
Mark this solution which I will now proceed to discuss. 

St Paul says: “By God’s grace I am that I am.’ He does 
not say that he is ‘of grace.’ There is a difference between 
being by grace and being grace itself. Doctors declare that form 
gives being to matter. Now there are various definitions of grace 
current among them. But I say grace is nothing else than the 
flowing light proceeding direct from God’s nature into the soul : 
a supernatural form of the soul which gives her a supernatural 
nature. This is what I had in mind when I stated that the soul 

. was unable of herself to transcend her own natural activity ; this 
she can do in the power of grace which endgws her with a super- 
natural nature. 

Observe, grace effects nothing by itself. Moreover it exalts the 
soul above activity. Grace is bestowed in the essence of the soul 
and is received into her powers ; for if the soul is to effect anything 
in this matter, she must needs have grace by virtue of which to 
transcend her own activities such as knowing and loving. Whilst 
the soul is in process of taking this transcendental flight out of 
herself into the nothingness of herself and her own activity, she 
is “by grace’; she is grace when she has accomplished this 
transcendental passage and has overcome herself and now stands 
in her pure virginity alone, conscious of nothing but of behaving 
after the manner of God. As God lives, while the soul is still 
capable of knowing and acting after the manner of her creature- 
liness and as a child of nature, she has not become grace itself 
though she may well be by grace. For to be grace itself the soul 
must be as destitute of activity, inward and outward, as grace is, 
which knows no activity. St John says: ‘ To us is given grace 
for grace,’ for to become grace by grace is the work of grace. 
The supreme function of grace-is to reduce the soul to what it 
is itself. Grace robs the soul of her own activity; grace robs 
the soul of her own nature. In this supernatural flight the soul 
transcends her natural light which is a creature and comes into 
immediate touch with God. | 

Now I would have you understand me. I am going to give an 
explanation I have never given before. The worthy Dionysius 
says: “When God exists not for the spirit there exists not for it 
either the eternal image, its eternal origin.’ I have said before 
and say again that God has wrought one act eternally in which 
act he made the soul in his own [likeness], and out of which act 

and by means of which act the soul issued forth into her created 
% 

“410 MEISTER ECKHART 

existence, becoming unlike God and estranged from her own proto- 
type, and in her creation she made God, who was not before the 
soul was made. At various times I have declared: I am the cause 
that God is God. God is gotten of the soul, his Godhead of him- 
self; before creatures were, God was not God albeit he was 
Godhead which he gets not from the soul. Now when God finds 
a naughted soul whose self and whose activity have been brought 
to naught by means of grace, God works his eternal work in her 
above grace, raising her out of her created nature. Here God 
naughts himself in the soul and then neither God nor soul is left. 
Be sure that this is God indeed, When the soul is capable of 
conceiving God’s work she is in the state of no longer having any 
God at all; the soul is then the eternal image as which God has 
always seen her, his eternal Word. When, therefore, St Dionysius 
says that God no longer exists for the spirit, he means what I have 
just explained. 

Now it may be asked whether the soul as here seen in the guise 
of the eternal image is the light meant by David wherein we shall 
see eternal light ? 

We answer, no. Not in this light will the soul see the eternal 
light that shall beatify her; for, says the worthy Dionysius, 
‘neither will the eternal image exist for the spirit.” What he 
means is that, when the spirit has accomplished its transcendental 
flight, its creaturely nature is brought to naught, whereby it loses 
God as I have already explained, and then the soul, in the eternal 
image, breaks through the eternal image into the essential image 
of the Father. Thus saith the Scriptures: ‘ Everything flows back 
in the soul into the Father who is the beginning of the eternal 
Word and of all creatures.’ 

It may be questioned whether this is the light, the Father 
namely, in which the spirit sees the eternal light ? 

I answer, no. Now mark my words. God works and has 
created all things ; the Godhead does not work, it knows nothing 
of creation. In my eternal prototype the soul is God for there 
God works and my soul has equality with the Father, for my 
eternal prototype, which is the Son in the Godhead, is.in all respects 
equal with the Father. One scripture says: ‘ Naught is equal 
with God ; to be equal with God, then, the soul must be naught.’ 
That interpretation is just. We would say, however: where 
there is equality there is no unity for equal is a privation of unity ; 
and where there is unity there is no equality for equality resides 
in multiplicity and separation. Where there is equality there 
cannot be unity. I am not equal to myself. I am the same as 
myself. Hence the Son in the Godhead, inasmuch as he is Son, 
is equal with the Father but he is not one with the Father. There 

TRACTATES 411 

is no equality where Father and Son are one ; that is, in the unity 
of the divine essence. In this unity the Father knows no Son nor 
does the Son know any Father, for there there is neither Father 
nor Son nor Holy Ghost. When the soul enters into the Son, her 
eternal prototype wherein she is equal with the Father, then, 
breaking through her eternal prototype, she, with the Son, tran- 
scends equality and possesses unity with the three Persons in the 
unity of the essence. David says: ‘ Lord in thy light shall we 
see light,’ that is: in the light of the impartible divine essence 
shall we see the diyine essence and the whole perfection of the 
divine essence as revealed in the variety of the Persons and the 
unity of their nature. St Paul says: ‘ We shall be changed from 
one brightness into the other and shall become like unto him,’ 
meaning: we shall be changed from created light into the un- 
created splendour of the divine nature and shall become like it ; 
that is, we shall be that it is. 

St John says: ‘ All things live in him.’ In that the Father 
“ eontemplates the Son all creatures take living shape in the Son, 
that being the real life of creatures. But in another passage St 
John says: ‘ Blessed are the dead that have died in God.’—It 
seems passing strange that it should be possible to die in him who 
himself said that he is the life !—But see: the soul, breaking 
through her eternal prototype, is plunged in the absolute nothing- 
ness of her eternal prototype. This is the death of the spirit ; for 
dying is nothing but deprivation of life. When the soul realizes 
that any thing throws her eternal prototype into separation and 
negation of unity, the spirit puts its own self to death to its eternal 
prototype, and breaking through its eternal prototype remains 
in the unity of the divine nature. These are the blessed dead 
that are dead in God. No one can be buried and beatified in the 
Godhead who has not died to God, that is, in his eternal prototype, 
as I have explained. 

Our creed says: Christ rose from the dead: Christ rose out of 
God into the Godhead, into the unity of the divine essence. That 
is to say that Christ’s soul and all rational souls, being dead to 
their exemplar, rise from that divine death to taste the joys above 
it, namely the riches of the divine nature wherein the spirit is 
beatified. 

Now consider the fact of happiness. God is happy in him- 
self; and all creatures, which God must make happy, will be 
so in the same happiness that God is happy in, and after the same 
fashion that he is happy. Be sure that in this unity the spirit 
transcends every mode, even its own eternal being, and everything 
created as well as the equality which, in the eternal image, it has 
with the Father, and together with the Father soars up into the 

412 MEISTER ECKHART 

unity of the divine nature where God conceives himself in absolute 
simplieity. There, in that act, the spirit is no longer creature, 
it is the same as happiness itself, the nature and substance of the 
Godhead, the beatitude of its own self and of all creatures. Further, 
I hold that if God did what he is impotent to do, granted the soul 
while still a creature the knowledge and enjoyment of actual 
beatitude, then, were the soul to be and to remain happy, it were 
impossible for God to remain God. Anyone in heaven knowing 
the saints according to their happiness, would not have anything 
to say of any saint but only of God; for happiness is God and all 
those who are happy are, in the act of happiness, God and the 
divine nature and substance of God. St Paul says: ‘He who 
being naught, thinketh himself aught, deceiveth himself.’ In the 
act of happiness he is brought to naught and no creaturehood 
exists for him. As the worthy Dionysius says: ‘ Lord lead me 
to where thou art a nothingness,’ meaning: lead me, Lord, to 
where thou transcendest every created intellect ; for as St Paul 
declares : ‘ God dwells in a light that no man can approach unto’ ; 
that is: God is not to be discerned in any created light whatever. 

St Dionysius says: ‘ God is nothing,’ and this is also implied 
by St Augustine when he says: ‘God is everything,’ meaning : 
nothing is God’s. So that by saying ‘ God is nothing ’ Dionysius 
signifies that there is no thing in his presence. It follows that the 
spirit must advance beyond things and thingliness, shape and 
shapenness, existence and existences: then will dawn in it the 
‘actuality of happiness which is the essential possession of the 
actual intellect. 

I have sometimes said that man sees God in this life in the same 
‘perfection and is happy in the same perfect fashion as in the life 
to come. Many people are astonished at this. Let us try there- 
fore to understand what it means. Real intellect emanates from 
the eternal truth as intelligence and contains in itself intelligibly 
all that God contains. This noble divinity, the active intellect, 
conceives itself in itself after the manner of God in its emanation, 
and in its essential content it is downright God ; but it is creature 
according to the motion of its nature. This intellect is to the full 
as noble in us now as in the after life. 

Now the question may be asked: How then does this life differ 
from the life to come ? 

I answer that, this intellect which is happy in exactly the same 
way as God is, is at present latent in us. In this life we know God 
only according to potentiality. In the after life, when we are 
quit of body, our potentiality will be all transfigured into the act 
of happiness which belongs to the active intellect. This trans- 
figuration will render the fact of happiness no more perfect than it 

TRACTATES 413 

is now ; for active intellect has no accidents nor any capacity to 
receive more than it contains innately. It follows that when we 
are beatified we shall be completely deprived of potentiality and 
shall conceive happiness only actually, after the manner of the 
divine nature. As David says: ‘ Lord in thy light shall we see 
light ’: with the divine nature we shall conceive the perfection 
of the divine nature, which alone is our entire felicity, here in 
grace and there in perfect happiness. 

PL 

D 

PA 
nr 

a A nn 
AS. gp vat. & 

IE, 
i) 
ba 
nh 

he Dh .. we Pia 
x Pet pal 5 2 ae is ’ 
a u Pi _ a) 
Mon x Pat 5 Fahr il sa oy; hit ee A 2 
wy Fe ae wo. % ur; Pr 
i! Ay, ‘aby “1 
fis! ames 

faces: 

III 
SAYINGS 

‘ 
4 
f 
Fa 
N N 
if a 5 
- 
: 
a e 
| . A 
ur rs 
y > 
if 
a ee - 
BA u 
Bu: 
ng 7 
re » 
ce . 
f 
i pty id 
, = = < 
ef 2 
4 =) 
BR EV 
7 : 
¥ . im 
> MV 
a Ae 
i 
u 

© 4 Lae! | i La 
VSN eee 
‘ N U roy 
A res N a in 
7 > ¥ 
‘ ne fr Cpe 
i m . ‚ Mr 
r i aie ene ee vary 
“4 I Ge Le gn ” 
», = r Pen | 
‘ , = ee 
- <a F : 
a u 
» 
' 
eh u 
E a 
2 
& J ox 2 
7 
wi) u 

i - s 5 
s oe 2 
— er, ¢ >! 
“ . 4- ee NA 
| a ro : wis 

- 
~ 

a! f " 2 Ni Pr 
5 je A PET 
Aa a Pa u 

1 

THIS IS MEISTER ECKHART 
FROM WHOM GOD NOTHING HID 

Meister Eckhart said in a sermon, The work wrought by God 
in the God-loving soul which he finds empty and detached enough 
for him to bring himself to spiritual birth in her, this work, he said, 
gives God greater pleasure than any work he ever did with any 
creature and is far nobler than the creation of all things from 
nothing. ; 

On being asked the reason why this work gives God such pleas- 
ure, he said it was because God has no creature but the soul of 
large enough capacity for him to empty his entire might, the whole 
ground of his being in, as he does in this act of begetting himself 
ghostly in the soul. 

When asked what God’s birth is, he said, God’s being born 
within the soul is nothing else than God’s self-revelation to the 
soul in some new knowledge and in some new mode. 

Anon they asked him, Does the soul’s chief happiness consist in 
this act whereby God gets himself in her in ghostly fashion ? 
Quoth he, Though it is true that God takes greater pleasure in 
this act than in any other deed he ever did concerning creature, 
natheless the soul is happier being re-born into God. God being 
born in her makes her not wholly blessed: she is beatified when, 
in love and praise, she follows this wisdom whereinto she is born, 
back to the source from whence it came and in their common 
origin, holding to what is his lets go her own, she being happy 
not in hers but his. 

2 

Meister Eckhart said, A man of godly love and godly fear and 
perfect faith may, an he will, receive God’s body every day at the 

priest’s hands. 
3 

The question is, what does God do in heaven? The answer 
given by the saint is this, He crowns his own work: the works 
God crowns his saints for he wrought in them himself. 

417 27 

418 : MEISTER ECKHART 

Meister Eckhart says, I have been asked what God is doing in 
heaven ? I answer, He has been giving his Son birth eternally, 
is giving him birth now and will go on giving him birth for ever, 
the Father being in childbed in every virtuous soul. Blessed, 
thrice blessed is the man within whose soul the heavenly Father 
is thus brought to bed. All she surrenders to him here she shall 
enjoy from him in life eternal. God made the soul on purpose 
for her to bear his one-begotten Son. His birth in Mary ghostly 
was to God better pleasing than his nativity of her in flesh. When 
this birth happens nowadays in the good loving soul it gives God 
greater pleasure than his creation of the heavens and earth. 

4 

& 
Meister Eckhart says, He who is everywhere at home is God- 
worthy ; to him who is ever the same is God present and in him 
in whom creatures are stilled God bears his one-begotten Son. 

5 

Meister Eckhart says, Holy scripture cries aloud for freedom from 
self. Self-free is self-controlled and self-controlled is self-possessed 
and self-possession is God-possession and possession of everything 
God ever made. I tell thee, as true as God is God and I a man, 
wert thou quite free from self, free from the highest angel, then 
were the highest angel thine as well as thine own self. This 
method gives self-mastery. : 

6 

According to Meister Eckhart, Grace comes not otherwise than 
with the Holy Ghost. It bears the Holy Ghost upon its back. 
Grace is no stationary thing, it is ever-becoming. It is flowing 
straight out of God’s heart. Grace does nothing but re-form and 
convey into God. Grace makes the soul deiform. God, the 
ground of the soul and grace go together. ; 

7 

Query, does God pour his grace into a power of the soul or into 
her essence, for no creature is allowed in the essence of the soul ? 
The answer is that grace is a matter of the soul and naught beside 
and grace without soul is not grace at all. It is immaterial for it 
is not true creature, it is creaturely. Grace to be grace must 
have the soul for substance for if God poured his grace into a 
power of the soul that power alone would benefit. Not so: he 

instils it into her essence and essence works by grace in all her. 
powers. 

SAYINGS 419 

8 

Meister Eckhart says, Practice is better than precept ; but the 
practice and precept of eternal God is a counsel of perfection. 
If I wanted a teacher of theology I should go for one to Paris, to 
its learned university. But if I came to ask about the perfeet 
life, why then he could not tell me. Where then am I to turn ? 
To pure and abstract nature, nowhere else: that can solve thy 
anxious queries. Why, good people, search among dead bones ? 
Why not seek the living sacrum that gives eternal life? The 
dead give not nor do they take. An angel seeking God as God 
would look not anywhere for him except in a quiet, solitary creature. 
The essence of perfection lies in bearing poverty, misery, despisery, 
adversity and every hardship that befalls, willingly, gladly, 
freely, eagerly, calm and unmoved and persisting unto death 
without a why. 

9 

Meister Eckhart said, Whate’er it be that lights devotion in 
man’s heart and knits him closest unto God, that is the best 
thing for him here in time. 

Again. he says, To be the heavenly Father’s Son one has to be 
a stranger to the world, remote from self, heartwhole and having 
the mind purified. 

O man, renounce thyself and so with toil-free virtue win the 
prize or, cleaving to thyself, with toilful virtues lose it. 

10 

Meister Eckhart says, He who is ever alone is Godworthy and 
to him who is ever at home is God present and in him who 
stands ever in the present now does God the Father bear his Son 
unceasingly. 

11 

Meister Eckhart says, He to whom (God) is different in one thing 
from another and to whom God is dearer in one thing than another, 
that man is a barbarian, still in the wilds, a child. He to whom 
God is the same in everything has come to man’s estate. But he 
to whom creatures all mean want and exile has come into his own. 

He was also asked: Does the man who goes out of himself 
need to trouble at all about his nature? He answered, God’s 
yoke is easy and his burden is light : No, only about his will; 
what the tyro fears is the expert’s delight. The kingdom of God 
is for none but the thoroughly dead. 

420 MEISTER ECKHART 

12 

God’s every infliction is a lure. I give no thanks to God for | 
loving me because he cannot help it, it is his nature to; what I 
do thank him for is that he cannot of his goodness leave off loving 

me.. 
13 

The highest the soul can get to in this life is a settled habitation 
without all in all. Being without all means being detached, 
perfectly free from self and things. Being in all means a state of 
perpetual rest: poise in her eternal idea, in the omniform image 
shining impartible. 

14 

Eckhart said, There are people upon earth that bear our Lord 
in spirit as his mother did in flesh. 

They asked him who these were? He answered, They being free 
from things do see in the mirror of truth whereto they are gotten 
all unknowing ; on earth, their dwelling is in heaven and they are 
at peace: they go as little children. 

15 

Meister Eckhart said, Better to my mind is the man who in the 
cause of charity will lend himself to taking dole of bread than he 
who gives an hundred marks for charity. How do I make that 
out? I argue thus. Doctors agree that honour is of far more 
worth than temporal goods. Now he who gives an hundred 
marks for charity gets back in praise and honour more than his 
hundred marks’ worth. The hand he stretches forth with gifts 
collects both more and better than it gave. But the beggar 
reaching out his hand for bread is bartering his honour; the 
giver buys honour but the taker sells it. 

Another thing advantages the beggar who receives over the 
donor of the hundred marks to God: the giver glories in and 
gratifies his nature, the beggar is subduing his and flouting it ; 
the giver is made much of for his gifts, the beggar scorned and 
shunned for taking them. 

16 

Meister Eckhart said, I never ask God to give himself to me: 
I beg of him to purify, to empty, me. If I am empty, God of his 
very nature is obliged to give himself to me to fill me. 

How to be pure? By steadfast longing for the one good, 
God to wit. How to acquire this longing? By self-denial and 
dislike to creatures ; self-knowledge is the way for creatures are 
all naught, they come to naught with lamentation and bitterness. 

SAYINGS 421 

God being in himself pure good can nowhere dwell except in 
the pure soul: he overflows into her, whole he flows into her. 
What does emptiness mean ? It means a turning from creatures : 
the heart uplifted to the perfeet good so that creatures are no 
comfort nor is there any want of them save inasmuch as the 
perfect good, God namely, is to be grasped therein. The clear 
eye tolerates the mote no more than does the pure soul aught that 
clouds, that comes between. Creatures as she enjoys them are 
all pure for she enjoys creatures in God and God in creatures. 
She is so limpid she sees through herself; nor is God far to seek : 
she finds him in herself when in her natural purity she flows into 
the supernatural pure Godhead where she is in God and God in 
her and what she does she does in God and God does it in her. 

17 

Meister Eckhart said, To die the death in love and knowledge, 
that is more noble and more worth than all the good works put 
together that holy Christendom has done in love and knowledge 
from its beginning until now and ever shall do till the judgment 
day. These do but serve to bring this death about, this death 
wherein springs life eternal. 

18 

Meister Eckhart says, We fail to get our way with God because 
we lack two things: profound humility and a telling will. Upon 
my life I swear that God in his divinity is capable of all things but 
this he cannot do, he cannot leave unsatisfied the soul with these 
two things. Wherefore vex not yourselves with trivialities ; ye 
were not made for trivial things and the glory of the world is but 
a travesty of truth, only a heresy of happiness. 

19 

Meister Eckhart being questioned as to God’s greatest gift to 
him answered, There are three. First, cessation of carnal desires 
and pleasures. Secondly, divine light enlightens me in everything 
Ido. Thirdly, daily I grow and am renewed in virtue, grace and 
happiness. 

20 

Meister Eckhart says, Lofty aim is lofty nature. The vision of 
God is a high endeavour. I say, God is omnipotent, but he is 
powerless to thwart the man of meek and mighty aspiration, and 
any failure on my side to get my way with God is due to lack 
either of will or meekness. 

422 MEISTER ECKHART 

21 

Meister Eckhart says, As a man gets to be like God and God 
gets dear enough for him to disregard himself and not seek what 
is his in time or in eternity, he is released from all his sins and 
purgatorial pains, yea though he have committed every sin on 
earth. And this life is attainable while yet he eats and drinks. 
Further he declares, To be the heavenly Father’s Son we must be 
strangers to the world, remote from self, pure-hearted, inward 
minded. , 

22 

On one occasion Brother Eckhart said, Five things there be 
which in whomsoever has them are sure sign that he will never 
lapse from God. First, though most grievous things befall this 
man from God or creature, never a murmur does he make: no 
word but praise and thanks is ever heard. Again, at the most 
trying times he never says one word in his excuse. Thirdly, this 
man desires of God what God will freely give and nothing else : 
he leaves it all to him. Fourthly, nothing in heaven or earth can 
Tuffle him : so settled is his calm that heaven and earth in topsy- 
turveydom would leave him quite content in God. Fifth, nothing 
in heaven or earth can cheer him; for having reached the point 
where naught in heaven or earth can sadden him so neither can 
it gladden him, except as. trifles can. 

A man remote and far from his own self as the chief angel of 
the Seraphim from him, would have that angel for his own as he is 
God’s and God is his. And that is the bare truth, as God is God. 

St Paul says: ‘ The whole world is the cross to me and I the 
cross to you.’ 

24 

Said Meister Eckhart the preacher, There is no greater valour 
nor no sterner fight than that for self-effacement, self-oblivion. 

25 

Brother Eckhart said, Not all suffering is rewarded ; only what 
is cheerfully consented to. A man hanged on the gallows, suffering 
unwillingly, were better pleased that it had been another. There 
is no reward for that. Other sufferings the same. It is not the 
suffering that counts, it is the virtue.—I say, to him who 
suffers not for love to suffer is suffering and is hard to bear. But 
one who suffers for love suffers not and his suffering is fruitful 
in God’s sight. 

SAYINGS 423 

26 

According to Meister Eckhart, Every sign, every holiness, every 
perfection possible to creature our Lady had par excellence. To 
take her holiness, it was so prodigious that our Lady never sinned. 
Of signs, again, she had the chief one, that of being God’s mother ; 
albeit our theologians do contend that our Lady was far happier 
uniting God to Godhead than she was in giving carnal birth to 
God. As to the overfullness our Lady got from deity, she was 
worthy of it, bearing as she did God in the flesh. Soul over- 
brimming like this overflows into the body and makes the body 
like it, thus she was God’s carnal mother. Accordingly some 
doctors do affirm that mental concepts tell upon the body more 
than physicians do with all their drugs. God is never born except 
in souls which have put creatures under their feet. Our philo- 
sophers say, Perfect rest is freedom from all motion. 

27. 

On St Peter’s words, ‘ We have abandoned all things,’ Meister 
Eckhart comments thus: Thou hast well said, for laden thou 
couldst not follow him. It is no profitless exchange, giving up 
all for God: by him all things are given and having gotten him 
he stands in lieu of all. 

28 

Meister Eckhart said, What our Lord did was done with this 
intent, and this alone, that he might be with us and we with him. 

29 

Brother Eckhart preached saying, St Peter said, ‘We have 
left all things.” St James said, ‘We have given up all things.’ 
St John said, ‘We have nothing left.’ Whereupon Brother 
Eckhart asks, When do we leave all things ? When we leave 
everything conceivable, everything expressible, everything audible, 
everything visible, then and then only we give up all things. 
When in this sense we give up all we grow aflood with light, 
passing bright with God. 

30 

He that would be what he ought must stop being what he is. 
When God made the angels the first sight they saw was that of 
the Father with the Son sprouting out of his Father’s heart like 
a green shoot out of a tree. This blissful vision they have had 
more than six thousand years and how it comes they wot as well 

424 MEISTER ECKHART 

to-day as when they were first made. This owing to their keen 
perception : the more we know the less we understand. 

31 

In the Book of Wisdom it is writ, ‘ All men are fools in whom 
is no knowledge of God for men are mortal without God.’ Without 
divine wisdom we are without God and to be without God is to 
be without truth for God it is who inculcates the truth. Not 
being in God means being in lies and without wisdom. One may 
be worldly-wise without being Godly-wise but this is folly in 
God’s sight : wisdom wisdomless, more foolishness than wisdom. 
The question is, who has this heavenly wisdom ? Meister Eckhart 
says, He who in deep and real humility so yields himself to God 
that his will is wholly God’s will and God’s will is his, as saith 
Isaiah the prophet, God teaches true wisdom to none but the 
humble.’ And in the Book of Wisdom too we read, ‘ Where there 
. is meekness there is true wisdom.’ Also the heathen doctor 
Ptolemeus says, ‘ Among wise.men the humblest are the wisest.’ 
According to Meister Eckhart, with humility goes love : lowliness 
without love is dead indeed for the virtues are virtue in virtue 
of love. 

32 

—‘ And so shall a man order his life if he would be perfect.’ 
Anent this Meister Eckhart says, Works wrought from within are 
pleasant both to God and man ; they are benign and living works. 
They are Godworthy for he alone it is who does in man works 
wrought from within, as saith the prophet Isaiah, ‘ Lord all our 
works thou hast wrought in us,’ and Christ too said, ‘My Father 
who is in me he doeth that I do.’ Such works are both easy and 
pleasant to man for all deeds are agreeable and pleasant to man 
in which body and soul are harmonious. This is the case in all 
these works. Again, these works are living works: the dead 
beast differs from the living one in that the dead is moved from 
outside only ; it must be pulled or pushed, to wit, and its works 
are all dead works. The live beast moves itself where’er it will; 
its motive power is within and its works are living works. In the 
same way those works of men which have their source within 
where God moves by himself, essential products, these are our 
works, divine works, useful works. But works which come from 
some external cause and not from inner being, these works I say 
are dead, they are not godly works nor are they ours. Meister 
Eckhart also says, Works wrought from within are willing works. 
But that which is willing is sweet, therefore works from within 
are all pleasant whereas works due to any outward cause are 

SAYINGS 425 

unwilling and slavish for were there nothing moving from without 
no work were done at all, so that it is reluctant, menial, bitter. 

33 

Meister Eckhart said, No person can in this life reach the point 
at which he is excused from outward works. What though one 
lead the contemplative life, one cannot altogether keep from 
flowing out and mingling in the life of action. Even as a man 
without a groat may still be generous in the will to give, whereas 
a man of means in giving nothing cannot be called generous, so 
no one can have virtues without exercising virtue at the proper 
time and place. Hence those who lead the contemplative life 
and do no outward works, are most mistaken and all on the 
wrong tack. What I say is that he who lives the contemplative 
life may, nay he must, be absolutely free from outward works 
what time he is in act of contemplation but afterwards his duty 
lies in doing outward works ; for none can live the contemplative 
life without a break and active life bridges the gaps in the life 
of contemplation. 

34 

Meister Eckhart says and so do other masters, that there are 
two things in God : essence and regard, 1.e. relatio. According to 
these doctors, not in the Godhead does the Father bear his Son; 
the Father in his essence does but see into his naked essence where 
he discerns himself in all his power: himself by himself, without 
the Son and without the Holy Ghost ; naught sees he there but the 
unity of his own essence. But the Father being minded to regard 
himself, to reflect upon himself in another Person, by this act of 
retrospection is begetting his Son ; and being well contented with 
himself in this regard and finding his reflection most delightful he 
must, since all joy is his eternally, keep on looking back eternally. 
So the Son is as eternal as the Father, and from the mutual liking 
and the love betwixt the Father and the Son there comes the Holy 
Ghost and since this love between the Father and the Son has 
been for aye therefore the Holy Ghost is as eternal as the Father 
and the Son and these three Persons have one simple essence and 
are distinct as Persons only: the Father’s Person never was the 
Son’s nor the Holy Ghost’s Person ; all three have each their own 
Person albeit they are one in essence, 

35 

Meister Eckhart says and so do other masters, No man has 
any merit apart from his intention and the why of a man’s action 

426 MEISTER ECKHART 

gives the measure of his merit, naught beside. Hence anyone 
intending, anyone striving, for something less than God is not 
worthy of God unless as the lover of creature, whatever it be, in 
God. God-lovers have no guerdon but God; them God rewards 
with himself. 

36 

Meister Eckhart says, and so do other masters, that in the course 
of nature it is really the higher which is ever more ready to pour 
its power out into the lower than the lower is ready to receive it. 
The highest heaven, for instance, is turning far more rapidly than 
the rest which run against it. However fast the lower heavens 
race against the upper, in order to receive the influx from it, the 
highest heaven will go harder still both as to pace and influx. So 
God is vastly quicker to pour out his grace than man to take it in. 
There is no dearth of God with us ; what dearth there is is wholly 
ours who make not ready to receive his grace. 

37 

The question is, When do the passions perforce obey the mind ? 
The answer Meister Eckhart gives is this. What time the mind 
is fixed on God and there abides, the senses are obedient to the 
mind. As one should hang a needle to a magnet and then another 
needle on to that, until there are four needles, say, depending from 
the magnet. As long as the first needle stays clinging to the 
magnet all the other needles will keep clinging on to that but 
when the leader drops the rest will go as well. So, while the mind 
keeps fixed on God the senses are subservient to it but if the mind 
should wander off from God the passions will escape and be unruly. 

38 

Why is it, Meister Eckhart asks, that people are so slow to look 
for God in earnest ? His comment is: When one is looking for a 
thing and finds no trace of its existence one hunts half-heartedly 
and in distress. But lighting on some vestige of the quarry, the 
chase grows lively, blithe and keen. The man in quest of fire, 
cheered when he feels the heat looks for its source with eagerness 
and pleasure. And so it is with those in quest of God: feeling 
none of the sweetness of God they grow listless but sensing the 
sweetness of divinity they blithely pursue their search for God. 

39 

Meister Eckhart asks, Whose are the prayers God always hears ? 
And Meister Eckhart answers, Who worships God as God God hears. 

SAYINGS 427 

But he who worships God for worldly goods, worships not God : 
he worships what he worships God for and employs God as his 
servant for the getting of it. As St Augustine puts it, ‘ What 
thou dost love thou dost worship; true prayer, real prayer is 
nothing but loving: what one loves that one prays to. Hence 
no one prays to God aright but he that prays to God for God 
without a thought of aught but God. 

40 

Meister Eckhart says and so do other masters, Whoso wants a 
virtue ought to seek it at the source, in God to wit, where we find 
all the virtues added up to virtue. The man who finds a single 
virtue thus discovers every virtue in the one and, attaining to the 
unity where all virtues are virtue, the soul sees God and God looks 
on the soul. Soul is caressed by God who, talking with her in 
familiar fashion, teaches her universal wisdom and God and man 
now fully reconciled, man is the lord of every creature, of all the 
good things that have flowed from God; as it is written in the 
Book of Wisdom where the wise man says, ‘ All good have I gotten 
in thee alone’: in virtue have I gotten all the virtues. 

41 

According to Meister Eckhart, God is not only the Father of all 
good things but he is the mother of all things to boot. He is 
Father for he is the cause of all things and their creator. He is 
the mother of all things as well, for when creatures have gotten 
their being from him he still stays with creatures to keep them 
in being. If God did not remain with creatures after they had 
started their own life they would most speedily fall out of being. 
Falling from God means falling from being into nothingness. It 
is not so with other causes, they can with safety quit the things 
they cause when these have gotten being of their own. When the 
house is in being its builder can depart and for the reason that 
it is not the builder alone that makes the house: the materials 
thereof he draws from nature. But God provides creature with 
the whole of what it is, with form as well as matter, so he is bound 
to stay with it or it will promptly drop out of existence. 

42 

Meister Eckhart says, the man who doing some good deed does 
it not wholly for God’s sake and without any thought save God, 
- that man darkens God’s glory. All good works are God’s. Hence 
_ if a man in his good work harbours intent towards aught but God 

428 MEISTER ECKHART 

he gives thereto the honour of the work and robs God of his glory 
and all such works are sterile and unfruitful. 

43 

The question is, Does the virtue of prayer increase with the 
outward practice of it? Meister Eckhart says that the external 
habit adds little or nothing to the value of prayer. Prayer is a 
good thing in itself. Now a thing that is good in virtue of its 
muchness is not good in virtue of itself. One groat has little value 
all alone but if thou hadst a thousand groats that were a handsome 
property, solely by reason ofthenumber. Groats have small value 
in themselves apart from number. And so it is with outward 
practices: number adds little to the good of prayer; one Ave 
coming freely from the heart has greater power and virtue than 
a thousand from the lips. And by the same token, no virtue 
dwells in number of good works; virtue is every whit as fine, as 
good, in one least act of virtue rightly done as in a thousand. 
Virtue is not enhanced by multiplying outward acts of virtue, for 
were it good from number it would not then be good in its own 
right. A thing good in itself is good in its oneness not in its multi- 
plication. True virtue means virtuous works wrought virtuously. 
Who gives an alms in God’s name but gives it grudgingly and not 
with cheerful heart, what though he do a virtuous deed, he does 
not do it virtuously. And so with prayer or any other virtue: 
done rightly it is virtue but not else. Take patience for example. 
External suffering does not make one patient : it merely tries one’s 
patience, as fire will try a penny whether it be of silver or of copper. 
The patient man is patient still though outward suffering n’er 
befall. And prayer the same. The man of pure heart Godward 
turned who never does a stroke of outward work is natheless in 
good case for hearts are not made pure by outward prayers: 
‘prayer rises pure from out pure hearts. 

44 

Doctors declare that God moves all things, 7.e. all creatures, 
but creatures cannot move God. God can move creatures for he 
has created all creatures and it is he who keeps them in existence. 
But creatures cannot move God: no creature can affect God, 
according to the universal law that the lower does not flow into 
the higher. Now creatures are inferior to God so they do not 
influence God, ergo, they do not move God. 

In this connection some enquirers ask how God can move 
creatures and not be defiled by creatures which are full of fault ? 
The masters answer, If, as we see, the sun can shine on mire and 

SAYINGS 429 

filth without contamination then how much more can God protect 
himself from any taint of creature. But Meister Eckhart argues 
in a different fashion. He says God is in all things but so as to 
be wholly outside things, hence faults in creatures will not affect 
God. Just as we see the soul whole in the eye and at the same 
time whole outside the eye for she is whole in every limb; no 
blemish of the eye can touch the soul which is in suchwise wholly 
in the eye as to be independent of the eye. Even so God in creature 

is wholly without creature, untouched and untainted by creature. 
_ There is another answer Meister Eckhart gives: God is only in 
the essence (or being) of a creature. His argument runs thus. 
Kssence is without defect, defect being nothing but a lapse from 
being. Now seeing no defect can touch the essence and God is 
only in the essence of a creature therefore God is unaffected by the 
defects of creature. Regarding this amazing fact of deity John 
Chrysostom observes: ‘ That God is in all creatures we know and 
declare but how and in what manner we do not understand.’ Yet 
Meister Eckhart says it is quite plain if for the word God we put 
the word being. We see and have abundant proof that being is 
in all things. But if actual being is God it follows then that God 
must be in all things. 

45 

Thus saith the wise man in the Book of Wisdom, ‘ Eternal wisdom 
is omnipotent for it is one.’ Upon which Meister Eckhart com- 
ments thus. The simpler a thing is the more powerful and effective 
it is. We can demonstrate it thus. In a thing made of parts 
the power of the thing resides in its parts. In a house made of 
walls, foundations and roof, the whole force of the house consists 
in these parts. If the house could but draw from its oneness the 
virtue it gets from its walls then it need have no walls. Now God 
is the simplest possible good wherein all things are one and as one 
he is therefore omnipotent. Again, the heathen doctors say that 
power dispersed is dissipated. It is so with the mind. Scattered 
in multitudinous creature it is’so much more feeble and infirm 
toward God. But when the mind gets rid of creatures, when all 
the senses vanish into mind, then mind and passions being met 
in one the mind is strong enough to wrest from God whatever it 
desires. When man does what is in him not even God can say 
him nay. 

46 

In one of his sermons Meister Eckhart said, It is my humility 
that gives God his divinity and the proof of it is this. God’s 
peculiar property is giving. But God cannot give if he has nothing 
to receive his gifts. Now I make myself receptive to his gifts by 

430 MEISTER ECKHART 

my humility so I by my humility do make God giver and since 
giving is God’s own peculiar property I do by my humility give 
God his property. The would-be giver must needs find a taker ; 
without a taker he cannot be a giver for it is the taker by his 
taking that makes the man a giver. So God, to be the giver, must 
discover a receiver. Now none but the humble can receive the 
gift of God. So God, to use his godlike power of giving, will eke 
need my humility ; without humility he cannot give me aught for 
I without humility cannot accept his gift. Thus it is true that I 
by my humility do give God his divinity. 

47 

Meister Eckhart also said, My lowliness raises up God and the 
lower I humble myself the higher do I exalt God and the higher 
I do exalt God the more gently and sweetly he pours into me his 
divine gift, his divine influx. For the higher the inflowing thing 
the more easy and smooth is its flow. How God is raised upon my 
lowliness I argue thus : the more I abase and keep myself down 
the higher God towers above me. The deeper the trough the 
higher the crest. In just the same way, the more I abase and 
humble myself the higher God goes and the better and easier he 
pours into me his divine influx. So it is true that I exalt God by 
my lowliness. 

48 

Meister Eckhart says, We ought not to have to ask God for his 
grace, his divine goodness, we ought to contrive to take it ourselves 
without asking. God has gotten himself in his divine outflow just 
as the flowing. . . . 

49 

Meister Eckhart points out how Isaias says, ‘ Thy light is come 
to thee, the light which is eternal, unchangeable and new and 
inconceivable, free and thine own; well may thy heart both 
wonder and rejoice.’ 

The question is, how is it light if it is inconceivable ?_ How does 
it come if it is immoveable ? How be called thine if it is free ? 
I answer first, That light is God which is light in itself and which 
is light in all created things and wherein all creatures are light. 
For to begin with I contend that light has the peculiar property 
of being clear and luminous in itself and in others revelation. 
But this belongs exclusively to God. Wherefore I say the light 
in itself is God. The second point is argued thus. If everything 
caused is a manifestation of the first cause then light of intellect 
in us is surely God ; no mind can see the naked truth in a created 

SAYINGS 431 

light for nothing gives what it has not got. Augustine says, 
* Our mind can only see the naked truth in light which is perfectly 
simple and pure, God, to wit.’ The third is proved as follows. 
If creature is light and God is light, as has been shown before, 
then creaturely being is merely a light in light-being. But one 
light in another produces but one light, so it is true. 

— Talking of light, now if so be that in this life our minds can 
see the naked truth by means of the light that is God, then it is 
also true that man may here see God and needs must it be true 
withal that man is here beatified.’ 

I answer that, albeit here a man may see the truth by means of 
the light that is God natheless he sees not what God is, using this 
light as a means. I say, what though he see God as he is, he is 
not yet beatified for God as a means is germane to creature. Look 
you, God beatifies not as being the beginning (when he is of the 
nature of all things), not yet as being the mean (where he is of the 
nature. of a creature), nor even as the end (for then again he is all 
things), neither does he beatify as being all of these but he beatifies 
just inasmuch as he transcends them all ; he beatifies as being God 
impartible, as being simply pure light in itself. 

If thou shouldst ask, ‘ How is he light, being incomprehensible ?’ 
I answer, Being incomprehensible therefore he is the light. I 
say, moreover, incomprehensibility is the light nature and this 
is plain, for his incomprehensibility comes from his unendingness. 
But his unendingness is due to his simplicity, to his purity (or 
clarity), which constitutes lightness in God. It is well said then, 
God is light. But know, this vision of the truth in the divine 
light is gotten in no school of creatures, it is learnt in the school 
of renouncement, of utter detachment from creatures, and for 
such lore the school is heaven, the book thy empty heart, eternity 
thy reading, thy mentor uncreated light and truth thy mentor 
too. This David meant when he declared, ‘ Lord in thy light shall 
we see the light.’ 

Then take the second question. How does he come who is without 
motion and how does he come who is without place? To whom does 
he come who is in all hearts ? 

I answer, He does not come as anything at all nor yet as gaining 
something for himself but he comes ordering ; he who was hidden 
comes and reveals himself. He comes as the light which lay 
concealed in people’s hearts and in their minds, now taking shape 
in intellect and will and in the deepest being of the soul. He is in 
the inner man in such a way that there is naught without him 
and there is naught there with him: he is there all by himself. 
He comes, appearing in the mind and in the will, nothing at all 
without him, nothing at all with him but mind and will are full 

482 MEISTER ECKHART 

of him alone. There seems nothing with him, nothing without 
him ; the mind is but the place of God, a Godstead to itself and 
nothing more, as David sings, ‘ Lord the light of thy countenance 
is risen upon us’ as though to say, Holding thy peace, with 
sighing and with rue do thou by means of intellect turn thy will 
round to feel the charm of God. Converse with him as man to 
man and as thou dost discourse with God in the first person and 
of God in the third so do thou talk to God in the second Person. 
Forgetting everything, aware of God alone, say unto him, * Thou 
art my God, thou only art within, thou only art all things.’ 
Creatures are not receptive to God, except those that are made in 
the image of God, like angels and man’s soul: these being God- 
receptive he is in them and they in him. To others God is essential, 
not that they have gotten him but simply that they have no being 
without him. Not in virtue of his presence do they see him, does 
she see God in her innermost depth ; nor is it by his power for he 
is powerless apart from her ; but we can do nothing without him. 
God being in the soul as in himself therefore the soul is called a place 
and soul is also called the place of peace for where God is as it were 
‘in himself there is the kingdom of heaven and peace untroubled, 
joyous and delightful. The blest soul is at rest in God as in her 
own, and more so. 

A man who has gone clean out of himself straightway finds God 
in God and God with God. He behaves like him for what he is 
he is to God and what he is to God God is to him: God belongs 
wholly to him and is wholly he and he is wholly in God and is 
downright God they being so entirely the same, one cannot be 
without the other. 

50 

The soul is no different from Christ save that the soul has a born 
nature and a created nature. This Christ has not in his eternal 
Person. Ifthe soul doffed her born nature and her created nature 
she would be all the same, just essence itself. I say, put off thy 
creature ; itis easy to doff the creature for this is a labour of love 
and the greater the pain the greater the joy. 

51 

Whoso has three things is beloved of God. The first is riddance 
of goods ; the second, of friends, and the third is riddance of self. 

‘ 

52 

Meister Eckhart said that in the essence of the soul we may 
surely see and know God. And the closer acquainted one is in 

SAYINGS : 483 

this life with the soul the closer acquainted with God. The only 
way is to abandon creature and escape from self. Harkee. Love 
creature as I may in God never can I love God in creature as 
perfectly as in myself. Thou hast to go out of thyself into thyself 
again : there lies the home of truth which none may find who looks 
for it ini outward things. Mary Magdalene, when she left creatures 
and betook herself into her heart, found there our Lord. God is 
unmixed and pure: I can find God then only in the pure. But 
my interior soul is more undefiled and pure than any creature ; 
so my best chance of finding God is down in my own soul. And 
eke I am the life in God for ‘ All that is in the Father is the life 
in him,’ John said. In this guise does the Father bear the Son 
and in this selfsame birth I do proceed from him. Now he 
declares the Son to be in him, in the very depth of his heart. 
But since all that was made in him is the life in him therefore I 
am this life in the innermost heart of God. ‘ And the life was the 
light of men,’ said John. Mark you, he says the divine light in 
us is our light wherein we see all things conceived in the mind. 
God is being, perfect being, without which are no beings; for 
all beings are from his being. May we be this same heing, So 
help us God. Amen. 

53 

According to Meister Eckhart, there are seven degrees of con- 
templation. Whoso would practise contemplation let him seek 
out a quiet spot and set himself to thinking, first, how noble his 
soul is, how she has flowed straight out of God, a thought that 
fills him with a great delight. Having well cogitated this, next 
let him think how God must love his soul to make it in the likeness 
of the Trinity, so that all God is by nature he may be by grace ; 
whereat he will delight perforce more vehemently still for it is 
far more noble to be made in the form of the Trinity than merely 
to come straight from God.—In the third stage he meditates that 
he has been beloved of God for aye ; the Trinity has been for aye 
and God has loved the soul for aye.—Fourthly, he reflects that 
God did ever charge him to enjoy with God what God has aye 
enjoyed and always shall, God himself namely. At the fifth 
stage the soul enters into herself and knows God in herself, which - 
happens in this wise: No being can be without being and being 
feeds on being ; but being cannot live upon this food till this food 
is converted to the same blessed nature as that which feeds upon 
it and this applies to being which is being-of-itself. But there is 
no being-of-itself excepting God. So my soul is living on nothing 
but God. And by entering into oneself like this one finds God in 
oneself. If God will that I faint not he must give me air No 

434 MEISTER ECKHART 

being can stand without God so if he means me to have being then 
he must give me himself. 

The sixth stage is, soul knows herself in God. As thus. Every- 
thing in God is God. Now my idea has always been in God, is 
still and ever shall be, therefore my soul is ever one with God 
and is God and I do find myself in God in the exalted fashion of 
being God in God eternally. This brings the expert soul ineffable 
delight. 

At the seventh stage the soul knows God in himself as being 
without beginning whence all things emanated. This gnosis 
comes to no man fully in this life for it means the beholding of God, 
a thing not of this world. 

54 

Mind you, all our perfection, our whole happiness, depends on 
our traversing and transcending creature, time and state and 
entering the cause which is causeless. 

55 

God will never give himself openly to the soul . . . except she 
bring her husband, her whole free will, to wit. 

56 

What the joy of the Lord is none can tell. But mark this 
much concerning it. The joy of the Lord is the Lord himself, 
none else, the Lord being live, essential, actual intellect which 
knows itself and is and lives itself in itself and is the same. I do 
not saddle it with any mode, nay, I divest it of all mode for he 
himself is modeless mode who is and is glad because he is. This 
is the joy of the Lord and is the Lord himself. White is not 
black nor is aught naught. From naught naught can be taken. 
From aught aught can be taken and it is wholly thus with God. 
Of aught that is wholly in God naught remains. Soul joined to 
God has in him once for all all that is at all in absolute perfection. 
There soul forgets things and herself, as she is in herself, waking 
up in God, godlike as God.in her, so much in love with self in him, 
so indiscriminately one with him, she enjoys naught but him, 
delighting in him. What more should she know or desire ? 

57 

God being still sets everything going. So desirable a thing 
starts them all running back into that from whence they came : 
to that which stays unchanged in its own self; and the nobler 
the thing the more blithely it runs. 

SAYINGS 485 

58 

God can no more abide his likes than he could abide not being 
God. Likeness is not a thing that can belong to God. There is 
sameness in the Godhead, in eternity ; but likeness is not sameness. 
If I am same I am not like. Likeness is no form of being in the 
one; there is sameness for me in the unity, not likeness. 

59 

The first work of God in the soul is the birth of his Son in the 
soul and from this act his other gifts do flow into the soul, as grace 
and virtue. What God can do in the soul is to bring forth his Son 
in the soul and this must needs be. It is characteristic of God that 
he cannot refrain, he must beget his Son in me and in you all. 
I say, God begets me his Son and so say I of you all as well. That 
we are all born of God his Son, is nothing wonderful ; we can see 
this with creatures. Now mark my words, I say, this man is 
the not; I am not what you are and you are not what I am. 
Suppress the not and we are just the same; take naught from 
creatures and creatures are all the same. The remainder is one. 
What is this one? It is the Son the Father bears. To be the 
actual Son the Father bears we must cancel the naught of creatures. 
This naught which all creatures are cumbers a man and stops 
him being the very Son begotten of the Father. God bids us 
part with naught so as to be ähe selfsame Son the Father bears. 
For this man must be one; he must escape from images and 
forms ere he can be the actual Son the Father brings to birth ; 
he must be rid of everything, not merely alien things, but eke his 
- own; for God’s Son and man’s son are not two sons, they are one 
Son, one nature ; so it behoves a man to flee from other natures as 
well as from his own and stand in the bare nature of the Son in 
the Godhead, in that only. What I say is that if one is to be the 
actual Son the Father bears one must give up own nature altogether. 
—<‘ But many people have natures so alien to their own, how then 
can they surrender their own nature ? ’—We always must surrender 
our own natures in order to become the very Son the Father 
bears. As St Paul says, ‘We must be changed into his Son.’ 
In other words, the Son alone being beloved of the Father, what- 
ever things the Father loves he must love in his Son and inas- 
much as we become this Son the Father bears we do be changed 
into his Son of love and are his very Son. Of this be sure. God 
will love them in us and in all creatures in the guise of his alone- 
begotten Son. Provided we abandon naught, become estranged 
from naught. We. must relinquish all things, must forget all 

436 : MEISTER ECKHART 

things, keeping nothing but the single nature of the Son. It 
seems a great deal but is not. It is a simple thing God bids us 
do, he bids us give up naught. Whoso is without why has given 
up naught and.by doing this we gain the whole world and abund- 
ance. ‘To the good man all things come, be sure of that. If 
I am better than you are, all the good you do and what you have 
is rather mine than yours for what you have you have in naught. 
But if I have abandoned naught I am the very Son the Father 
bears and everything belongs to me in God. 

60 

What could be sweeter than to have a friend with whom, as 
with thyself, thou canst discourse all that is in thy heart ? 

61 

When God made man the innermost heart of the Godhead was. 
put into man. | 
62 

What is God’s speaking ? The Father regarding himself with 
pure perception sees into his own simple uncompounded essence 
and there descrys the whole idea of creature. By doing so he 
speaks himself, his Word being clear understanding and this is 
his Son. ; 

63 

Speaking of man we mean a person ; speaking of manhood we 
mean human nature. 

64 

Doctors define what nature is. It is the thing that essence 
can take on. God took on manhood and not man. Isay: Christ 
was the first man. How so? What is first in intention is last 
in execution, as the roof is the finish of the house. 

65 

The uppermost soul-face has two acts. By one she knows God, 
his gift and his emanation. Therein she loves God today and 
knows him, and not tomorrow.. The image lies not in these 
powers owing to theirimpermanence. There is another action of 
the upper face, which is concealed. In the concealment lies 
the image. Five things belong to this image. First, it is cast 
by another. Secondly, it answers to that same. Thirdly, it 
emanates therefrom. Fourthly, it is like thereto in nature; not 
that it is God’s nature but it is a substance which is self-sub- 
sistent ; pure light-emanation from God and differing from him 

SAYINGS 437 

only by the fact of knowing God. Fifthly, it tends towards the 
exemplar whence it came. Two things adorn this image. The 
one, its being arrayed like him. The other, its having in it 
a somewhat of eternity. The soul has three powers. Not in 
them lies the image. But she owns a single power, namely, 
the active intellect. Now according to Augustine and the New 
Philosophers, memory, understanding and will are found herein 
together, nor can these three be told apart. This is the secret 
image answering to God, God shining straight into this image. 

It is God’s will that we be holy and that we do what makes us 
holy. Holiness is a matter of will and wisdom. According to 
the best authorities holiness lies in the ground, in the summit 
of the soul, where soul is in her cause, where she has outgrown 
names and her own powers withal. For powers too are the defi- 
ciency. We cannot give a name to God, nor can we name the soul 
in her own nature. The point where these twain meet is holiness. 

Essence is so noble it gives being to all things. Were there no 
essence angels would be like stones. 

66 

A learned doctor said on one occasion when preaching in the 
capital, that there was once a man, we read of him in holy scrip- 
ture, who went a full eight years yearning for God to indicate some 
person who should instruct him in the way of truth. Then in a 
moment of vehement desire there came a voice from God and said, 
‘ Get thee to the temple, there shalt thou find a man to set thee on 
the path to truth.” And he went and found a beggar, his feet all 
cracked and dirty, his rags scarce worth three pence. He greeted 
him, ‘Give thee good morrow!’ He answered, ‘I n’er had a 
bad.’—‘ How now!’ quotha, ‘Give thee good luck!’ He 
answered, ‘I never had ill.’ Again he adventured, ‘ God bless 
thee! How sayst thou, Sirrah, to that?’ He said, ‘ I was never 
accursed.’—‘ God ’a mercy !’ he cried, ‘ unriddle me this, I trow 
it is beyond me!’ Said he, ‘I will. Thou dost wish me good 
morrow and I say I ne’er had a bad. Hungry I praise God ; 
freezing I praise God ; poor and forsaken withal I praise God so 
I never have a bad morrow. Thou dost wish me good luck ; 
I say, I have never had ill. Whatsoever God gives or may lay 
up for me, be it sour or sweet, good or bad, I accept all from God 
for the best so I have no ill hap. Thou dost call down God’s 
blessing upon me. I answer, I am not accursed. I have given 
my will up to God’s, every whit, so that anything God wills I will. 
That is why I am never unblessed, because I have no will but 
God’s.’-—‘ Marry, good Sir, suppose God chose to cast thee into 

488 MEISTER ECKHART 

hell, what wouldst thou say to that ?’—‘To cast me into hell ?’ 
quoth he, ‘that would spite himself! Yet if he cast me into hell 
I should still have two arms to clasp him with. One arm is true 
humility and this I should put under him, embracing him the 
while with the other arm of love. Better,’ he said, ‘ to be in hell 
with God than be in heaven without him.’ 

67 

Said Meister Eckhart to a beggar, ‘ Good morrow, brother.’ * The 
same to you Sir, but I never have bad ones.-—‘ How so, brother ?° 
he asked. —* All God gives me to bear I cheerfully suffer for his sake 
deeming myself unworthy, so never am I sad or sorry.’—* Where 
didst thou find God first ?’ he asked.—‘ Leaving all creatures I 
found God.’—‘ Where didst thou leave God, brother ?’ he said.— 
‘In every man’s pure heart.”—‘ What manner of man art thou, 
brother?’ quoth he.—‘I am a king,’ he said.—‘ Of what?’ he 
queried.—‘ Of my own flesh. Whatsoever my spirit desires of. 
God my flesh is more eager, more ready to do and to bear than 
my mind to accept.’—‘ Kings have kingdoms,’ he said : ‘ where is 

‘thy realm, brother ?’—‘In my own soul.’—‘ How so, brother ?’ 
he asked.—* When, having locked the doors of my five senses, 
I am desiring God with all my heart then do I find God in my soul 
as clearly and as joyful as he is in life eternal.’—He said, ‘ Granting 
thee holy, who made thee so brother ? ’—‘ Sitting still and 
thinking deep and keeping company with God has gotten me to 
heaven, for never could I rest in aught inferior to God. Now 
having found him I have peace and do rejoice eternally in him 
and that is more than any temporal kingship. No outward act 
however perfect but hinders the interior life.’ 

7 68 

Meister Eckhart met a lovely naked boy. He asked him whence 
he came. He said, ‘I come from God.’—‘ Where hast thou left 
him ? ’—‘ In virtuous hearts.’—‘ Whither away ? "—‘ To God.’— 
‘Where wilt thou find him ? ’—* Leaving all creatures.’—‘ Who 
art thou ? —‘ A king.’—‘ Where is thy kingdom ? ’—‘ In my own 
heart.’—‘ Mind no one shares it with thee.—‘So I do.’ He 
took him to his cell and said, ‘ Take any coat thou wilt.’—‘ Then 
I should be no king’ (said he), and vanished. 

It was God himself that he had had with him a little spell. 

69 1 

A daughter came to the Dominican convent asking for Meister 
Eckhart. The porter said, ‘Who shall I tell him?’ She 

1 See also Spamer’s Texte, CO, 5. 

SAYINGS \ 439 

answered, ‘I do not know.’—‘ Why do you not know?’ he 
enquired.— Because,’ she said, ‘ I am not either virgin or spouse, 
not man nor wife nor widow nor lady nor lord nor wench nor 
thrall.’ The porter went off to Meister Eckhart. ‘Do come out,’ 
he said, ‘ to the strangest wight that ever I heard and let me come 
too and you put your head out and say, ‘ Who is asking for me ? ’ 
He did so. She said to him what she had said to the porter. 
Quoth he, ‘My child, thou hast a shrewd and ready tongue, I 
prithee now thy meaning ? ’—‘ An I were virgin,’ she replied, ‘I 
were in my first innocence ; spouse, I were bearing the eternal 
Word within my soul unceasingly ; were I a man I should grapple 
with my faults; wife, should be faithful to my husband. Were 
I a widow I should be ever yearning for my one and only love ; as 
lady I should render fearful homage ; as wench I should be living 
in meek servitude to God and to all creatures and as thrall I 
should be working hard, doing my best tamely to serve my Master. 
Of all these things I am no single one who am the one thing as the 
other running thither.’ The doctor went away and told his 
students, ‘ I have been listening to the most perfect person I ween 
I ever met.’ 
This fragment is entitled, ‘ Meister Eckhart’s Daughter.’ 

70 
MEISTER ECKHART’S FEAST 

Meister Eckhart tells how once upon a time there came a beggar 
to Cologne on Rhine in quest of poverty and the life of truth. 
Accosted him a noble dame, ‘ Eat with me, brother, of God’s 
charity !°—‘ Gladly,’ quoth he. When they were seated she 
encouraged him, ‘ Eat heartily, be not ashamed.’— ’Tis wrong,’ 
he said, ‘ to eat too much, to eat too little is wrong too ; the just 
mean lies between : I will eat as a beggar.’-—“ What is a beggar ? ’ 
she asked.—He said, ‘It means three things. First, being dead 
to natural things. Next, not having inordinate desire of posses- 
sions. Thirdly, begrudging suffering to everyone except oneself.’ 
— Tell me,’ she questioned, ‘ what is poverty of the inner man ?’ 
—‘That also means three things,’ he said. ‘ First, complete 
detachment from creatures, which are out of God, in time and in 
eternity. Secondly, abject humility of the outward and the 
inward man. Thirdly, an active interior life: the mind un- 
ceasingly wrought up to God.’—* What is poverty of spirit ? ’ she 
asked.— You want to know too much,’ he said.—‘ I can never 
know too much,’ said she, ‘ of God’s glory and man’s happiness.’— 
‘True,’ he returned. ‘That again means three things. First, 

440 MEISTER ECKHART 

not knowing aught but God in time and in eternity. Secondly, 
not seeking God outside oneself. Thirdly, not owning any pro- 
perty that one conveys from place to place.'-—‘ But surely Meister 
Eckhart, our father, must get from out ‘his cell the sermons he 
preaches from his pulpit ? ’—‘ Not he,’ he said.— Whence then ? i 
(she asked).—‘ The more temporal the more personal, the more 
personal the more temporal.’—‘I trow,’ she said, * this guest is 
not out of Bohemia.’! Quoth he, ‘ The sun that shines here in 
Cologne is shining also in the town of Prague.’—* Explain,’ she 
begged. He said, ‘Tis not my place with Meister Eckhart present.’ 
Meister Eckhart said, ‘ He who knows nothing of the truth from 
within, if he woo it without shall find it too within. — The 
reckoning is paid,’ she cried. And he: ‘ Lady, you furnish the 
wine.’—‘ I am not loath,’ she answered, ‘ an you ask me.’ ; 
(So Meister Eckhart asked her), ‘ Wherein do we divine the work- 
ing of the Holy Ghost within our souls ?’ She answered, ‘ In three 
things. First, in the waning day by day of personal things, desires 
and natural love. Next, in the waxing of divine love and of grace 
from day to day. Last, in the eager charity which moves us to 
bestir ourselves on our fellow-man’s behalf before ourown.’ Quoth 
he, ‘ Our Lord’s friends prove it.” Anon he asked, ‘ How does the 
spiritual man divine God’s presence at his orisons or exercises ? ’ 
She answered, ‘ By three things. First, by the object he sets 
before his chosen, world scorn and body suffering, to wit. Next, 
by a growth in grace commensurate with the love betwixt himself 
and God. The third one is that God does never leave him without 
hint of some fresh truth.’-—‘ That is, of course, the case,’ he said. 
“ Now tell me, how does he know if what he does is wholly in accord- 
ance with the sovran will of God?’ She answered, ‘ By three 
things. First, clear consciousness never fails him. Secondly, he 
has union with God without break. Thirdly, the heavenly Father 
keeps giving his Son birth in him, in inspiration.’ Quoth Meister 
Eckhart, ‘ Were every reckoning as well paid as this one for the 
. wine there’s many a soul in purgatory would this day be in life 
eternal.’ Whereon the mendicant chimed in, ‘ What more remains 
it is the Doctor’s turn to pay.’—* Leave the old to their age,’ pro- 
tested Meister Eckhart.—‘ Then love shall settle it,’ the beggar 
said, ‘ that never faileth.’ ithe 
Quoth the lady, * Prithee father, how does one know oneself the 
heavenly Father’s child ?’ Heanswered, ‘ Bythreethings. First, 
one does everything forlove. Next, one takes everything the same 
from God. Thirdly, one has no hope in anyone but God.’ 

18 Béheim (Bohemia) I interpret thus: 6é stands for beatus ; heim, domus 
oe mr is to be interpreted as own house or fixed abode.’ Wilhelm von 
enden. 

SAYINGS 441 

Quoth the beggar, ‘ Prithee father, how are we to tell if virtue 
is doing her perfect work in us ?’ He answered, ‘ By three things, 
love of God for God’s sake, good for good’s sake, truth for 
truth’s sake.’ 

Quoth the Doctor, ‘ My children, how lives the teacher of the 
truth ?’ The lady said, ‘ He practises what he preaches.’ The 
beggar cried, ‘Agreed. But the truth in his heart no words 
can say.’ 

As the eternal Word is the birth of the heavenly Father, so is 
the will of God the birth and the becoming of all creatures. 

THIS IS MEISTER ECKHART’S FEAST 

„+ 
A ree og u 
4 13 Fi oF 
N 4 * vi 
5 
r En ’ 
1 . 
2 E 
. ¢ , 
; v4 bf 
‘ v ‘ ; 
. : 
’ 7 _— 
a j a 
„a ' 
; ( I? 
E f 
2 * u, . 
? 4 i 4, 5 
24 j ’ prac nk oi ih 5 dreh 
mn ie 
42 4 . E 2 a 
Ar At 
7 a « * i 
u ii 
se 2 r 
~ buf 
: >“ 
+ A 
u . . 
4 é 
5 
f a 
* 
‘ 
E + 
we _* 
> ’ 

‘ 
* 
< f 
a 
22-22 
v 
Ps 2 
“ 7 ‘ 
. 2 Er 2 u 
- - 3 _ 
P h 
ya 4 
“ 2 € 
5 £ 5 + 
? ~y a y 
u 
) ae “ 
u. Fg 
a4; 1 Vor. Ze 
" ~ ’ KT » 
Ww i ’ » 4 
Sh » & # > 
ae Di Br 
er j wn 
P 
i 
= 7 
rn 1 vr 
4 
” - 
" f 
» i 
‘ ee =; a Bu 
FE ae Ö 
N . # vu we 7 
= + 
» 
~ # 
ah ml wart a 
‘ . = 
y } vr R 
mi 
F ER. 
bos Fe Qype 
Eu Be > 
‘ ( > => 
af eg u 
x a ms 

IV 
LIBER POSITIONUM 

4 

1. Here the disciple is supposed to question his master, saying, 
* Tell me, could God an he would have made all things as good as 
he is himself ?’ The master said, Yes, what God wills he can do.—- 
* Are things all made of his own nature ?’ The master said, No. 

2. The disciple inquired, ‘ What is the soul made of ? ’—She is 
made out of nothing. —* Where did God get the nothing he made 
the soul out of ? —Some say he got it in himself. That is not 
the case for in God is not nothing : that which is in God is God. — 
‘But God has all things in himself and without God is nothing. 
Surely then he gets this nothing out of himself? ’—The master 
said, No, not at all! He gets it neither in himself nor out of * 
himself, nor above himself nor below himself. There is no getting 
nothing from inside or out. Ifit were gotten anywhere it would 
not be nothing. Anything that does this: takes nothing from 
nowhere and makes of it something, is God. So runs the argument 
that the nothing is gotten from nowhere. They asked St Augustine 
about this mysterious nothing out of which the soul is made and 
where, apart from place, this nothing hides ? His explanation was 
that this nothing is openly enclosed in betwixt God and God- 
head, in his almighty power. Were it in close confinement it would 
not be naught : it either would have place or else be God by nature, 
the soul being made of the nature of God. But it is not. Ergo, 
this nothing is at large in the almighty power of the Father to 
whom it is as easy to get from nowhere naught as aught. It is 
confined to his omnipotence to be able to take naught from 
nowhere and from it create aught. Whatever can do this is God. 

8. Now another question. Dionysius says, Tell me, what about 
the soul who is in full enjoyment of her rights : what is it that she 
has by rights at the height of her perfection ?—By rights the soul 
has knowledge : clear understanding of all things andisso mellowed — 
by love as to be all unwitting, when people love and hate her, 
whether she be not dearer to her haters than her lovers. And 
this soul has by rights absolute freedom from herself and things : 
sunk in the sovran good she cannot find herself at all. Here we 
have two natures. One, the thing that sinks; the other, what it 
sinks in. She sinks eternally but never touches bottom. This 

445 

446 MEISTER ECKHART 

sinking shows her two things. In sinking from herself she is 
more God than creature. The fact that she does sink proclaims . 
her creaturely for deity sinks not.—But when she has yielded her 
aught to his aught and her naught is subsisting in naught, then 
what will belong to her aught and her naught ?—None can tell, 
but she has no more than her rights. That is the answer. 

4. Another question is, has the soul more enjoyment in the 
source of joy or in the vision of its wonders ?—Consider what she 
has in each. In admiring its wonders she obeys the selfsame 
wondrous law that the first cause laid down for all causes as 
befitting each. But soul does not stop here, she transcends 
wonder. The wonders have become her potential being. Hence 
her enjoyment is much keener in the source of joy than in the 
beholding of its wonders. In the source is her abode, not in its 
wondrous vision. There all wonders end ;° there all is one to her 
and one in all. That is the answer to this question. 

5. The question is, if the Godhead has all things how comes it 
then neither to give nor to beget ? If.it does not beget it is not 
Father.—The explanation is this. Man’s nature is called man- 
hood, and manhood as such neither acts nor begets ; it acts and 
begets in a human person. And the same with Godhood : it.is 
all-containing and yet not active and productive in itself. What 
it does is all done by the Persons in person and nature. The God- 
head is called fruitful inasmuch as it is brought forth in the Persons 
in Person and essence. 

6. An angel may do three things in the soul. Either he con- 
fronts her with the scriptures or with the holy life or, again, with 
the example of Christ Jesus, showing her something clearly as 
though in a mirror wherein one may espy some blemish on the 
human face and so proceed to cure it. Thus she sees herself, what 
she still lacks ; where-she is not as yet all that she ought to be; 
what things to leave and what to keep; how much or little she 
should be to things: all this she plainly sees. And whatever an 
angel can do the devil may very well copy.— Have we no means 
of telling, Sir, if it is an angel or the devil ? ’—Yes, they are ike 
different. Tests for angel and the devil are as follows. An 
an angel does is done in the light, orderly and clearly, and the uch! 
rejoices in the amiable presence of the angel ; also it is a sign to 
know him by that she is left with a sense of pleasure. In counter- 
feiting this the devil makes it vague, confused, ambiguous, and the 
soul, affrighted at this haunting ofthe fiend, is restless and depressed 
and by this she may know it is the devil. 

The angel talks virtue to the soul, the fiend talks virtue too but 
God does not talk virtue.—* For the love of God, good Sir, tell us 
what you mean.’—I will explain. The angel talks virtue to the 

LIBER POSITIONUM 447 

soul and his talk (the angel’s), which is of necessary virtue, is 
friendly and persuasive, something in this fashion : ‘ See, there is 
still this to go and that to do and the other to leave off’: orderly 
counsel and plain and the soul finds peace in complying with 
his words. The devil. talks virtue too, but he urges superfluous 
virtues : too much fasting and watching and kneeling, too much 
weeping, and his counsels are more in the nature of commands, as 
thus : * Do this or that or thou art damned,’ or ‘ art not good nor 
perfect.’ An orgy of uncontrolled virtues with no definite aim, 
‘that is his cue and the soul is affrighted within her and gleans no 
satisfaction from his words.—But God’s talk is not of virtue 
though it is wonderful talk. The burden of it a fair Word that 
is passing good to hear. The Holy Ghost goes before the angel 
and embracing the soul prepares her to receive what the angel 
has to say; and the Son gives wisdom and order to the words 
and God the Father help and consummation to that which is 
spoken in the soul. Thus God does not talk virtue in the soul ; 
he forestalls the angel and prepares the soul, giving wisdom, order 
and achievement to the angelic utterance in the soul; the Holy 
Trinity all work together in her without speaking. 

7. The statement that our Lord from time to time holds con- 
verse with good people and that they hear words or become im- 
pressed with the sense of certain sayings such as, ‘Thou art mine 
elect, or my beloved; thou shalt never leave me and I will never 
leave thee,’ and the like, things like this, I say, should be accepted 
with reserve and judged upon their merits for locutions of this kind 
are often due to a trick the soul has, when indulging in comfortable 
intuitions of divinity, of answering herself by a sort of reflex - 
action. When the soul, aflood with God, is void and free from 
sensible affections she grows apace in created light till nothing 
transcends her but intellect and essential knowledge. In this 
detachment the knower is the known ; out of her own light she 
creates what she desires. Such is the effect of the benignant 

‘reign of essential understanding. Aristotle says in the third book 
of The Soul, ‘Every immaterial substance or isolated form is in 
itself both the knower and the known,’ and this is why the soul, 

_eut off from the corporal things by the encircling flood of God, 
draws deiform truth out of her own self. It follows that anything 
in her of which she has a rational perception is not said by God : 
God’s speech is none other than the perfect image of divine truth 
wherein the spirit is caught up out of its selfhood, past under- 
standing, into intellect. There in unity she understands without 
understanding. é 

8. To drag the hawthorn through the hay without a catch we 
must lop it well, like our Lord Jesus Christ, the tree of love, who 

448 MEISTER ECKHART 

dragged the hawthorn through the hay of this wicked world, so 
shorn of all its branches that no moving thing could cling thereto 
and so he gathered up nothing that was unstable. And to attain 
to him we must be too bare for things to cling to us or we to them. 
We take up our cross when stripping everything of self and self 
of everything we cling all pure and naked to the bare cross of Christ. 
9. He who loves aright loves not nor is not loved. They love 
and are beloved who can be pleased and pained: they pour out 
themselves in love on creatures and creatures back on them. 
But they love not nor are they loved who are not moved by creature 
good and ill; these neither give nor do they take: they pour 
not out on creature nor creature back on them. They love not 
neither are they loved. ‘We ought to love God out of love. They 
love in love who love for why : who love him for some bodily or 
temporal good. But they love out of love who love without a 
why : who do not love for temporal good nor yet eternal: they 
love him merely for himself, for his own sake pure and simple 
apart from anything he gives. \ 
10. We read of John the Baptist that he was a prophet. He was 
‘more than prophet for when the Holy Ghost from time to time 
spake by the prophets they were thereafter as they were before, 
in sinful habit. Prophets are people who are now and then con- 
strained to play’ this part. While the Holy Ghost is speaking 
through them by actual infusion of his grace they are exereising 
virtue and thereafter they revert to their former habit: they are 
called virtuous as practising virtue intermittently : they do right 
and also wrong. Not so St John; he was more than prophet for 
he practised virtue not at intervals, it was his natural and settled 
wont. And those who follow him in this are not prophets either, 
they are more than prophets, seeing as they do in the clear light 
of God exactly what to do and what to leave undone and having 
given them the Godlike power to act up to their lights with 
effortless, spontaneous delight and delightful spontaneity. These 
are called virtuous not because they practise virtue intermittently : 
they are fixed and established in it. That thing is habitual 
which we do at one time and at another not; it is an alternation. 
That is not habitual which is continuous and without admixture. 
11. A good man is known by three things. One is singleness of 
will: all we call nature his will is free from. The second is clear 
understanding : any mental knowledge that she has his soul 
has fully mastered : she either approfounds it here or yonder in 
the common ground during illumination. The third is peace of 
. mind : such images as may occur therein are no hindrance to the 
soul. 
12. Three things distinguish the solitary soul. The first is, 

LIBER POSITIONUM 449 

cessation of desire: no more wants or sense of deficieney. The 
second is, active love for and acquiescence in the will of God. 
The third is a lively feeling in the soul of the love of the Holy Ghost. 

13. Divine good in.the singular no body or blood receives but 
it does receive God’s manifold goodness. It is simple divine good 
for the spirit to be rapt out of itself into God’s oneness, there to 
understand without sensible perception. But God’s manifold 
goodness means anything revealed to her in form and likeness, 
for this is all a matter of the mortal nature.—The heavenly 
Father gives his consolation to none but the man of peaceful heart. 
Christ said to his disciples, ‘ My peace I give unto you.’ 

14. Let no one claim to have received the perfect gift of the 
Holy Ghost, who can be shaken in his convictions by any arguments 
that are disquieting. I refer to things which are spoken contrary 
to our knowledge of eternal truth. 

15. Nature comes with God into creature and driving God out 
remains alone in creature. Spirit goes with creature into God 
and driving creature out stays by itself in God. The most perfect 
mode of soul is one of self-oblivion in good works as a whole and 
the way thereto is the clear discernment of special imperfections. 
In the least of mortal quests there is at stake all natural creature 
appetite. Effortless achievements‘ are wiped out of the mind as 
though they had not been. It is true wisdom to recognise the 
folly of evil and the freedom of perfection. 

18, Hosea the prophet, rapt in wonder, had a threefold marvel 
shown him. The first one was, how God is one in essence and 
three in Person. The second marvel, which, though somewhat less 
is still ineffable and incomprehensible to creature, is this: how 
two natures meet together in one Person. The third marvel is 
the marvel of marvels: how creator is creature and creature is 
creator. The prophet Hosea says, ‘ His going forth is prepared 
as the morning ; he shall come unto us as the soft evening rain.’ 
Here the morning light suggests the nearness of his coming: the 
dawn is the herald of the day. The day dawns thrice. First in 
the chamber of the Person of the Father. Next, in the chamber 
of the Person of the Son. Thirdly, in the world. The first dawn 
was the will of the Father; the second, the obedience of the Son ; 
the third one broke when their common Spirit caught the precious 
most pure blood-drops that ever flowed from the virgin heart of 
Mary. The fire of love once kindled, he no longer tarries: day 
is here. 

20. Suppose a man insults me and I silence him by my retort, 
it is not I who conquer: I am conquered. I conquer if, in true 
humility, I hold my peace. Conquering we are conquered and 
being conquered conquer. 

29 

450 MEISTER ECKHART 

21. It is a question if angels grow in heaven ? I declare they 
do. They go on growing till the day of judgment, waxing in 
knowledge and in love; by then the lowest is about as wise as the 
highest was when he was created. —* But tell me Sir, does the soul 
grow in heaven as well ? ’—I say, No.—‘ But why, Sir, should 
the angel grow and not the soul ?’—For this reason. The soul 
grows in the body and when she quits the body that is her judgment 
day: the highest she has reached by then is the nearest she will 
ever get to knowing God. But her growth is far nobler than an 
angel’s for what an angel has comes by no effort of his own; hers 
is the reward of toil so that one light of hers is worth ten of any 
angel’s. 

22. Three kinds of progress take place in serious people. The 
first is natural; when, fought to a finish, man’s nature is van- 
quished and subdued, then at length he sees all random thoughts 
as things he can turn to his account and we to ours. Not a single 
notion but will serve to bring light to pious people, and this (light) 
is essential almost as much as natural ; essential, though by grace, 
a divine repugnance to all base inventions.—The second kind of 
progress is unconscious. ‘The man is spiritualised so that his 
words, his ways and his whole self enlighten other people with a 
realization of their own shortcomings. Nature sleeping, spirit wide 
awake, that I call light and she is a light not alone to other people 
but the devil quails before her.—‘ Sir, tell me, what is he afraid’ 
of ? ’—The devil does not know what is in the soul except what 
he can recognise by its outward form. Supposing her brimfull of 
light then divine light comes surging out of her and when the 
fiend sees this he is afraid and durst not test her with a notion, 
so the soul stays undisturbed. Which is to her credit though 
unbeknownst to her.—The third progress is spiritual. When such 
a soul is flooded with the influx of God’s spirit, love reinforces love, 
light light, giving a love which fires the soul and which she cannot 
fail to be aware of. The first growth is conscious, the third also 
is conscious and the middle one unconscious. 

23. Plato says, ‘ The soul of all creatures is the Godhead.’ Then 
our Lord Jesus Christ is the soul of the elect. 

24. The question is, what is the effect on man of the body of 
our Lord Jesus Christ ? I say that its effect on man is to clarify 
his nature and prevent him committing mortal sin. On the en- 
lightened it confers another boon, receptivity to the divine light 
and then though they die they will have nothing between. 

27. ‘ Pray Sir, one to whom eternal light is given, suppose he 
were to die, would he have aught between ? ’—Once having had 
eternal light he never has anything between. 

28. ‘Tell me, good Sir, what is divine light ? ’—With divine © 

LIBER POSITIONUM 451 

light the natural life is no obstacle to the eternal light, or in other 
words, there is no consenting to sin. When we are unable to act 
up to our lights that is a sign that we have not received eternal 
light. Knowledge with the power to apply it, that is eternal light. 
He who receives eternal light takes everything the same. 

29. * But even good people are now and then perturbed : have 
they then no light ? —When our Lord Jesus Christ was drawing 
near his passion, his agony of suffering pierced his soul and called 
forth the rebuke to Judas at the table and St Peter on the mount, 
to whom he said, “ Couldst thou not watch with me a while ? 
Thou who didst promise to be with me unto death.” But he did 
not on this account lose the light of unity. Once more har- 
monious with his Father’s will he was filled with joy at having in 

‚accord therewith submitted willingly to pain. The fact of being 
moved involves no loss of light: anything conceived in time is 
moved in time. While we are in time we are affected by time. 
But the more imperturbable one is the more one is established 
in eternity. By their deeds ye shall know them. | 

80. He alone can do God’s will who resigns his own. We are 
strong in proportion as we are inspired with divine power to 
withstand the things that come between ourselves: and God. 
When we stand in our primitive innocence, then at last we begin 
to live. 

81. “But when is a man in a state of primitive innocence ? ’— 
Primitive innocence is not attained without divine light. Simple, 
primitive innocence reigns when the pattern of all virtues is 
present in a man and he stands without impediment of nature in 
the eternal truth. It is only by treading upon creature that we 
reach the bottom rung of Godhood.—‘ What is the bottom rung 
of Godhood ? ’—It is spiritualised nature. 

82. ‘Sir, is it better having and giving or not having and 
letting ? —Letting is better than giving. Giving adds more 
lustre, letting shows more spirituality. We shed our blood; the 
saints let their blood be shed. 

83. ‘ Will you tell me, Sir, what causes the decay of tenderness ? ’ 
— What is the tenderness you mean ?—‘ I mean interior tenderness.’ 
— To have it is a sign of immaturity ; to lose it betokens ado- 
lescence. The father pets his child when the child is young but 
as it gets to know its father’s will he grows seemingly less fond and 
this less obvious fondness is an indication of the child’s approach 
to man’s estate. With the soul it is the same. His tenderness 
to her proclaims her immature, but as she grows in knowledge and _ 
constant harmony with the will of God he inspires her with less 
irrational fondness and this is a sign she is developing. 

85. That alone is perfect which does not seek for aught outside 

452 MEISTER ECKHART 

‚itself. Whatever we can say about perfection to that we can 
attain.—A gentle man is one whose serenity no trouble can dis- 
turb.—We stand before God while we do not cross the will 
of God. 

36. When does God work in man unhindered ?—God finds no 
hindrance in a man who takes both good and ill from God with the 

‚same thankfulness. 

87. Sure proof of true humility is the fearful joy of being 
praised. For on coming into touch with truth and finding in 
himself a witness of it, a man is sensible of pleasure but fears it as 
a likely cause of his undoing. 

88. The right loyal heart receives with bitterness inventions of 
the soul which are not sent by God.—That heart is kind whose 
graciousness is proof against every good and ill. 

89. The treasure of God is loss of possessions, people’s despisery, 
sickness and submission to God. 

41. Our Lord Jesus Christ waxed not at all in eternal light ; but 
the things he taught, in beholding these he took peculiar pleasure. 

42. Pious folk should imitate the deified man, Christ. By 
imitating Christ I mean becoming Godlike. What I mean by 
Godlike is, your words, deeds, conduct, being free from human 
wont. By human I mean imperfect. In proportion to his im- 
perfection a man is moveable by aught or anybody can be (moved) 
by him.—‘ What do you mean by moveable ? —By moveable I 
mean not impatience only : moveable I call anything affected by 
either good or ill and that can in anywise be anything to anyone 
or to whom anyone can as such be anything, and I call immoveable 
only that which nothing can affect and which affects nothing. 
That man then I call immoveable to whom good and ill are just 
the same ; who is as far as possible exempt from the agitations of 
both joy and sorrow. It will never be natural to him that his 
emotions stir not independently of mind. But once the mind takes 
charge, it is all over and as it was before and then the man is not 
a mortal man, he is man deified. 

43. Good people have three sorts of expert knowledge. In the 
first place the intelligence is sharpened so that it estimates correctly 
the smallest thing presented to it: its more or less amount of 
sensible admixture they gauge to a nicety and can act accord- 
ingly.—In the second place, when they have to do a thing they 
can always tell whether it proceeds from the ground of God. or 
the ground of nature. Thirdly, so subtile is their understanding 
that any ghostly form, the very faintest light, which appears to 
them, they recognise for fiend or spirit. 

44. The true test of interior perfection is that nothing thou 
doest from without casts any shadow within. 

. 

LIBER POSITIONUM 453 

45. When the Godhead began to inquire how mankind could be 

restored to its original perfection, the Father sat in counsel in the 
‚chamber of the Holy Trinity. The Father said, ‘ Who shall we 
send to save mankind ?’ Answered him the Son and said, ‘ Father, 
send me: I will save mankind.’ Then stooped him down the 
eternal Word of the heavenly Father, that is to say, his Son, who 
is the middle Person of the Holy Trinity, and clad himself in 
human nature. Remaining what he was he took upon him that 
which he was not and was thus obedient to his Father in heaven 
and not in heaven only but on earth as well. Obedience to his 
Father and love towards mankind constrained him to perfect 
all his Father’s work. . 

46. ‘Sir, for God’s sake, may I ask you something that I want 
to know, something very subtle ?’—By all means. Whatever it 
may be and however subtle, I will try and answer. Ask me what 
you will.— Well, what I want to know is this: was our Lord 
Jesus Christ hindered in any way by doing outward works ?’ 
—I can give you a definite answer to that. The soul of Christ 
was never an independent entity as such. It no sooner was than 
it was Christ; directly it was made, straightway it was united ; 
first one and then the other it is true but yet both timeless. At his 
first appearance Christ was snatched from independence into the 
keeping of the middle Person of the Trinity where in essential 
wisdom he gazes without blenching at the naked fullness of the 
divine perfection. From the moment when Christ’s soul and body 
were united with the Godhead his soul has been gazing at the 
Godhead as it is doing to this day. As to the lower powers of 
his soul which function in the body making possible his preaching 
and his teaching and the other things he did, there the joy of 
contemplation was diminished somewhat: not the vision but the 
pleasure of the sight. But the higher powers of his soul, wherein 
he was united, these remained always in unveiled contemplation. 
Now I have explained how Christ was hindered and at the same 
time not. One thing more and let that suffice as giving you the 
key to the whole matter. The hindrance was physical not 
psychic. But even so he never failed in the minutest point to 
fulfil the mission on which his Father sent him, preaching and 
teaching and doing outward works whereby he earned reward 
and honour. 

47. ‘ Could Christ earn reward ? ’—There are two rewards ; one 
of them Christ earned, the other not. One of the rewards we earn 
by our good works is the vision of the Godhead. This reward 
Christ did not earn since from the moment Christ’s body was 
united with the Godhead, his soul has been gazing at the Godhead, 
as it is doing to this day. The other reward we earn by our good 

454 MEISTER ECKHART 

works is the glorification of the body with the soul after the day 
of judgment and this-reward Christ earned by his holy life, his 
body being glorified together with his soul at his resurrection. 
Now thou knowest how Christ did earn reward and also not. 

48. ‘ Just one other thing.’ —Tell me, what is that ?—‘ You 
say that Christ gained honour. What honour did he gain? — 
Christ has the title of The Head of Holy Christendom and this 
honour Christ has won by his holy life. 

49. ‘A man to whom eternal light is given, is he prone to sin 
in time ? ’—One to whom eternal light is given may well stoop to 
imperfection and sometimes falls an easier prey to frivolity and 
suchlike venial sins than another man.—‘ What is the cause of 
this propensity ? ’—It comes from being engrossed in one simple 
thing ; multitudinous images disturb the soul, tossing her about 
with their various conceits. Once conceiving unity she is dis- 
tracted by diversity. But as soon as she begins to see, it is as 
though it had never been and she can free herself completely 
without the slightest effort ; which is a sign that she has eternal 
light. To see and be unable to escape would argue lack of eternal 
light. You know now how it is that people, even with eternal 
light, are prone to sin. St Paul sinned after he had been 
caught up. 

50. The first and noblest work of God is motionlessness : divine 
rest. It stands to reason that the maker of the motionless is him- 
self unmoved. Were God not immoveable there could nothing 
motionless be made. 

Aristotle says all moving things proceed from rest and from 
necessity and moving things are all seeking rest. Man likewise 
then ought to be as motionless as possible.—* When is a man 
motionless ? ’—The soul is motionless when nothing whatever can 
perturb her; when she is neither glad nor sad and cannot be 
gladdened nor yet saddened. And she must be unnecessitous.— 
“When is she unnecessitous ? —The soul is unnecessitous when 
she has no need to cleave to any creature and not only has no need, 
it is hell-pain to her to dwell upon the form of creature since there 
is no rest for her save in the formless form of God. She is un- 
necessitous when she has come into her rights and, with no need of 
change, rests in the unnecessitous nothingness of his unchanging 
nature. 

51. ‘Sir, what did St Paul mean by saying, ‘‘ We shall be one spirit 
with God?” When is the soul one spirit with God ? ’—She is one 
spirit with God when she has no image or anything between. And 
she is turned to spirit when she is not subject to any creature love 
or appetite. 

52. ‘Sir, what is perfect love ? ’—Perfect love leaves nothing 

LIBER POSITIONUM 455 

less than God.—‘ Pray tell me what you mean.’—I mean, having 
hold of nothing but God they cannot leave go of less than God, 
who are as they should be. Natural ties have been cut. 

53. * Tell me, Sir, for the love of God, is it possible to pray or 
ask of God quite unselfishly ?’—Oh yes. I will tell you how. 
There are two cases of unselfish prayer. The first is on our own 
account, that we may be rid of some imperfection which comes 
between us and eternal truth. The second case is prayer for some 
other person’s sin, knowing all the facts and that he desires to be 
free. For these things we may pray and with avidity. But our 
human will must confine itself to the will of God, as thus : ' Lord, 
thou knowest I desire not nor do I will aught save what thou dost 
will: an thou know something better, give me that,’ so losing 
thine own and keeping his. 

54. ‘Sir, what about the man they talk of sometimes among 
pious folk, who sets such store by physical austerities and long- 
winded prayers ; is that the best or is there something better ? ’— 
The most perfect bond that we can have is innocence, a blame- 
less life, and being wholly without guile it is best to drop words 
altogether for words are interlopers between ourselves and God. 

55. ‘What is the sign of union with God’s will ? —Perfect 
singlemindedness.—It is characteristic of the gracious, deified 
mind, from trivial error to extract much wisdom.—The very least 
thing in excess of absolute necessity will count.—Christ’s every 
action is a pious precept.—An angel’s nature is his intellect and 
his intellect is his impartible nature. 

56. He to whom light is given grows conscious of the darkness 
in all creatures. : 

57. ‘ Will you tell me, Sir, why Solomon should say, The righteous 
man falls seven times a day? What is this falling of the righteous 
man ? ’—It is the lapsing of his soul from the highest level she can 
reach to: failure to remain ‚at the very summit where she tran- 
scends creature in God, that is the fall of the perfect man. 

58. ‘ When does one person love another in God without ad- 
mixture of nature ? ’—The sure test of pure divine love is the sense 
of nothing but God, always with enlightenment. 

59. ‘ Why is it that a man will ask for things he does not need 
and knowing this to be the case will still go on doing it: what 
does he do it for? ’—It is nature. When appetites are uncon- 
trolled a man will ask for the impossible.—‘ But supposing it is 
not impossible nor yet unlikely and he is self-controlled, what is it 
then ? ’—I tell you it is nature.—‘ Yes, yes, good Sir, but leave 
out nature !’—That will I not. It is nature inasmuch as it is 
mingled with divine nature. 

60. ‘ What is an angel ? "—Angel like soul is a perpetual nature. 

456 MEISTER ECKHART 

The soul has no parts, this and that. Wherever she turns she turns 
as 2 whole. 

‘What is essential virtue ? —In essential virtue man is in 
a ie of having no active heart’s desire ; he knows what is right 
and is able to live up to his lights in the power of his primitive 
aS ee 

‘What is the sign of eternal life ? —Absence of hate is a 
a Wr eternal light. So far as we fail in love towards all mankind, 
we never really have it. 

‘Pray Sir, when are we discriminating ? ’—When we know 
one thing from another. —‘ And when are we above discrimination ?’ 
— When we know all in all then we transcend discrimination. 

64. ‘What does St Paul mean when he speaks of ““ redeeming the 
time because the days are evil ” ? ’—He calls the days evil referring 
to the changeableness of time. He says, redeeming the time— 
‘When is time redeemed ? ’—Let me tell you. To do a good work 
is not to redeem time but to pawn it. It is a good work to rest 
from sin and exercise some virtue. To do better work is not 
redeeming time. He who perfects by practice does better. To do 
the best of all, that does redeem the time. It is best of all to rest 
in the embrace of God.— But is that redeeming the time ? ’—To 
be sure it is. Time is not redeemed in time. The redemption of 
time is the timeless spirit’s atonement above time. 

65. ‘ Will you expound that sentence in St John’s epistle, 
“ Blessed are the dead that die in God?”’ When do we die in God ?’ 
— When everything is dead that intervenes between ourselves and 
God.—* Well then, will you tell me what is the joy of spirits in 
eternity: are they always finding something new in God ? — 
Verily I say, if they did not find it ever new there would be an end 
to eternity. Were there aught in God exhaustible by creature, 
eternity would end and heaven cease to be. 

6. ‘Sir, what is true wisdom ? ’—-True wisdom, so says one 
philosopher, means the knowledge of all created things and the 
creator who has made them. 

67. According to St Paul, the closest bond of love a man can 
have is harmony of will. Our Lord in his love made eternal 
provision for all human suffering when his Son died upon the cross. 

68. He follows hardest on the heels of God who leaves all 
temporal things behind and clings to the eternal. 

69. Joy is the reward of virtue, says one of the saints.—‘ Tell me, 
when does a man do his duty by creatures ?’—When he knows © 
them and leaves them. 

70. A saint says, So long as we will and will not our free will is 

not captive to God. If any man does as he should God will do what 
that man would. 

LIBER POSITIONUM 457 

71. * Sir, how would you define grace ? ’”—I define grace as him 
whom no joy nor pleasure can gladden, no pain nor adversity 
sadden. 

72. The most successful prayérs are the willing learners from 
creature or the spoken word. 

73. ‘When does God work in man unhindered ? ’—When he 
takes good and ill from God with the same thankfulness.—‘ But, 
with one and the same thankfulness or each with thankfulness ? ’ 
—They must be received with the same thankfulness. Time is 
always true to its own nature but were soul and body displaced 
into eternity motion would be lost. The less moveable thou art 
the more thou art established in eternity. 

74. ‘Sir, when is virtue present in a man ? ’—There is virtue in 
the soul just as memory and knowledge and love are in the soul, 
for they are spiritual in their substance. There is virtue in the 
‚soul and it is present in a man as long as it is not cast out in 
lawless utterances. 

75. * Will you tell me, Sir, why we are sometimes quite unmoved 
in suffering whereas at other times we hail it with delight and then 
again it readily affects us ? —Supposing a man is by himself with 
his senses indrawn from the multiplicity of things and recollected 
to himself, then his soul will be unmoved inasmuch as God is 
present in her. But if his senses are broadcast upon things and 
more or less unstable on those things, he will be readily affected. 
Then let him beware of lawless utterance ; he must recollect him- 
self and in deep humility just appeal lovingly to God: ‘ Lord thou 
knowest I can do naught without thee,’ and quick as thought thou 
art back in God. 

76. ‘ Pray Sir, is one quite detached when one gives no consent 
to sin and bitter as it was to part from things it were just as bitter 
to return to them ? ’— Yes, surely. 

77. ‘Is eternal light vouchsafed to anyone who falls short ? ’— 
Oh yes! It was to St Paul. 

78. ‘Is no holy soul beatified that has shortcomings ? ’— Yes, 
thousands if one reckoned them.—‘ But no saint can be sanctified 
unless he has received eternal light ? —Yes, numbers. 

79. ‘What do you mean, Sir, when you talk of divine light and 
eternal light, are they the same or is there a difference ? Do they 
consist in the same thing ? ’—They are not the same. By one 
light we know, by another we can and by a third one we do. 
Now to distinguish between them. To perceive divine truth and 
answer thereto, that I call divine light. I say it is God’s light 
because it is Godlike. It is not God himself; it may be given by 
an angel or asaint. Eternal light, again, I define to be the perfect 
image of the impartible nature of God and of it St Paul says, the 

458 MEISTER ECKHART 

third heaven and its light are not immediately present to us here 
in this body ; we have to return to our trueselves. Ah, woe is me, 
how wearisome my exile! It is impartible light when the soul 
departing from the body flies straight back to God into whose 
light she is absorbed. Beyond this her perception does not go. 
And I mean by impartible light the vision of God with nothing 
between: no creaturely hindrance, no time, no looking back: in 
eternity.—St John had eternal light; he knew the whole truth 
and attained to it. All things were possible to him, but though - 
not guilty of any mortal sin he was still liable to its suggestion. 
That no man can escape. 

80. ‘ What is the sign of eternal light ? "—It is a sure sign when 
everything not God is irksome and virtue has become a second 
nature. 

81. Talkativeness or over-attention to our daily wants is fatal to 
friendly intercourse with God. If we would escape the purgatorial 
fires we must set a watch on all our ways, especially our words. 
Different is the cleansing fire of the perfection of God and the love 
of the soul, between them imperfections are consumed away. 

82. Good people’s food is clear consciousness and intercourse 
with holy souls and constant reception of the body of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Neither the devil nor yet any creature ever gave 
an appetite for the body of our Lord Jesus Christ: this comes 
from God alone, you may be sure. 

84. ‘ Tell me, Sir, do we find in holy writ mention of any rapture 
besides that of St Paul ? °—No.—‘ But they tell me three are to 
be found: Adam was caught up while he was asleep and St John 
when he was resting on the bosom of our Lord and St Paul when 
he was felled to earth ; they each saw God without means, without 
any image or likeness.—Verily, I say, before the death of our 
Lord Jesus Christ no man had ever seen God in his God-nature 
except that golden temple our Lady Mary at the moment when 
our Lady conceived divine and human nature; then she received 
eternal light and saw God in his simple nature, but before that no 
creature.—‘ Then what was Adam’s rapture and St John’s ? — 
When God created Adam his body was made painless like his soul. 
You could have hewn him in his sleep and it would not have 
hurt him for the lower powers of his soul were obedient to her 
higher ones and she was subject to the law of her perfect nature 
and unhindered by gross body and this was his by right of nature. 
Had he stayed at the summit of his soul he would have kept her 
in her maker. He knew God had created him and that divine 
nature was destined to unite with human nature and he had dis- 
criminate knowledge of all creatures, each in its natural perfection 
just as God had made them and he was carried away by enjoyment 

LIBER POSITIONUM 459 

of the sight. You must know that he was sleeping like any other 
man.—‘ Then what was the rapture of St John ? ’—He was resting. 
Rest so called from its likeness to the abstraction of our Lord Jesus 
Christ and St John’s from its likeness to them both: a gentle 
sinking into dispassion, that is what his rapture was. 

85. “Is a man liable to fall once he has had eternal light ?’—I 
say, No. If Adam had seen God he would not have fallen and the 
archangel Lucifer, if he had seen God in his impartible essence 
would not have fallen.—‘ I have heard tell that in ecstasy there 
is no interference with free will. Is that really so ? ’—It neither 
strengthens nor weakens the free will. Verily I say, anyone who 
holds that a man can fall after eternal light, though he commit no 
greater sin than St Agnes did, shall die infallibly for it is heresy and 
mortal sin to have this belief. That soul can no more fall than 
St Peter could. The heavenly Father might as well forsake his 
Son as the soul wherein he has given his Son birth. If the Father 
ends the Son ends ; if the Son ends eternity ends ; if eternity ends 
the soul ends. 

86. ‘ Sir, when you speak of God’s birth, of the Father begetting 
his Son in the soul, is this birth the same as the rapture of St Paul 
and what happened at Pentecost to the disciples or are these 
different things ? "—They are exactly the same.— Then when you 
talk of eternal light do you mean God’s birth in the soul or is that 
something else? ’—I mean the same thing; they are identical. 
But one thing I do say. Birth is the better term and nearer to 
the truth though in reality there is no difference. I will tell you 
why. An angel by nature is eternal light; the sun is eternal 
light ; the stars are eternal light. Eternal light is ascribed to 
things that are not changed by time; and since we can attribute 
eternal light to creatures so we may to man in an imperfect sense. 
But birth applies to the heavenly Father alone, this birth in eternity. 
God catches the soul all at once to himself and his birth is gotten 
therein. There it is to him well-nigh the same as the Son in the 
Trinity. I say, well-nigh, for it is there by grace and the Son by 
nature.—‘ Suppose a man has eternal light, is he prone to temporal 
sin ? ’—It was after Pentecost that Peter sinned. 

90. ‘ Can a man make certain of having nothing more to over- 
come ? ’—St Paul had things to overcome after he was caught up. 
And our Lord Jesus Christ had to overcome. Though his soul 
and body were united with the Godhead and the Godhead is 
impassible, yet his future pains were present with him, racking 
all his soul-powers. 

91. ‘ When the soul prepares for God by chasing away thoughts 
and discarding all the things she has relied on and endeavours 
to get rid of every means but without success, tell me, Sir, what 

460 MEISTER ECKHART 

ought she to do next ?’—When the images from outside are all 
gone let her abase herself and lovingly entreat of him somewhat . 
that she still lacks.—‘ But if she refuses to desire or entreat, being 
minded to remain quite simple ? —Then let her simply fix her 
mind on God with vehement longing.— But surely, Sir, longing 
is a means and she wants to be quite simple and direct: without 
any images and free from this and that, with not a word or prayer 
to come between ? ’—I say it is impossible in the unglorified body ; 
she ought not to expect it.—‘ If that is the case, Sir, then it seems 
to me her watchword ought to be refusal—of objective things and 
subjective images—and that is her best way.’— There is no doubt 
of it; she can do no more. When a soul like this is rapt above 
herself into naked knowledge of naught it is God who does it at 
his own good pleasure, absolutely freely, without any help of hers. 

92. ‘Sir, can we realize all our minds can grasp ?’—No. I can 
conceive of things I cannot be: the unglorified body is not so agile 
as the mind. 

93. ‘ What is a reasonable man ? ’—One who is controlled in 
joy and sorrow, him I call a reasonable man.— How would you 
define prayer ? ’—St Augustine says, prayer is the soul’s detach- 
ment from things and attachment to God.—‘ Tell me, Sir, can we 
be rid of things at once without any trouble ? ’—No, it is always 
accompanied with pain: that indicates the pull of something 
higher. If it comes without pain it is no matter for rejoicing. 
True, St Paul lost things all at once, but afterwards he had to 

‘conquer them in detail. Conquests made by suffering are lasting. 

94. What God has by nature in unity is not denied to any 
rational creature, by grace, in his individuality. Rejoicing and 
sorrowing, that is nature. We must expect nature in people. 

95. ‘Sir, are we punished for faults ?’—We are punished for 
sins and hindered by faults.—‘ But you said that when a man has 
eternal light he never has anything between and now you say he 
is prone to sin. Do such people sin and is sin punished with tire ? 
You certainly did say that they have nothing between. How are 
these two facts to be reconciled ? How is the sin wiped out ?’ 
—By the perfect love of the creator to his creature and the creature 
to his creator: the sin lies between them and in the fire of their 
love sin burns away. \ 

96. ‘ Those to whom eternal light has come, do they afterwards 
remain in a state of love and vision? I am wondering, being 
established in the one, where there is naught but one, how they 
manage to be one and other, for there is that in me, when spirit 
conceives unity, that passes all distinction. Are grace and vision 
and light all the same? ’—No, not by any means. Take an 
illustration. The stars are put out by the sun and in the same way 

LIBER POSITIONUM 461 

grace and vision fade when eternal light is given. The highest of 
the angels draws a form from God and on assuming it, adapts it 
further to himself and informs therewith the middle ones who pass 
it on to those below and the lowest give it to the soul and the 
fiend can copy it. So they may be deceived. But the soul in 
whom the heavenly Father speaks his Word does not receive from 
the lower angels: what the highest of the angels draws from God 
he pours into this soul without the intervention of the rest. Verily 
I say, seldom or never do people get through angels apparitions of 
such things as are given in time and temporalities. 

97. ‘ What is the difference between nature and spirit ? ’—I call 
that spirit whereby we are aware what we ought to have and 
what to leave whether we would or no. Spirit makes us do it, 
willy-nilly. Not to do it because we do not want to would be 
nature. 

98. “When is nature uppermost ? ’—When we have at heart 
something we ought to get rid of and will not. 

99. ‘How would you distinguish, Sir, between sin, fault and 
infirmity ? ’—It is sin to cleave with desire to anything that does 
not make for God. ‘By a fault I mean any accidental falling 
short of God. And infirmity may be defined as not having the 
mind fixed on God all the time. 

100. *O thou fathomless Truth,’ cries St Paul, ‘ thy ways are 
past finding out!’ When he cries O, he is thinking of the hidden 
hoard of the divine nature.—* What hoard ? ’—The wisdom of God. 
Angels’ and souls’ desire is appeased by nothing but the best. 
The wisdom of God is savoured when all creatures point (us) towards -—— 
the best.. The other hoard is God’s art. Art amounts, in temporal 
things, to singling out the best. True art loses this altogether 
and abides in the ground of them all. St Paul was caught up 
above this wonder and above this O and saw the very thing he 
is seeing to this day, the bond of life meanwhile persisting in his 
body as form does in its matter. His higher self received naked 
eternal light ; body was no hindrance, soul received from God. 

101. ‘ When is the soul above O ? ’—When she gets the simple 
impression of divine form, of the image which is the Son himself 
for so the Father is always letting down the apex of the higher 
world into the one below.—Anyone on earth may be deceived 
excepting him in whom the Father bears his Son. 

102. ‘ What is the sign of the eternal birth ?’— While a man is 
subject to sensible affection he has no conception of eternal truth. 
When he does conceive the eternal truth no creature can comfort 
or discomfit him. The time when Paul was felled to earth he heard 
a voice which said to him, ‘ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ? ” 
He said, ‘Who art thou Lord? ’—‘I am Jesus of Nazareth.’ 

462 MEISTER ECKHART 

The voice was not God: God was speaking through an angel. 
God can no more lose his nature than utter his eternal Word in 
sound or image. God said through an angel, I am Jesus of 
Nazareth. He said I, referring to the impartible I of divine nature. 
The am shows distinction between the Father and the Son. Jesus 
of Nazareth suggests the union of divine and human nature. 

103. St James says, ‘ With the Father of lights is no turning.’ 
There are three kinds of turning. One of nature, another of will 
and a third of power. I speak of the first. Turning means 
changing from one thing to another, becoming more or less, going 
to and fro. One philosopher says, ‘Things are all fighting their 
way back to naught.’ If God withdrew support things would all 
relapse into primeval chaos. The philosopher says, all created 
things are fluent. That is fluent which is not stationary in itself. 
If creature could touch bottom heaven would end and creature 
would be God. Natural change there is none with the Father of 
lights. Change is due to a longing for rest. If there were rest 
in him divine nature would pass away and heaven be at an end. 
He does not alter. What he has like nature is generation. If 
generation stopped things would all go back to their primeval 
nothingness. But of what avail are long discussions of God’s 
nature if we are not aware of his image in us ? 

104. ‘Pray Sir, what makes the soul unchangeable ? ’— 
Stability of soul depends upon three things. First on her having 
her body well-controlled : what the soul wills, that her body must 
do without question. If Adam had preserved his natural perfection 
he could have done whatever he desired and creatures would all 
have been obedient to him. But when he fell both his own body 
and all creatures left off obeying him: they were no longer true 
to him who was untrue to God.—The second thing is to have no 
attachment to or enjoyment in anything inferior to God.—Thirdly, 
no quarter must be given to the mortal nature. If Adam had 
stood firm he would not have become mortal. Adam as God 
made him on the first day would have survived until the day of 
judgment. St Paul declares, ‘From the moment God called me 
not once have I looked back.’ If Adam had seen God in him- 
self he could not have fallen. He knew that God had made 
him and what he made him for and this he viewed with carnal 
pleasure. It was this and nothing else that carried him away. 

105. When our Lord Jesus Christ was about to depart to heaven 
to his Father his disciples were with him at the place of his ascen- 
sion, distraught and unable to speak or pay attention, so much 
were they engrossed with the bodily presence of our Lord. And 
while they stood staring up at the sky there came an angel saying, 
‘Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here gazing up into heaven ? ” 

LIBER POSITIONUM 463 

Why so absorbed in that which, after all, cannot remain with you 
for ever? Philosophers tell us that creature does not stay, it is 
flowing all the time back into its source. If the disciples had been 
proof to sweetness not one of them would have been distraught. 
For this the angel chid them saying, ‘Why stand ye here?’ as 
though to say, why occupy your minds so much with the beloved 
bodily form of our Lord Jesus Christ ? Ye only waste yourselves 
on temporal things which, after all, are impermanent. ‘ Why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven?’ God is the form of the soul, 
the soul’s soul. When spirit is caught up above all images, into 
the eternal truth, then the soul stops and sees into heaven. It is 

‘ man’s highest happiness that she cannot rest until, being rid of 

images, she is reflected back into the naught where she has been 
eternally without herself. Soul becomes Son when she is thus 
transported over all into the open where God is ; then soul draws 
out of God and when she is as we have said she is standing at 
the door. She loses her own nature drinking out of God, on 
the threshold of gnosis, where nothing enters into her except the 
eternal, Eternal rest, then, is not given her except by him. 

106. Aristotle says, everything partial is painful; the most 
united is most painful when divided. 

107. Three kinds of people receive God. The first receive him 
for pleasure. God is sweet to them in anticipation so they enter- 
tain him selfishly and to their cost, with little genuine profit. 
The second receive him of necessity, in discarding sins, for without 
God they have no power to do it. The third lose desire and 
desiring naught receive him wisely and with real benefit. The 
benefit is this: they recognise each fault with rue and in true 
penitence contrive that he shall find in us the reflection of what 
we seek in him; thus getting him to dwell in us as we do in him 
we attain to angelic life: the upward flight, the simple glance into 
God’s nature, and at each ending of the act the steady reflection 
of God so that in multitudinous things like bodily necessity, she 
is not debarred from the eternal but in multiplicity is still united. 

108. ‘ Pray Sir, is it possible for mere creature to partake of 
God’s nature ? ’—No, for as St Augustine argues, God is remote 
from matter and that which has no matter has no, parts and is 
indivisible. Creature can receive no part of God’s nature because 
God is impartible by nature.— I do not mean part, Sir, in the sense 
of fragment; I mean part in the sense of community of spirit 
with spirit in divine nature. That was my idea in asking.’— 
You must make allowance for the difference in creatures. One is 
united, another separated. See how one is united. The will of 
the Father and the obedience of the Son seized, with the power 
of their common Spirit, in the bare chamber of the virgin heart of 

464 MEISTER ECKHART 

their chosen vessel Mary, her most pure blood-stream and there- 
from, with all his members, wrought one faultless man and poured 
therein a soul complete with powers and this by the power of the 
Godhead. When, out of chaos (having brooded there for aye) 
a shining spiritual soul emerged, straightway all imperfection 
was removed and by the Spirit itself this soul was admitted to the 
rank of spirit and, sponsored by the soul, the body was received 
as well. Such is the mode of union of. united creatures.—‘ And 
how do separated creatures participate God’s nature ? ’—St Peter 
says that creatures according to their natures partake of God 
in three ways: as being, as life and as grace. As being, 
creatures all without exception. As life, receptive creatures, 
from angels and men downwards. Mark how the Father by his 
generative power created by the propagation of his Word. From 
his interior Word burst forth their common mind, by nature the 
one angel of all creatures. Him he commanded to pour his mobile 
power into the sun and from the solar energy there showered upon 
earth, increased and multiplied, trees, beasts and all mankind. 
As regards the soul, the heavenly Father.draws up with his power 
the lower powers of the soul; the Son lights up the middle ones 

and the Holy Ghost impinging on the sharpness of her mind, 

flashes it back to the absolute zero of the Tri-unity. I say to 
zero : to the boundary line between united and separated creatures. 
Christ namely, as he was in his first light, bereft of personality 
which the middle Person of the Trinity preserves therein, where 
in essential wisdom he is transfixed, confused with God’s all- 
perfection. Further, the soul gets light from God’s essential 
revelation. This is her aught and his causeless incomprehensibility. 
There her aught abides, graven in a point, mounted in the splendour 
of his eternal love-nature. In this sense mere creature receives 
and partakes of the divine nature. 

109. * When do we lose God altogether ? ’—How do you mean, 
lose ? What is your idea in asking this ?—‘ I mean lose in the 
sense of knowing God one without other: free from matter and 
form and exempt from creatures, which are matter and form, one 
and other. So that creature conveys to her not one whit of God 
for all they say that God is in all creatures. How is this loss to 
be accounted for ? I answer : Three sorts of people are deprived 
of God. One in material creatures, another in spiritual substances, 
the third above creature and below God. In the first case there 
is loss in creatures of gross material nature. This happens when, 
her senses being sated with their objective forms, she escapes from 
their separateness to their perfect whole. Thus she loses the 
dense part of their nature and there remains to her only the 
sweetness of their innate nobility. In the second case, since no 

LIBER POSITIONUM 465 

caused thing is superior to its cause and the aforesaid sweetness 
is derived from creatures whereas the soul proceeds from God, 
like though not of his same nature, therefore the soul being sated, 
not stinted, with this sweetness will acquire a fresh thirst, for 
ineffable sweetness, a longing for her first felieity. This finally 
detaches her from material nature and drives her to pure knowledge 
of herself and spiritual substances in general. Now she seeks 
delight in the enjoyments of her kind but finds it not for creatures 
are all dry and like no better than its like: abiding actuality is 
the only thing to quench her parching thirst.—In the third case 
she loses her activity. It happens thus. All spiritual substances 
act instantaneously though not at any instant of time. Losing 
instantaneously her materiality she loses each and every use of 
her separated nature. The thirst is followed by the loss of all 
variable activities and approach to the outskirts of eternity. Here 
she awaits the love-light wherein she sees the Trinity. This 
waiting is personified in Mary, Mary standing without at the 
sepulchre, waiting in her outward helplessness the embrace of the 
eternal nature. She saw two angels one at the feet and another at 
the head. Sight is light-perception. The angel at the head stands 
for the omnipotence of the majesty of God; the one at the feet, 
for his subtile nature. They asked her, ‘ Whom dost thou seek ? ’ 
For the incomprehensibility of God and her passionate desire- 
nature would form no satisfying union. The question is one of 
incapacity for his incomprehensible nature ; she wants to embrace 
the whole extent of him and is not able to. She said, ‘ Jesus of 
Nazareth!’ He is the keeper in this solitude. Turning, she sees 
him standing in the likeness of a gardener : in the in-graven nature 
of the Person imaged in the ground of unity. He questioned her, 
‘Whom seekest thou?’ This is the blinding transcendental light, 
the glory in the midst of the Trinity, which eclipses her own dim 
understanding and the aforesaid light. “If thou hast borne him 
hence, tell me,’ she says. She has lost her wits in the overwhelming 
light of the immediate truth. He says, ‘ Mary !’ using her own 
name. When the Father, departing from his essential personality, 
begets out of himself in otherness of Person his Word, the perfect 
reproduction of himself, he grasps with his paternal hand his 
impartible, beatific nature and harking back in spirit to himself 
is with himself as Son well-nigh in otherness. This is her name of 
whose child David cries, ‘ Thou art my Son this day have I begotten 
thee.’ She would have touched him. Now behold and marvel at 
her love of God! Not satisfied with rising beyond all creaturely 
conception she desires to sink into the undifferentiated oneness of 
the essence of the Three, of God with God, nature with nature, 
and lose the creature-nature that is hers e’en though that would 
30 

466 MEISTER ECKHART 

not be for her own highest happiness. For in oneness she would 
lose her knowledge, her love and her enjoyment, in other 
words, the actual goal of creatures. Hence his warning, 
‘Touch me not !’ for this touching means the refunding into God 
of separated natures, whereas it is to creatures full of love and 
feeling that the consciousness of unbroken oneness brings supreme 
felicity. If she runs into God or God runs into her, either way 
hers is the loss because of the immensity of his essential nature 
and the insignificance of her creaturehood. As a dewdrop to the 
ocean are all creatures as compared with their creator. He bids 
her ‘ Go to Galilee to my disciples and tell them of my resurrection ; 
there they shall see me as I said.’ Truly a bitter blow! She, 
who was not satisfied with God in the likeness of the second 
Person, who wanted to merge into his oneness, and Jesus bids 
her go to Galilee to bring word of his presence to mere creatures : 
her, who was impatient of the universal Word in eternal unity ! 
She obeys him and goes thither. To Galilee, submissive to Jesus. 
Galilee means crossing (or transition). There is no temporal life. 
but has to yield to physical necessity. Her watchword then must 
be, ‘ I no longer live but Christ liveth in me.’ She came to Jesus’ 
brethren who are three. Uninterrupted union; perfect corre- 
spondence with the mirror of eternity, without any discrepancy 
whatever ; complete submission of the soul-powers and loss of all 
activity in the actual power of God in the essential nature of the 
body and the soul. Lo, she loses God in the limiting value of 
creature. 

110. Love God with all thy soul. —‘ What do you mean by loving 
God with all one’s soul ? —Ascending naked to God with nothing. 
between, that I call whole-souled love. The soul’s life is love, the 
soul’s love is gnosis and her gnosis is her being. The soul’s real 
being is delight. The soul is never so near to God but God stands 
one side soul the other.. Being belies not itself. Augustine says, 
God is the soul’s soul and being. 

114. ‘Pray Sir, can one be moved without sinning ?’—When 
the animal passions are stirred the movement comes from with- 
out, not from within. Like a tree blown about by the wind and 
not torn up from the ground because the roots hold. In a case 
of agitation allowance must be made both for the person and 
the cause. 

115. ‘ Can one remain the same in good and ill ? — Your bodily 
nature must always be the sport of joy and sorrow; that it can 
never lose. But will remains the same in fortune and misfortune, 
without resentment in the depths of woe. The power of impatience 
is taken from the recipient of eternal light. 

116. ‘How do you mean Sir, the power? Pray explain,’—I 

LIBER POSITIONUM 467 

am using power here with reference to two things. On the one 
hand there is loss of the power of resentment. And on the other 
hand the power to be upset is removed from those who are vouch- 
safed eternal light. To lose their equanimity would be to them 
hell-torment and impossible. Joys and sorrows are not grown in 
the ground of eternal truth ; none of creatures’ nurslings are truth’s 
seedlings and that is the key to this matter of dispassion. | 

117. * There is another thing that needs explanation. You say 
that power is withdrawn and they are not able for it. Is this 
inability of nature or of grace ? "—Nature acts differently. Were 
it a natural disability then effort would be vain, which it is not. 
It is an inability of grace ; the soul is caught in the blaze of divine 
light and held by the majesty of God in the reflection of the 
essential good of the third Person. There personal distinction 
disappears merged in the oneness of the Three. There she is lost 
to the multiplicity of creatures. That answers your inquiries 
about the loss of power-in pious souls and how they are impotent 
to lose their equanimity. Now, at last, they are omnipotent. 

118. * For the love of God, Sir, expound to me one statement 
you are fond of making.”—What is that ?—‘ You say that inability 
to live up to one’s lights shows the absence of eternal light. The 
man who has eternal light can put his theories into practice. She 
only has to see a thing and lo, it is as though it had not been and 
she is free from it, which alarms me somewhat for I am never guilty 
of the most venial fault but first it is suggested to my mind and 
this does not prevent me from committing it.. Tell me, Sir, what 
is her essential power ? ’—Essential power is one. Her essential 
power is will-and-love and this is not a prey to images bodily or 
ghostly, so she is essentially potential and that is what I mean 
when I call her really free from (passive to) it. 

119. ‘I crave your counsel, Sir: In the throes of intellectual 
conception, at the actual moment of it, I would fain be absolutely 
free.’—It is impossible : gross matter forbids. Soul is volatile by 
nature, body is made of dense material. That this dense material 
should be as nimble as the psychic is not to be expected in the 
unglorified body. To the eye colour, to the ear sound. There is 
no harm in that nor is it any barrier to eternal truth. We ought 
to disregard them it is true, but that cannot be. Yet one thing I 
can tell you for your comfort : no will or love is lost on these dis- 
turbers of the peace. Furthermore I say, the power to will and 
love being absent, her power is what I call essential power. It is 
a certain test of essence when nothing wrought from without gives 
any reaction within. 

120. In the image-bearing form of God which impartibly con- 
tains the form of all things there shines the universal form unformed 

' 

468 | MEISTER ECKHART 

in oneness, which radiates one single light into all spirits variously : 
the highest spirits, as becomes their stable nature, without reflec- 
tion and souls in this body according to their fitness in this passing 
time. Mark how this image-bearing light, which the soul receives 
from its reflection, carries her beyond this mode of changing time 
into eternity, to the level of the highest spirits. When a mind 
habitually dwells in its eternal image, God to wit, with more 
delight than in itself, to such a mind the image-bearing light appears 
in its eternal form. Then the mind is transported over these 
manifold and changing things which exist in time and inhabits 
these rather than itself. Remember, we are dealing here with spirit 
not with essence. 

121. The image-bearing light of divine unity is impartible and 
yet both essence and nature. Now the question ‘is, how is it 
essence and how is it nature? The answer is as follows. As 
essence it subsists in permanent, immanent stillness. It appears 
as all things in impartible mode ; not in the mode of any creature : 
it is a mode of its own in that same absolute stillness. There the 
distinctions of the Persons are sublimed to this simple modeless 
mode. Behold it now the essence of the Persons and of all things : 
the essence of the Persons it is by nature but of creatures by grace. 
For consider. It contains the form of all things impartibly, as 
essence. In this form it is ingrained in all things. This same 
impartible form (or image) is also nature and as nature it preserves 
its one-being in the Trinity and the Trinity its one-being in the 
unity. And as this one-being in the Trinity it is the impartible 
potentiality of the Trinity: the nature of the Persons but not 
that of all things. For if it were the nature of all things it would 
reproduce itself in all the things in manifestation in its own potential 
nature. Then things would all be God in the same sense that God 
is God. Now that is not the case. This shows that it is not the 
nature of all things but only the nature of the Persons and there 
exists no thing but has its own appropriate nature. 

122. Since the impartible image-bearing light behaves as essence 
and also as its nature, has it then, I ask, the idiosyncrasies of each 
or not ?—No, assuredly not. There is no more than one. Its 
chief idiosyncrasy is that it is shining by itself and is manifest 
only to the Persons. But in that this image-bearing light falls 
upon all things and the only thing that shows it is itself, you see 
it has the character of light. This character belongs to essential 
essence and it also belongs to its nature’s nature. Here essence and 
nature are shown to be one being with one idiosyncrasy not two 
idiosyncrasies ; for supposing there were two then one idiosyncrasy 
would cause the other; which is impossible: the essential stillness 
behaves as simple essence and nature’s radiant Trinity as well. 

LIBER POSITIONUM 469 

123. Hence arises the question, in the essence and its nature do 
things all appear in impartible fashion or no ?— The answer is, Yes, 
they appear in the essence in immanent stillness and impartible 
mode: essence and nature one light in light’s summit. The 
essence is light’s source and centre. As such it is essence. Also 
in the Trinity nature shines with the light of all things in the same 
impartible way. But there is stillness in the depths of essence. 

124. But how nature in the Trinity is one and three proceed 
from one is not to be deduced from the impartibility of the first 
cause. Augustine says, the Persons are one in nature. Hence 
nature and Persons are alike eternal. Intellect is by nature 
perfectly intelligible to itself in the light of nature and its con- 
ception of itself is other than this intellect. Intellect is not 
begotten ; it is the paternal Person who begets the knower in 
perfectly conceiving his own Person. Lo, on a sudden, the eternal 
birth ! Now there are two Persons and in the very act of the Son’s 
proceeding from the Father, the knower looking back, leaps to the 
perfect understanding of his Father whence he sprang. In that 
same origin these two natures know each other with one knowledge. 
The knowing is the same as the knower himself. Therein they 
know themselves one love in the omnipotence of the Father whence 
the knower sprang. This love is their common spiration : in this 
love they are one. It is the third Person. It starts with the re- 
birth, the reposing of the knower on the heart of the omnipotent 
Father. Thus the first river originates the second river, in con- 
junction with the original source. Hence the several natures are 
all one in nature and this nature is the same in the several natures. 
That is to say, Persons. 

125. ‘ But what enjoyment do the Persons get out of their 
natural essence ? —Well, as you may prove, the Persons are in 
their nature and their nature in the Persons: their nature keeps 
the Persons. quite distinct while at the same time preserving them 
in unity. As preserving them in one, nature is simply the power 
of the Persons. In this same power the three Persons disappear 
into their nature. For essence and nature form one light in light’s 
summit, the impartible image of God, essence passing into nature ; 
moreover all the Persons being clapt into their nature vanish into 
the dim silence of their interior being. There they retain no per- 
sonality for with this confinement goes entire loss of property. Lo, 
God de-spirited! The fathomless deep is fathomed by the master- 
mind of God. The delight and satisfaction and perfection found 
therein no nature can describe. That is how the three Persons 
enjoy their natural essence. 

126. ‘ Tell me, when the spirit runs back into its source, does it 
remain in its original source or in the naught of its idea ? ’—Its 

470 MEISTER ECKHART 

proper habitation is its source. The naked spark of spirit is the 
mens. Mens is the natural image of the spirit. But mind is never 
perfect spirit till it passes into its exemplar and is lost to its own 
selfhood, escaping in that same natural image into its ideal nature. 
In this sense its abode is in the naught of its idea rather ‘than in 
its source. But its origin is its real abode. 

127. How is the Son re-born in the Father once he has come 
forth ?—In this way. The Father grasps the light of his own 
understanding and bears it into the ground of his essence. Thus 
the knower is reflected back into the light of his Father’s heart. 

128. ‘I should much like to know, about the appearance of the 
paternal Person in the unity, where it is all-conceiving.’—When the 
Father conceiving the impartible idea of all things in the unity, 
appears to himself in Person and essence, lo, the paternal Person 
vanishes in this mysterious unity and there is an end of the Father 
and of all distinctions. Unity conceiving all as one, nothing but 
one appears and communes with itself. But since logically speak- 
ing there is Person in the unity, it is in this unity that it conceives 
its nature, appearing and calling itself Person and there too the 
paternal Person must conceive his unity, as the unity the Person, 
since both of them have the same nature. 

129. Mark how conception differs. There is ideal conception 
and real conception. Ideal conception is the nature’s general 
conception of the Persons, all the three. But the real conception 

‚is the special conception of each particular Person in its own 
proper nature in the nature. 

130. ‘ Tell me, when God conceives the soul does he conceive 
her by ideal conception or by real conception ? ’—He conceives 
her by ideal conception for this general idea embraces all in one ; 
supposing he conceived her by particular conception she would 
be bereft of the flower of her nature for in a particular conception 
nothing is conceived besides the special nature of the thing itself. 
In other words, its nature as a unit, an expression, not its 
innate nobility. 

131. Mark the noble lineage of the Persons. They are uncreated 
and without beginning and infinite and inconceivable and are 
possessed of property which comes to them in the course of 
nature. Not so with the soul: she is created and has a beginning 
and is man and has possessions and not property for to her it is 
all given. 

132. ‘ Is the seér as free as the will ? ’—No, not by any means. 
If it were it would be always in the naked Godhead. But it is 
not; it has to be doing its work, the ordering and management 
of the various powers. Will has not got this to do: it bids and 
forbids. 

LIBER POSITIONUM 471 

133. ‘ Now what I want to know is this: why has the Godhead 
a feminine name and no feminine function and the Person of the 
Father on the other hand a masculine name and a feminine 
function ? ’—The explanation is this. The Godhead contains all 
things impartibly and the thing in which another is contained is 
called mother in virtue of this content. It has, however, no 
maternal act since it does not as such give birth to anything. The 
Father, again, has a masculine name and a feminine function and 
the reason is that the Father in Person does not contain things 
in him, he begets them out of him by the power of his Person. 
The Father in his proper personality is empty of the content 
which he impartibly contains. But also he plays a mother’s 
part, the unity providing him with all that-he brings forth. In 
this bringing forth he is functioning as mother ; as being free from 
content in his personal nature he retains his masculine name. 
The birth of the Son shows the Father travailing. But the Father 
is Father in that he begets. 

134. ‘ Then there is this question : Is the Son born or is he not ' 
born or is he still to be born ? ’—Let us consider. There are three 
‘Persons and that shows the Son is born for each of the Persons 
has its own peculiar nature. They could none of them have this 
if the Son had not been born. This proves the Son is born. But 
the Father changes not at all in his eternal childbirth: could we / 
attribute to him any deed at all it would be in the sense that 
anything he does he is doing now and what he is doing now he 
has always done, for with him there is no past nor future. This 
proves the Son has not been born : he is now this instant being 
born and this now is an ever-becoming ; as the Father himself 
says, ‘ To-day have I begotten thee.’ To-day is the eternal now. 
It is in this now that his birth is taking place. 

135. Remember, the eternal Word is both unborn and born. 
This is a hard saying, but being in the Trinity the Word must 
needs be born; it cannot there be called the unborn Word. 
Taking the eternal Word as Person, it is born; but take it in its 
essence and the Word is non-existent. Here the Word has to be 
born. 

136. Now mark how we argue that the Word remains the Word 
unborn. Where the Word issues from the Father as a birth it 
shows its born nature and proclaims the Father parent. But 
where the Word proceeds from the Father as a light it is the 
species of the Father and shows the Father formless for it has the 
form of the Father. He himself declared, ‘He who seeth me 
seeth my Father.’ Thus the Word reveals the Father in his own 
form and shows the Father formless and where the Word proceeds 
from the Father as understanding it proceeds as abiding within. 

472 MEISTER ECKHART 

As intelligence leaves not the heart but reveals to himself the man 
in whom it dwells, so we have the Word in the eternal procession 
of the Father, the Word which proceeds from understanding, 
while understanding itself does not issue forth but abides within. 
In this: procession we have, in the immanent understanding, the 
Word unborn. This explains what is meant by the unborn Word 
and how, in the eternal procession, the Word is as it were born of 
understanding and is still to be born and is this instant being 
born. 

137. One of the masters (Erigena) says: The Father never 
wrought anything inferior to himself. If this is true, then all the 
creatures God has ever wrought are God. The question here is, 
whether the work wrought is as noble as the worker when the 
worker is God? Let us see. We speak of a working work and a 
wrought work. The working work is God, the wrought work is 
not God for it is creature. Hence the explanation. When it is 
stated that the Father wrought no work inferior to himself that is 
as good as saying that the Father does one work and one alone in 
his own Person, to wit, the begetting of his Son in the eternal 
emanation personal and essential. Only this one work properly 
belongs to the Father-nature and all other work wrought we 
attribute not to the Father alone but to the three Persons and one 
God. But, it may be objected, can the eternal emanation of the 
Son from the Father be called a work ? You can look at it in this 
way. Everything existing has its appropriate work ; the work of 
fire, for instance, is to heat and so with understanding : it is its 
work to understand itself. Here the work is not inferior to the 
worker. And in this sense the Son may very well be called the 
eternal work of the Father. He brings him forth eternally as 
Person who yet remains in him in essence. 

188. Then there is the question: Was the eternal Word con- 
ceived in Mary in Person and essence and was it in the bosom of 
the Father as Person and essence as well ?—In the continuous 
emanation wherein the Word emanates from the Father as it 
were from understanding, wherein the Word is now being born, 
in that same emanation Mary received the eternal Word in a 
point of time as Person and essence, in its immanence : the Word 
as flowing from the understanding of the Father. It remained 
in the bosom of the Father as immanent understanding personal 
and essential. Thus it came, coming after the manner of a flow 
and remaining within after the manner of an understanding. 
Ah, what light and grace enlightened souls obtain from this 
glorious knowledge ! 

139. To return to Christ. According to theologists, our Lord 
Jesus Christ’s soul and Lucifer’s were made in the same light. 

LIBER POSITIONUM 473 

The soul of Jesus Christ our Lord was the very wisest soul that 
ever was. She turned in the creature to the creator wherefore the 
Father clothed her in the divine garment and flower of her nature. 
Lucifer turned to the deficiency and he therefore fell, falling 
eternally. So fall all they who turn away from God to perishable 
things. 

140. But this light which Christ’s soul supernaturally was, this 
was a creature and our Lord’s soul itself being creature too, which of 
these two creatures then, theologians ask, is the nobler and the 
higher ?—I was asking one wise doctor about this and he said that 
in one way the light is nobler but in another Christ. See what this 
supernatural light means. When Christ’s soul was created she 
was taken from herself and haled above herself into the Tri-unity. 
Therewith she was united. This was not natural to her, it was all 
above nature, what befell Christ’s soul. What befell was the 
supernatural light. Herein Christ’s soul was omnipotent, in virtue 
of this happening. Here the supernatural light is nobler than 
Christ’s soul, you can see that for yourselves. The adorner is 
more noble than the thing that it adorns. Take an illustration. 
Material is adorned by colour while the colour is displayed by the 
material, since it has no body of its own. Even so Christ’s soul 
is adorned by this supernatural light and on the other hand 
Christ’s soul makes manifest this supernatural light. 

141. Now mark how the soul of Christ is nobler than the super- 
natural light. The supernatural light having had its effect upon 
Christ’s soul (it happens in a flash), Christ has no more to do with 
this supernatural light, for the union of divine and human nature 
to one Person happens instantly and once for all. Here the soul 
of Christ is nobler than the supernatural light. 

142. Then as to souls who have overcome themselves so far as 
to imagine themselves God. This is due to nothing more than 
their own natural light: they are withdrawn into themselves 
till they can see themselves in it as light. You know how a 
blow in the eye will sometimes make one see stars. By stars in 
their eyes these souls see themselves. The way the supernatural 
light reveals the soul to herself is this: the naked spark of the 
soul, her mens, reflects the supernatural light and the pure essence 
of her spirit seeing itself in this supernatural light fondly imagines 
itself God. But as you see, it is nothing else than the spirit in 
the supernatural light, a very great perfection, none the less. 

143. Another question is, whether God is (God) by nature or 
by will ?—He is God not by nature nor by will. If God were 
God by nature he would be a caused God: nature would have 
caused him. But that is not the case. And the same with will : 
were he God by will he would be subject to will and will would 

474 MEISTER ECKHART 

be superior to God. Which is not true either; but he is God 
naturally, not by nature; he is God willingly and not by will. 
That is the answer. 

144. Again, did God beget himself or did he beget some other ? 
—He did not beget himself nor any other: God the Father is 
unbegotten God. He begat another and not any other. He 
begat another, i.e. another Person, not something other, 1.€. 
another nature: the impartible nature of the Father is also the 
impartible nature of the Son and of their common Spirit. That 
is the answer. 

145. It is a question among theologians whether the nature is 
common to the Persons and the Persons common to the nature 
seeing that each Person contains the whole of nature as its natural 
being. Does God impart himself to human nature ?—Yes.—How 
can God impart himself to human nature if he is one in essence 
and distinct in Person ?—Each of the Persons has the nature as 
a whole and the Person of the Son, by assuming human nature, 
imparted himself to it, the two natures meeting in his Person. 
Here divine and human natures are in communion. Only the 
middle Person took on human nature but the three Persons are 
. equally allied with the three powers of the soul.—Are these two 
natures one or are they united ?—They are united and not one. 
That is one which is in itself without any other and where two 
meet in one they are united.—How are these two natures united ? 
—They are united by something between so that each one keeps 
its own nature. The Person which took on human nature is the 
medium uniting these two natures. Had this Person not assumed 
man’s nature the two natures could not have been united. Neither 
robs the other of its idiosyncrasy : uncreated nature does not 
rob created nature of its createdness nor does created nature rob 
the uncreated of its uncreatedness.—How did the Person take 
man’s nature ?—He assumed manhood and not man.—What is 
the difference between man and manhood ?—Man originates 
with perfect man and is not taken by a Person: it is two natures 
united in one Person. But manhood is emanating God and man 
and is taken by the Person of the Son and is divine and human 
nature and corporal nature united in one person. So much for 
man and manhood. 

146. Did the Person take the manhood of our Lady ?—Yes and 
no. He took the bodily nature of our Lady and the nature of 
his spirit God produced from naught and poured it into corporal 
nature ; God inspired his spirit and embodied himself in his body. 
—Is our Lady, soul and body, one person ?—Yes.—Did he not 
take the person of our Lady ?—No. The eternal Word of the 
Father took to itself what was not there already. There was 

LIBER POSITIONUM 475 

Person there for the eternal Word is itself a Person. But human 
nature was not there. Hence the eternal Word assumed a nature 

not a person: God’s nature and man’s nature were united in one 

common form with one Person for Christ does not belie himself. 
—What brings about this union ?—Grace.—What is grace ?— 
According to Dionysius, grace is the light of the soul, which 
lights the understanding of the soul. This light is not God but 
it is something from God. Just as the sunshine is not the sun 
but something that comes from the sun so God sheds this light 
into the soul. In this light man knows and loves and to some 
extent enjoys in time what beatific spirits know and love and feel 
in eternal life. But here in time man knows and loves in his own 
way, dimly: he does not see God face to face as a spirit does in 
eternal life. Yet the mere feeling of him makes a man able to 
do all things, to practise all the virtues and in the virtues he 
grows Godlike and the liker God in virtues the more one he is 
with God. Thus grace makes for union. 

147. There is a further question about the union of divine and 

„human nature: have they both the same essence in the Person 

they are joined in or have they two essences in this non-potential 
state ?—One Person can have no more than one essence. So far 
as the personal nature is Person each nature is its own hypostasis. 
Where two natures are created in one Person that Person has one 
essence and that in two natures so far as the two natures are 
unmingled.—Then we may consider nature as apart from essence 
in the personal union ?—Yes, it can-be seen from another point 
of view. We find nature in its image unmingled but in the Person ~ 
two natures are present in one Person as in their hypostasis. So 
far as both belong to the same Person the Person has one essence 
and that in two natures. The Persons are eternal, they are in no- 
wise creature for they have no before or after. Person, that is 
unity keeping silence albeit big with speech. The Persons are*not 
contained by the unity: they are in unity. 

148. There is the question of the worker and the work, whether 
the work is as noble, as perfect as the worker? This refers to the 
Persons of the Trinity. Examine it in this way. The Father is 
an origin able to originate an origin like unto himself. The Son 
is such an origin and he together with his Father originates their 
common Spirit. Here the worker and the work, the effectual 
work of revelation, are equally perfect. As Dionysius says, ‘ The 
first cause causes everything equal to itself.’ It was said by one 
master that the work wrought by God in the patient soul which is 
all bare of things is nobler than any of the works he has ever 
wrought in time in heaven or in earth. Just think what this 
means. The works God has wrought in the angels in heaven 

476 MEISTER ECKHART 

were wrought by the almighty power of God who created them 
from naught. He was not hindered in this work. In the case of 
the soul which also he created out of naught, he endowed her 
with free will nor would God do a single thing without her free 
will’s sanction. But when the soul is passive and cleared of every- 
thing in her that might be a hindrance to God’s will and turning 
to God of her own account she gives God the freedom of her noble 
will as though she had never had free will, enabling God to work 
in her as freely as when he made all things from naught, then this 
work has two outstanding features. One is that her free will is 
no obstacle to God although he is so careful not to override free 
will: God can work as freely as he will, what he will and when 
he will and how he will just as if the soul had no free will. The 
second feature is that God being free in himself his work is freely 
wrought in what by right of its free will might well object but 
which does in fact raise no objection. And that is why this is 
the noblest work God does in heaven or earth in respect of 
creature. Now you may ask what this work is? It is nothing 
less than God’s revelation of himself to himself in the soul. As 
sure as he is in himself he himself is in this work. That which 
is wrought in is turned into that which works there, to the 
likeness of him, the worker, who has wrought there his like. 
Here the work which is wrought is as perfect as the worker for 
it is his living image which is in the work. 

149. The soul cannot prepare herself for the reception of God : 
he who prepares her, him does she receive in preparation. There 
is a special profit accruing to the soul in the reception of the 
body of our Lord, which she does not get in any other gift.—‘ What 
profit is that ? ’—Her nature receives its own nature for Jesus 
Christ’s nature is our nature. Nature is received by nature 
albeit not received pure nature: it is received united with divine 
nature. 

150. Mark how these two natures are united. They are not 
united nature to nature: they are joined together in one Person, 
z.e. the middle Person. Just as the divine nature is the nature 
of this Person so is human nature in Christ the Person in the 
Trinity. For what the eternal Word assumed was humanity 
not a human person. Had the eternal Word assumed a human 
person there would be four Persons in the Trinity. But there are 
not. Jesus Christ’s humanity in the eternal Word is the very 
Person who has ever been the central figure of the Trinity. There- 
in is not one nature as there is one Person: the natures are of 
different nature and are united in the Person. Wherefore whoso 
receives the body of our Lord receives the middle Person and 
divine nature and Christ’s manhood, which is Person in the 

LIBER POSITIONUM ATT 

eternal Word, and Christ’s eternal soul. We receive this all at 
once in Jesus Christ’s body. This we do not do in any other 
gift in heaven or earth. Let us therefore prize this gift above 
all other gifts to be gotten here below. 

151. When Christ gave his body to his disciples he said, ‘ Take, 
eat, this is my body.’ But Christ was mortal. Now the question 
is, did Christ give his body mortal or immortal? According to 
Hugo of St Victor, every property of his original body of immor- 
tality, the whole of these Christ had in him what time he was 
mortal. So in spite of being mortal he could give his brethren 
his immortal body ; if he had given them his mortal body the 
eating of it would have outraged them. Bishop Albertus contro- 
verts this doctor. I am amazed, he says, that such a great 
authority should hazard such a foolish statement. Every nature 
emanates from its appropriate form and Christ’s form here was 
mortal and no immortal property could emanate from his mortal 
form. If you really want to know how Christ gave his body, 
mortal and immortal, he gave his body as mortal in itself and 
immortal in its form and in its effect for its action is divine and 
he gave it therefore in another form than that of himself. He 
gave his body as immortal in its work and in its form and mortal 
in itself for in his mortal body Christ had power to communicate 
his body immortally as to its effect but not so as to its own nature. 

152. It is a question whether in Christ’s body there remains 
aught of what it seems ? No, there is seeming without substance 
and substance without seeming. It seems to be bread but there 
is really no substance of bread: it is really the body of God 
without its appearance. So far as its appearance goes it would 
nourish us like any other food. But if there is really no substance 
of bread and only the substance of bread feeds the body then how, 
without the substance of bread, does this nourish the body ?— 
At the consecration of the body of our Lord the bread loses its 
nature while it retains its form, its mass, its smell and its feeling of 
bread, so that it does not disappear. Nothing we can taste and 
feel, nothing, in short, which is apparent to the outward senses, 
is God’s body. The outward senses do not lose what pertains to 
them. They derive their nourishment from such things as re- 
main. In bread the solid part is all that nourishes. The solidity 
of the body of Christ is not his body: the solid of the bread 
remains and that feeds the outward man. This is the explanation 
of how the sacrament nourishes like any other food. But it really 
has none of the nature of bread. 

153. —When Christ consecrated his body on that Sabbath day 
and gave it to his disciples, supposing some to have been left and 
hidden in a bush, would this have died when Christ died on the 

478, MEISTER ECKHART 

cross ?—If the consecrated body had been maltreated by scourging 
or in any other way, that would not have hurt it. Christ suffered 
no hurt by eating in the sacrament for he gave his body in another 
form than that of himself. Christ suffered not at all in the form 
he gave. But mark. When Christ died upon the cross since 
there lay under consecration the body of the soul that died upon 
the cross therefore all the pain Christ suffered in his human form 
was suffered by his body under consecration. When Christ died 
to his manhood there died his body dying under consecration, for 
there was no more than a single body. This death of Christ was 
the parting of the soul from body; and since she is impartible 
therefore wherever she is she is altogether. When she was in the 
precincts of hell she was not in the body. Neither could she be 
in his consecrated body. We speak hére of two bodies, but there 
is only one, that which rose from the dead on the third day. 

154. Did the consecrated body rise too ?—Oh yes, it rose up 
glorified for it was the Christ. 

155. Then it was questioned, can the soul while in this body get 
to the point of receiving without means ?—The answer is both no 
and yes. In the first sense I declare that anything the soul 
receives must be by light and grace. Light and grace are her 
means for she is creature. Soul cannot do without these means 
as long as she is in the body. On the other hand the affirmative 
reply, that the soul is able to receive direct while in the body, is 
argued thus. The soul has within her a likeness of the sovran 
good. In this likeness she receives like. Here like is being 
received direct by like. Mark how. In receiving thus without 
means we have to abide by this likeness.—Wherein does this like- 
ness consist ?—Likeness to the sovran good consists in motionless- 
ness of the inner and the outer man : in imperturbability towards 
all nether things, the outward man not being moved by them nor 
the inward man disturbed by any mental agitation; he remains 
firm and unshaken in the here and now. Be so always. 

156. One other question. How have all things been in God ?— 
In his impartible essence all things subsist impartibly, no one more 
noble than another. But in the essential Word where all things 
are distinct one thing is nobler than another. 

157. Once the spirit is one with God is it at all enriched by 
virtues ?—Virtues are products of necessity and necessity enriches 
not the spirit. It is not virtues that enrich the spirit but the fruit 
of virtues. 

158. It may be asked, are we to take the impartible image of 
all things as Person or essence ?—There are three distinct Persons 
but not three images to correspond. We may therefore look at 
the image in the light of impartible essence. But since essence 

LIBER POSITIONUM 479 

in the Persons is possessed impartibly as essence and partibly as 
speech (one utterance in the Father and another in the Son and 
another in the Holy Ghost), therefore we may take the image of the 
Trinity also as a speaking in the Persons as well as simple essence, 
for the essence is simple in the Persons no less than in its own 
particular nature. 

159. It may be asked, has the one essence no form to correspond 
with its essential nature ?—That which reveals another is its form. 
Essence cannot manifest itself in its essential nature: it is mani- 
fested by the Persons. Hence the Persons are the form of the 
essence so far as they reveal it. But Person is one thing, essence 
is another. Nothing that exists can be without its proper form. 
If essence exists it must wear its appropriate form. In its own 
essential form it is manifest to itself as well as to the Persons and 
none else. But the Persons reveal it to creatures. Here the 
Persons are its form by the fact of being Persons and making 
manifest the formless essence. The Persons are the form of the 
essence inasmuch as they reveal it and in its arcane nature it has 
its own form latent in itself. This form is none other than the 
immanent essence itself. Under this essential form the forms of 
all things are formless for this essential form is the impartible 
form of all things: this universal form is essential God in its 
onefold nature and threefold as uttered in the Persons. 

160. This is what the spirit clearly sees in a foretaste of delight. 
The best the spirit can hope for in this body is the perennial feeling 
of being without all and within all. Without all means in com- 
plete detachment, remote from self and things. In all means 
abiding in perpetual stillness : conscious life in its eternal exemplar 
wherein the universal image shines in impartibility. There the 
spirit dwells in all: it has attained to its ideal. 

161. Doctors discuss that most abstruse and difficult of ques- 
tions : What is that which is not caused and which, though neither 
essence nor yet Person, has might and power in the Father and 
makes the Father father and the essence essence ?— The answer 
needs your close attention. Nature cannot be without something 
whose nature it is and the Person of the Father cannot be without 
someone whose Person it is. Neither can exist without the other 
so neither can originate the other. At the same time they have 
a dual character: speech-silence. Where both alike vanish into 
their common ground they have the same character ; there speech 
detracts not from silence neither silence from speech. This lapse 
into their common ground applies to the eternal and eventful 
nature. Uneventful nature does not interfere: eventful nature 
goes on speaking while uneventful nature holds its peace. But 
this uneventful nature must have an hypostasis, i.e, the eternal 

480 MEISTER ECKHART 

and eventful nature which gives power and might to the objective 
Person. This makes the Father father and the nature nature; 
not that the Father has an eventful nature: his is the eternal 
uneventfulness. This let none gainsay in the interests of eternal 
truth for it is the eternal truth. The ignorant, remember, are 
given to attacking the eternal verity. 

162. St Dionysius says the highest spirits are poured into the 
lower in succession, and the lowest are poured into the soul. Now 
the question is, can the soul receive at all without the aid or 
knowledge of superior angels ? I answer. Grant one spirit is 
more toward than the rest then anything received by the other 
spirits will be known beforehand to this spirit which is better 
placed than any of the others. Thus a Seraph is more open to 
divine inspiration than any single spirit in this life and for two 
reasons. One is that the angel being pure spirit cannot be poured 
into the soul. While sharing with the body she has no accom- 
modation for the angel. Secondly, the angel is in the condition of 
ever beholding the divine light and that is not for any soul in this 
life. Hence Seraph is more apt to receive God’s inspiration and 
what’ all spirits receive that spirit knows who is more apt than all 
the rest. Seraph is not the means of its reception, but, flying as 
he does nearer to the source of the divine light, it is apparent to 
him what other spirits are getting of that light. In this sense souls 
get nothing without the angels knowing. 

But let us see, in the working of the soul, if we cannot find some 
secret way in which enlightened souls receive without the Seraph’s 
knowledge. Well, as you know, the soul animates the members of 
the body all unbeknownst to those same members. And though 
life runs so secretly into all the limbs that they are unaware of its 
mysterious flow, the work of life is none the less carried on in 
them. The fact is, God instils his life into the soul and into every 
spirit surreptitiously : no Seraph knows about this stealthy stream 
of life. Its reception by the soul is a clandestine act. How should 
Seraph know ? He knows nothing of himself or of the soul. That 
is one thing the soul receives without the higher angels knowing. 

‘The other she receives in the mysterious spark of her own 
nature, her undivided likeness. But when like meets like there 
is no mean between them. Like gives like its likeness all unknown 
to its unlike, in unbroken union. But Seraph is unlike the soul. 
A Seraph, as you know, is spirit not embodied in any sort of body... 
But soul is spirit embodied in something of the kind. And 
secondly to Seraph in his created nature there came all at once 
and without addition what he this day possesses in his vision of 
the eternal light ; for he is constant in his likeness to God. Here 
the soul is different from the angels for in the reflection of her like 

LIBER POSITIONUM 481 

she receives a secret influx unknown to any angel. It has been 
said by John, a sage of Greece, that the likeness of the soul consists 
in perfect likeness to that which has no like. Dionysius calls the 
angels ‘divine minds.’ And St Bernard says of those who lead 
angelic lives while in the flesh that into them there flows the mind 
of God as it does into the angels. O thou God turned God in thy 
temporal unified mind, thou spirit inspired into the oneness of 
God, stand up and do thy crowning work ! 

You ask how the spirit stands up ? He stands on his two feet, 
understanding and love, and oversteps all perishable things lest 
he should foul his feet with matter of corruption.—And what is 
his crowning work ?—The clear and naked vision of the highest 
good, God yonder, wherein the highest good shall bathe the spirit 
in the light of exquisite consciousness. Then shall thou look and 
see !—Do the light-streams of the highest good affect the spirit ?— 
—When the Sovran Good floods the spirit with light the spirit is 
borne up above its natural abode. 

öl 

Meister Eckhart was besought by his good friends, “Give us one 
last word before you go.’ He said, I will give you a rule which is 
the sum of all my arguments, the key to the whole theory and 
practice of the truth. 5 

It very often happens that a thing seems small to us which is of 
greater moment in God’s sight than what looms large in ours. 
Wherefore it behoves us to take alike from God everything he 
sends us without ever thinking or looking to see which is greatest 
or highest or best but following blindly God’s lead, that.is to say, 
our own feeling, our strongest dietates, what we are most prompted 
to do. Then God gives us the most in the least without fail. 

People often shirk the least and prevent themselves getting the 
most in the least. They are wrong. God is everywise, the same 
in every guise to him who can see him the same. There is much 
searching of heart as to whether one’s promptings come from God 
or no ; but this we can soon tell for if we find ourselves aware of, 
privy to, God’s will above all when we follow our own impulse, our 
clearest intimations, then we may take it that they come from God. 

Some people make believe to find God as a light or savour ; they 
may find a light or a savour but that is not to find God. According 
to one scripture, God shines in the dark where every now and then 
we may catch a glimpse of him. Where to us God shows least he 
is often most. So it behoves us to take God the same in every 
mode and in every thing. 

Someone may say, But if I do take God alike in every mode and 
every thing my mind refuses to abide in that mode or in this one 
as in that.— Then I say, he is wrong. For finding God in one way 
rather than another, I allow due credit, but that is not the best. 
God is everywise, alike in every guise to one who can find him the 
same. Knowing one guise, such and such, is not knowing God. 
Finding this or that is not finding God. God is everywise, the 
same in every guise to one who can see him the same. 

Someone may object, But to find God in every mode and in 
every thing do I not need some special way ?—In whatever way 
you find God best and are most aware of him that way pursue. 
Should another way appear quite different from the first you will 

482 

LIBER POSITIONUM 483 

do right in quitting that to close with God in this one which 
appears as in the one forsworn. It is a counsel of perfection in 
this manner to attain to such a final certainty and peace that we 
can see God and are able to enjoy him in any guise and in any 
thing without having to stop and look for him at all: a boon 
accorded me. For this and to this end all works are wrought 
and on the whole works help. The things that do not help let us 
eschew. 

We thank thee, heavenly Father, for giving us thy only Son in 
whom thou givest thine own self and all things. We pray thee, 
heavenly Father, as thou has given us thy only Son our Lord Jesus 
Christ, through whom and in whom thou dost deny us naught, nor 
wouldst nor couldst not, hear us in him and make us pure and free 
from all our many faults, uniting us with him in thee. Amen. 

THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 

RT, 

HET 

Fr 

N 

Zn 

AR 

a 
pare 

aval 

i 
= 

a 

(SEE 
x 

oe 

EEE un EEE 

re, 

ui A 

erg 

Meister Eckhart, by Franz Pfeiffer, Leipzig, 1857; trans- 
lation, with some omissions and additions, by C. de B. Evans. 

de" 
By... Eckhart, meister, d. 1327. 
5080 

| 25 : 

A B5 London, J. M. Watkins, 1924-31. 
vl 2v. 22 cm. 

“In the following translation ‚of vol. 1, the six last and doubtful 
sermons have been omitted and a few other numbers of Parts r and 
have been replaced by substitutes, either discoveries of Pfeiffer’s or 
from independent sources.”’—ıvol. I, p. xiii. 

Vol. Ir has title: The works of Meister Eckhardt ... volume II, con- 
taining, besides the ‘lost’ Book of Benedictus and Pfeiffer’s Tractate 
Xvil, a number of sermons form the Oxford codex entitled ‘The para- 

7 
J 
a 

Stechert-Hafner, Inc.|} 

31 East 10°" Street 

New York 3 

(Continued on next card) 

(60r33id, 

25—13083 

’ 

tate 
LSS 

DR 

EP 
. Mae