} come De NEY gi Be SASS sie Ge SNS! ee Be SNe! ter © 

fi 
4 

2! eee Gee Be SN 

THELUR Te¥s THIRD PATRIARCH 
GREAT MASTER HUI- NENG 

The Sixth, | 

Patriar 

Dharma Jewel Platform :5 

Karma ended and emotions empty, 
defines a true Buddha. 

Karma heavy and emotion turbid, 

defines a living being. 

With the Commentary of TRIPITAKA MASTER HUA 

ot 0. ail Meek Te a) UE Sue en 8 Et Fae ett fee i ee fa) Eee P85 ee cee ee 

The Sixth Patriarch’s 
Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The Sixth Patriarch’s 
Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

With the Commentary of 
Tripitaka Master Hua 

English translation by the 
Buddhist Text Translation Society 

Buddhist Text Translation Society 
Dharma Realm Buddhist University 
Dharma Realm Buddhist Association 
Burlingame, California U.S.A. 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 
Published and translated by: 

Buddhist Text Translation Society 
1777 Murchison Drive, Burlingame, CA 94010-4504 

© 2001 Buddhist Text Translation Society 
Dharma Realm Buddhist University 
Dharma Realm Buddhist Association 

First edition (Hong Kong) 1971 
Second edition (USA) 1977 
Third edition (USA) 2001 

11 10 09 08 07 0605040302 10987654321 
ISBN 0-88139-316-9 

Printed in Malaysia 

Addresses of the Dharma Realm Buddhist Association branches are 

listed at the back of this book. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Huineng, 638-713. 
[Liuzudashi fa bao tan jing. English] 
The Sixth Patriarch's Dharma jewel platform sutra : 

commentary of Venerable Master Hsuan Hua, English translation 

by the Buddhist Text Translation Society. 
p.cm 
Includes index. 

Originally published: San Francisco : Sino-American Buddhist 

Association, 1977. 
ISBN 0-88139-316-9 (alk. paper) 

1. Zen Buddhism-Early works to 1800. I. Hstian Hua, 1908- 
II. Hsiian Hua, 1908- Liuzu fa bao tan jing qian shi. English. 

Il. Buddhist Text Translation Society. IV. Title. 

BQ9299.H854 L613 2002 

294.3'85--de21 2001037450 

Contents 

The Fisht-Guidelines of BY TS ticcondutiententivaaniimds vii 
Gitor’ S WMO CU COM ic Bcc sede hecce a tesactt ialatasiet ie iagetatdnnee te abeadees xi 
Biography of the Venerable Master .............cccceseeeereteees xiv 
Tripitaka Master Hua’s Introduction ........0..ccceeeeeseeeeeeeeeees xxi 
rans lator’ Ss ImtrOGUGt Otis siesesscctgcree cgsetslsslaeeeianidciannaadeasd xxiii 
IROWIG WEE Se ECLA CG retested real ecg se ream eotest ech catheea a xxvi 
Ore WOU aii cases vcatun cited innit ania tatiana rer ie 1 
ATuvun eye) (6103054 Saree ee meeRee ere ahem meen S eer ter Eire Ren er ane near vere ne arent 3 

The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs ............::cceeecceeee 9 

A(sencral Tntroducttoniisurcndinasantineeecininlat heel 21 
Chapter I. Action and Intention... ccceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeteeeees 51 
Chapter Uy Prarie istg aces anctaielttee cane mitn a aneyaiiee nest 115 
Chapter III. Doubts and Questions............:ccceceseeeeeereteereee 169 
Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom ............::ccececeeeeees 203 
Chapter Vc Sitti ai: Cy an assesses eteadh edeetetenaeertiesas etn Seeds 217 
Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform... cee 221 
Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions ...............ce 261 

IPRS HU eh PRAT a rcstict te ctf aaa realist eal ate teste tel 266 

Bbikshu Pas aes settee tee et chs ea 269 

Boks hy: Chih: Pn G 2 oe eae naan tea iaele! 284 

Its hy CU ie AT casas cc css acste suy deat edh cant whan ce 292 

Bhikshu Chih Tao .....000...ccccccccecceceeecceeccceceesececeeeesuseeeentseeess 299 

BB GtKS IU EIS S20 saci Since Gate aches Gaactatt ahaiage el eakeadunecees 309 
Dhyana Master Huai Jang «0.0... ecececeeceeeeeeeeceseeeeeeeeeeeeeenees 312 
Dhyana Master Hstian Chiao ...........cceeceeeseseeeteeeeteeeereee 316 
Dhyana Master Chih Huang saccccc.ceidetstasieccsetnntgeatihecets 322 
One Member Of The Sangha. oii. ccscantirinanianrcuck 328 
Bbikshy Pane’ Prem sste: sired aes ttititoant antenatal nae 330 
Master Wo: Li’ SV CSC sic hefieteel tactat hist ete ces Status 335 
Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual............ ce cceeeeeereteeeees 337 
Bbiksht Chih One) sicptc tanita aaa eat wamasha ier 354 
Bi KSI SRG tL 2, 2cttea: dy tect chastastie baccatt iatatedtedl et ieectadunecets 363 
IDTPNCUE USS EROMS 2isct.o oecieverataviacnraecatin ecusibatcborieeclatee: 369 
Chapter IX. Proclamations .........0.:.:.cseeesesececeeteeeteeeeseseeeeeeees 371 
Chapter X. Final Instructions .......:00.scecasdeiesnends 379 
General: Indexes cccic oils iui bate ee oes 431 

People écPlaces- Index acl iaas luniadice eine oaiet onda ats 441 

The Eight Guidelines of 
The Buddhist Text Translation Society 

. A volunteer must free him/herself from the motives of 

personal fame and profit. 

. A volunteer must cultivate a respectful and sincere 
attitude free from arrogance and conceit. 

. A volunteer must refrain from aggrandizing his/her 
work and denigrating that of others. 

. A volunteer must not establish him/herself as the 

standard of correctness and suppress the work of 
others with his or her fault-finding. 

. A volunteer must take the Buddha-mind as his/her 

own mind. 

. A volunteer must use the wisdom of Dharma- 

Selecting Vision to determine true principles. 

. A volunteer must request Virtuous Elders in the ten 
directions to certify his/her translations. 

. A volunteer must endeavour to propagate the 
teachings by printing Sutras, Shastra texts, and Vinaya 
texts when the translations are certified as being 
correct. 

Si >t ie Git FG 

Huineng - Sixth and last Patriarch of Chan Buddhism 

Happily-Dwelling Conduct 

Happily-dwelling conduct is the Bodhisattva conduct, 
and the Bodhisattva conduct is itself the happily- 
dwelling conduct. One happily dwells in the doors of 
practice cultivated by Bodhisattvas. Both one’s body 
and ones mind reside in the states of cultivation of the 
Bodhisattva Way, and do so happily, since that is what 
one likes to do. 

ie | ape 
i i a 
Ad Lt i eas = 
" BS ‘a a = 
= — 

a a — c " 
bee a ee 

Editor’s Introduction 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra is the 
fundamental text of Ch’an Buddhism. It relates the life and 
teachings of Master Hui Neng, the Great Master the Sixth 
Patriarch, as set down by one of his disciples. During the seventh 
and eighth centuries under the T’ang Dynasty, Master Hui Neng 
taught the doctrines of no-thought and of sudden enlightenment, 
which, as expounded in this text, continue to be the heart of 
Ch’an wherever it is practiced. As such, these are the only 
teachings of a Chinese high monk which are regarded by 
Buddhists as a Sutra, that is, as a sacred text equal to those 
compiled by the earlier South Asian masters. 

Interest in Buddhism in general and in Ch’an in particular is 
now swiftly growing in the West, especially in America. 
Translations and re-translations of many of the central Buddhist 
texts have been appearing in consequence. A good deal of 
confusion has been an unfortunate by-product. Because Ch’an is 
so foreign to traditional Western thought, the rendering of Ch’an 
teachings into a Western language requires, even in the most 
literal translation, the virtual invention of a new vocabulary of 
concepts; and each new translation has tended to present a 
distinctly different rendition of the central Buddhist ideas. To 
elucidate them, commentaries are often added by the translators. 

But all of these translations and commentaries have been 
written by scholars who are not Buddhists. While that kind of 
non-membership is hardly important to a translator of ordinary 

xi 

philosophical writings, it becomes a severe stumbling-block for 
the translator of Ch’an teachings. For Ch’an is not a system of 
thought at all, but a special kind of moral and psychological 
work, aimed at a particular personal transformation which the 
Buddhists call enlightenment. Only one who through difficult 
practice has undergone that transformation can hope to teach 
Ch’an authoritatively and translate and comment on the sayings 
of other masters without having to resort to guesswork about 
what the sayings mean. 

Fortunately for students of the Way, an effort to establish an 
authoritative Buddhist canon in English has now been 
undertaken by Tripitaka Master Hsiian Hua and his American 
disciples. 

Master Hua stands in the direct line of orthodox Buddhist 
leadership as it has been handed down from the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. 

The present translation of The Sixth Patriarch’s Sutra, here 
presented in its second edition, was the first work of Master Hua 
to appear in America (the first edition appeared in 1971). The 
translation itself was carried out under the Master’s supervision 
by the Buddhist Text Translation Society, composed of the 
Master’s disciples who are scholars both of the Chinese 
language and of Buddhism. With his Western readers in mind, 
the Master has provided a running commentary to the Sutra text. 
The commentary was first spoken in a series of lectures in 1969. 
The Master’s sure and witty manner of making the most difficult 
concepts plain, already well known to Buddhists on both sides of 
the Pacific, has been rendered in English by his disciples with an 
eye to retaining the lively spoken style of the original. 

In his commentary, Master Hua’s method is to read a few 
lines from the Sutra text and then expound upon their meaning 
or expand on the doctrines in question, often by reference to 

Xl 

contemporary American problems. This style of exposition 
follows the tradition of lecturing Sutras that has existed in China 
for many centuries. Until the appearance of this volume in its 
first edition, there had been in the West little or no record or even 
description of the verbal teachings of Buddhism. The present 
volume serves as a rare example of Buddhism in action, as it has 
survived intact through the centuries. 

Upasaka Kuo Chou Rounds 

Buddhist Text Translation Society, San Francisco, 1977. 

xlil 

Biography of the Venerable Master 

Discovering and perfecting the method to extricate living beings 
from the most fundamental problem of human existence-that of 
birth and death—has been the primary focus of the Venerable 
Master Hstian Hua’s life. 

On the sixteenth day of the third lunar month in 1908, his 
mother saw Amitabha Buddha emitting a light which illumined 
the entire world, and when she awoke from this dream she gave 
birth to the Venerable Master. A rare fragrance lingered in the 
room following her dream and throughout the birth. 

The Master’s initial awareness of death came at eleven years 
old when he saw a lifeless infant. The realization that death and 
birth follow upon one another without cease and that both bring 
suffering, pain and sorrow, awakened a profound sense of 
compassion in the Master and prompted his immediate 
resolution to leave the home life and learn to bring an end to the 
cycle of birth and death. He honored his mother’s wishes that he 
remains at home to serve his parents until their deaths, however. 

The following year on Gwan Yin Bodhisattva’s birthday, he 
dreamed that an old woman wearing a patchwork robe and a 
string of beads appeared to guide him through a wilderness in 
which he was lost. She radiated compassion as she led him over 
the road which was gutted with deep and dangerous holes. He 
knew that if he had tried to traverse this road alone it would have 
been difficult if not impossible to reach safety, but as she guided 
him, the road became smooth and safe and he could see clearly 

XIV 

in all directions. Ahead was his home. Glancing back on the 
dangerous road, he saw many people following him—old and 
young, men and women, sangha and scholars. ““Who are those 
people?” he asked, “Where did they come from and where are 
they going?” 

“They have affinities with you,” she said, “and they also 
want to go home. You must guide them well and show them the 
Way so that you may all arrive at nirvana. I have important work 
to do elsewhere, and so I shall leave you now, but soon we shall 
meet again.” 

The Master asked her name and where she lived. “You will 
find out when you arrive home,” she said. “There’s no need to 
ask so many questions.” Suddenly she whirled around and 
disappeared. The Master led the people safely home and woke 
from his dream feeling extremely happy. 

During that same year he began bowing to his parents three 
times each, in the morning and evening-twelve bows a day. 
Then he thought “The world is bigger than just my father and 
mother,” and he began to bow to the heavens, to the earth, to the 
Emperor, and to his teachers as well. He also bowed to his 
master, even though he had not yet met him. The Master knew 
that without the aid of a good knowing advisor, it is impossible 
to cultivate, and he felt that he would meet his master soon. He 
also bowed to the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Pratyeka Buddhas, 
and Arhats, and to all the good people in the world to thank them 
for all the good deeds they had done; he bowed on behalf of the 
people they had helped. 

“Evil people are to be pitied,” he thought, and he bowed for 
them, asking that their karmic offences might be lessened and 
that they might learn to repent and reform. When doing this, he 
thought of himself as the very worst offender. Each day he 
thought of new people to bow for and soon he was bowing 837 

XV 

times in the morning and 837 times in the evening, which took 
about three hours a day in all. 

The Master didn’t let others see him bow. He rose at four in 
the morning, washed his face, went outside, lit a stick of incense, 
and bowed, regardless of the weather. If there was snow on the 
ground, he would just bow in the snow. In the evening, long after 
everyone was asleep, he went outside and bowed again. He 
practiced this way every day for six years. 

During these years his filial devotion became known far and 
wide and he was referred to as “Filial Son Pai.” Nor did his filial 
devotion end at the death of his parents. On the day his mother 
was buried, he remained behind after the ceremonies were 
completed to begin a three-year vigil beside her grave. Shortly 
after, he left his mother’s grave long enough to go to Three 
Conditions Temple at P’ing Fang Station south of Harbin to 
receive the shramanera precepts from Great Master Ch’ang 
Chih. He then returned to his mother’s grave and built a five by 
eight hut out of five inch sorghum stalks which kept out the wind 
and rain but actually set up little distinction between inside and 
outside. He commenced to observe the custom of filial piety by 
watching over his mother’s grave for a period of three years. 
Clothed only in a rag robe, he endured the bitter Manchurian 
snow and blazing summer sun. He ate only one meal a day, when 
there was food, and he simply did not eat if no food was offered 
to him. He never lay down to sleep. 

At the side of the grave, the Master read many sutras. When 
he first read the Lotus Sutra, he jumped for joy. He knelt and 
recited it for seven days and seven nights, forgetting to sleep, 
forgetting to eat, until eventually blood flowed from his eyes and 
his vision dimmed. Then he read the Shurangama Sutra, 
thoroughly investigating the Great Samadhi and quietly 

XVi 

cultivating it: the three stoppings, the three contemplations, 
neither moving nor still. The Master relates of this experience: 

“T began to obtain a single-minded profound stillness, and 
penetrate the noumenal state. When I read the Avatamsaka, the 
enlightenment became boundless in its scope, indescribable in 
its magnificence, unsurpassed in its loftiness, and ineffable in its 
clarity. National Master Ch’ing Liang said, 

Opening and disclosing the mysterious and subtle, 
Understanding and expanding the mind and its states, 
Exhausting the principle while fathoming the nature, 
Penetrating the result which includes the cause, 
Deep and wide, and interfused, 

Vast and great and totally complete. 

“Tt is certainly so! It is certainly so! At that time I could 
not put down the text, and bowed to and recited the 
Great Sutra as if it were clothing from which one must 
not part or food which one could not do without for 
even a day. And I vowed to myself to see to its vast 
circulation.” 

When his filial duties were completed, the Master went into 
seclusion in Amitabha Cave in the mountains east of his home 
town. There he delved deeply into dhyana meditation and 
practiced rigorous asceticism, eating only pine nuts and drinking 
spring water. The area abounded with wild beasts, but they never 
disturbed the Master. In fact, wolves and bears behaved like 
house pets, tigers stopped to listen to his teaching, and wild birds 
gathered to hear the wonderful Dharma. 

After his stay in the mountains, the Master returned to Three 
Conditions Monastery where he helped the Venerable Master 

XVil 

Ch’ang-chih and the Venerable Master Ch’ang-jen to greatly 
expand the monastery, while simultaneously devoting his time 
to the propagation of the Dharma. 

For more than three decades in Manchuria, the Master 
adhered strictly to ascetic cultivation, diligently practiced 
dhyana meditation, and worked tirelessly for the expansion and 
propagation of the Dharma. During those years, he visited many 
of the local Buddhist monasteries, attended intensive meditation 
and recitation sessions, and walked many miles to listen to 
lectures on the Sutras, in addition to lecturing on the Sutras 
himself. He also visited various non-Buddhist religious 
establishments and obtained a thorough grounding in the range 
of their specific beliefs. 

In 1946 the Master made a major pilgrimage which took him 
to P’u T’o Mountain to receive the complete precepts in 1947. 
Then in 1948, after three thousand miles of travel, the Master 
went to Nan-hua Monastery and bowed before the Venerable 
Master Hsii Ytin, the 44th Patriarch from Shakyamuni Buddha. 
At that first meeting the Venerable Master Ytin, who was then 
109 years old, recognized the Master to be a vessel worthy of the 
Dharma and capable of its propagation. He sealed and certified 
the Master’s spiritual skill and transmitted to him the wonderful 
mind-to-mind seal of all Buddhas. Thus the Master became the 
45th generation in a line descending from Shakyamuni Buddha, 
the nineteenth generation in China from Bodhidharma, and the 
ninth generation of the Wei-yang lineage. Of their meeting the 
Master has written: 

The Noble Yiin saw me and said, “Thus it is.” 

I saw the Noble Yin and verified, “Thus it is.” 
The Noble Yiin and I, both Thus, 

Universally vow that all beings will also be Thus. 

XVill 

The mind-to-mind transmission is performed apart from the 
appearance of the spoken word, apart from the mark of the 
written word, apart from the characteristic of the conditioned 
mind—apart from all such appearances. Only sages who have 
genuine realization understand it; ordinary people have no idea 
what is happening. It is a mutual recognition of the embodiment 
of the principle of true suchness. 

Nearly eight years later, in May of 1956, the Venerable Yiin 
sent to the Master a document entitled “The Treasury of the 
Orthodox Dharma Eye: the Source of Buddhas and Patriarchs.” 
The document bears the seals of Yiin-chu Monastery and of the 
Venerable Yiin. It serves as tangible and public certification of 
the transmission of the mind-to-mind seal from the Venerable 
Yiin to the Master, which took place during their initial meeting 
in 1948. 

In 1950 the Master resigned his post at Nan Hua Monastery 
as the Director of the Nan Hua Institute for the Study of the 
Vinaya, and journeyed to Hong Kong where he lived in a 
mountainside cave in the New Territories. He stayed in the cave 
until the large influx of Sangha members fleeing the mainland 
required his help in establishing new monasteries and temples 
throughout Hong Kong. He personally established two temples 
and a lecture hall and helped to bring about the construction of 
many others. He dwelt in Hong Kong for twelve years, during 
which many people were influenced by his arduous cultivation 
and awesome manner to take refuge with the Triple Jewel, 
cultivating the Dharma-door of recitation of the Buddha’s name, 
and to support the propagation of the Buddhadharma. 

In 1962 the Master carried the Buddha’s Dharma banner 
farther west to the shores of America where he took up residence 
in San Francisco, sat in meditation, and waited for past causes to 
ripen and bear their fruit. In the beginning of the year 1968 the 

XIX 

Master declared that the flower of Buddhism would bloom that 
year in America with five petals; in the summer of that year the 
Master conducted the Shurangama Sutra dharma assembly 
which lasted 96 days-—five of the people who attended that 
session left the home-life and became bhikshus and bhikshunis 
under the Master’s guidance. Since that time more than twenty 
people have left the home life under his guidance. 

Since 1968 the Master has delivered complete commentaries 
on The Heart Sutra, The Diamond Sutra, The Sixth Patriarch’s 
Sutra, The Amitabha Sutra, The Sutra of the Past Vows of Earth 
Store Bodhisattva, The Great Compassion Heart Dharani Sutra, 
The Dharma Flower Sutra, The Sutra in Forty-two Sections, The 
Shramanera Vinaya and others. In June of 1971, the Master 
commenced a Dharma Assembly on the king of sutras, the 
Avatamsaka. With such tireless vigor the Master has firmly 
planted the roots of Dharma in western soil so that it can become 
self-perpetuating. He has spent many hours every day explaining 
the teachings and their application to cultivation, steeping his 
disciples in the nectar of Dharma that they might carry on the 
Buddha’s teachings. 

The miraculous events that have taken place in the Master’s 
life are far too numerous to relate in this brief sketch. This is but 
a brief outline of how the Master has worked with selfless 
devotion to lay the foundation of the Buddha’s teaching on 
western soil. 

XX 

Tripitaka Master Hua’s Introduction 

All of the Sutras are guides to use in cultivating the Way. They 
may be spoken by the Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas, the Patriarchs, 
and also by Arhats, transformation beings, and gods. Although 
they all serve the same purpose, the doctrines within them differ. 

The Sutras spoken by the Buddha were translated from the 
Indian languages into Chinese, and thus worked their way into 
Chinese society. In China, then, all the Sutras are translations, 
with the sole exception of this present work The Sixth 
Patriarch’s Sutra, which was spoken by the great Chinese 
master the Sixth Patriarch. The Great Master was originally an 
illiterate peasant. When he heard the sentence of The Vajra 
(Diamond) Sutra which said, “One should produce that thought 
which is nowhere supported,” he experienced an awakening and 
went to Huang Mei to draw near to the Fifth Patriarch, the Great 
Master Hung Jen. The Fifth Patriarch transmitted to him the 
wonderful Dharma, “using the mind to seal the mind,” which has 
been handed down in unbroken Patriarchal succession. The 
Sixth Patriarch inherited this mind-seal Dharma-door and 
proceeded to carry out the wisdom-life of the Buddha in his 
speaking of The Sixth Patriarch’s Sutra. 

Now, it has been translated into English and the mind-seal 
Dharma-door of the Buddha has thereby been transmitted in 
perpetuity to the West. It is hoped that Westerners will now read, 
recite, and study it, and all become Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, and/ 

XXi 

or Patriarchs. This is the main objective of this translation. May 
all who see and hear it quickly accomplish the Buddha Way. 

Wherever this Sutra is transmitted, the Orthodox Dharma 
may be found right in that place, causing living beings quickly 
to accomplish Buddhahood; such is the importance of this new 
translation. The Sutra is indeed a treasure trove; it is the true 
body of the Buddha, the compassionate father and mother of all 
living beings. It can give rise to limitless Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, 
and Patriarchs! May all in the West who now read this Sutra 
realize Bodhi and accomplish the Buddha Way! 

The Sutras contain the precious wisdom of the Buddha. 
There are some, let us call them “garbage-eating” scholars who 
claim that The Shurangama Sutra was not spoken by the 
Buddha. This is most certainly not the case, and I have made the 
following vow: If The Shurangama Sutra is false, I will fall into 
the uninterrupted hells forever. 

Ch’ang Pai-shan Seng 
San Francisco, August 1977 

XXil 

Translator’s Introduction 

This is the second edition of the first commentary to The Sixth 
Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra ever to express the 
essence of the Sixth Patriarch’s heart. Since the time the Great 
Master spoke this Sutra, no other commentary has revealed his 
basic principles, the Dharma of his heart. Tripitaka Master 
Hstian Hua’s commentary unfolds the heart Dharma, the mind- 
seal, before the reader. 

If you wish to understand the wonderful meaning of this 
Sutra, you should study this commentary, for within it are set 
forth the limitless, inexhaustible, profound principles of the 
Buddhadharma. Among Western and Eastern peoples it is the 
flower of wisdom, the real fruit of Bodhi. 

Furthermore, this translation has been prepared by the 
Buddhist Text Translation Society of the Sino-American 
Buddhist Association. Each of its members, Bhikshus, 
Bhikshunis, Upasakas, Upasikas, many of whom hold Master’s 
and Doctor’s degrees, have read the manuscript with care over a 
period of several years to insure its accuracy. 

Essentially, the mind-seal cannot be spoken or expressed in 
writing, but in his commentary the Master has done just that, 
using numerous analogies and expedient devices to cause people 
to understand what they have never understood before. 

Tripitaka Master Hua was born in northern China, and after 
his mother’s death he practiced filial piety by sitting beside her 
grave for a period of three years. He built a small grass hut to 

XXiil 

keep out the wind and rain, and sat there in meditation. If food 
was brought to him, he ate; if no food was brought, he did not. 

The Master later traveled south to Canton, where he was 
appointed by the Venerable Master Hsii Yiin to serve as Head of 
the Vinaya Academy at Nan Hua Monastery, the temple of the 
Sixth Patriarch. He later received in transmission the Dharma of 
Master Hsti Ytin and became his Dharma successor. 

Since arriving in America, the Master has turned the Great 
Dharma Wheel, lecturing on such Sutras as The Shurangama 
Sutra, The Lotus Sutra, The Earth Store Bodhisattva Sutra, The 
Vajra Sutra, and The Heart Sutra, and others. He teaches an 
ever-growing number of American disciples, many of whom 
have left home to become Bhikshus and Bhikshunis. 

In San Francisco, the Master has founded Gold Mountain 
Monastery where he is lecturing on The Avatamsaka Sutra. He 
has also founded the International Institute for the Translation of 
Buddhist Texts. He has made the solemn vow that wherever he 
goes the Orthodox Dharma will prevail and the Dharma-ending 
Age shall not set in. Most recently, the Master established the 
City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, near Talmage, California, a vast 
complex of 237 acres and 60 buildings, to serve as a center of 
World Buddhism. The City of Ten Thousand Buddhas now 
holds Dharma Realm Buddhist University, of which the Master 
is President, and soon to be established are many programs to 
benefit living beings in many ways. 

The Master upholds firmly the Orthodox Dharma, for the 
Dharma he teaches proceeds from direct and authoritative 
transmission, and he works unceasingly for the Buddha, the 
Dharma, and the Sangha. This lively commentary constitutes the 
first authentic transmission to the West of the mind-seal of all 
Buddhas which has passed in unbroken Patriarchal succession 
from Shakyamuni Buddha to the present day. We present this 

XXIV 

volume as the foundation for the flourishing of the 
Buddhadharma in the West. 

Bhikshuni Heng Yin 

Buddhist Text Translation Society/Co-chairperson, 
Primary Translation Committee, 

International Institute for the Translation of Buddhist Texts. 
San Francisco, August 1977 

XXV 

Reviewer’s Preface 

When the Fifth Patriarch transmitted the Dharma to the Sixth 
Patriarch he said to him, “Do not speak too soon, for the 
Buddhadharma arises from difficulty.” 

Centuries later in Northern China, Tripitaka Master Hstian 
Hua, then known as Filial Son Pai, was practicing filial piety. He 
cultivated and meditated for three years beside his mother’s 
grave. His only protection from the northern winds and rains was 
a five foot square hut made from stalks of sorghum bound 
together in an A-frame which left both ends exposed to the 
elements. 

One time while cultivating there a miracle happened. Filial 
Son Pai saw the Great Master the Sixth Patriarch come to his hut. 
He entered through one of the openings and talked to the filial 
son just like an ordinary person. Filial Son Pai thought that he 
was real, forgetting at that time that the Great Master had entered 
Nirvana over a thousand years ago. The Sixth Patriarch said to 
the Filial Son: 

“In the future you can go to America. 

You will meet this person and that person... 
Five schools will divide into ten, 

to teach and transform living beings. 

Ten will become a hundred, 

a hundred will become a thousand, 

and so forth to endless, endless numbers, 

XXV1 

in abundance, abundance, abundance, 
endless abundance—numbers incalculable 
as grains of sand in the River Ganges. 
This marks the true beginning of 

the Proper Dharma in the West.” 

After they had talked, when the Great Master moved to leave, 
the filial son rose to escort him. They walked together a few 
steps and suddenly the Sixth Patriarch was gone. It was then that 
Filial Son Pai realized, “Oh! The Sixth Patriarch entered Nirvana 
hundreds of years ago, but nonetheless, I met him today!” 

Several decades after this miracle, following years of 
difficulty and hard cultivation, in a cold and tiny temple in San 
Francisco’s Chinatown, Tripitaka Master Hsiian Hua began 
transmitting the Dharma of the mind-seal of all Patriarchs. He 
continues to do so every day. Those who recognize him listen to 
it, consider it, and cultivate it. 

In this commentary on The Sixth Patriarch’s Sutra the 
Master says, “...you will succeed only if you do not fear 
suffering. The Buddhadharma arises from difficulty, the more 
difficult, the better. So now you must endure suffering. This is 
difficult, but you can do it, for it is the opening of your wisdom.” 

Bhikshuni Heng Ch’ih 

Buddhist Text Translation Society/Co-chairperson, 
Primary Translation Committee, 

International Institute for the Translation of Buddhist Texts 
San Francisco, August 1977 

XXVIi 

Na Mwo Original Teacher Sakyamuni Buddha 

XXIX 

XXX 

i 

‘ 

Twenty-eighth Patriarch Arya Bodhidharma 
The First Patriarch in China 

>a Re = +L | 

megs. 
=H 

Twenty-ninth Patriarch Great Master Hui-k’o 
The Second Patriarch in China 

XXX1 

XXXIi 

Thirtieth Patriarch Great Master Seng-ts’an 
The Third Patriarch in China 

> Me Be + | | 

wo 
= 

Thirty-first Patriarch Great Master Tao-hsin 
The Fourth Patriarch in China 

XXXIii 

Thirty-second Patriarch Great Master Hung-jen 
The Fifth Patriarch in China 

XXXIV 

J 

FIN 

a 

a KZ Ss 
BAS NSS 

Thirty-third Patriarch Great Master Hui-neng 
The Sixth Patriarch in China 

XXXV 

Verse for Opening a Sutra 

The unsurpassed, profound, and wonderful Dharma, 
Is difficult to encounter in hundreds of millions of eons, 
I now see and hear it, receive and uphold it, 

And I vow to fathom the Tathagata ’s true meaning. 

FOREWORD 

The Sixth Patriarchs Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra has been 
explained in America before, but I do not know how well it has 
been done. Some lecturers simply read the text aloud, and, since 
each Sutra has its own special interpretation, merely reading it 
aloud does not reveal the meaning. 

The Buddhadharma flourished in China, but only the 
teachings of the Sixth Patriarch, the illiterate Patriarch, were 
made into a Sutra. It was recorded by the Master’s disciple Fa 
Hail. Although his transcription may not mirror the Patriarch’s 
exact words, the meanings expressed are correct. 

I hope that everyone will study the Buddhadharma with his 
true mind, and not hold the opinion that it is very easy. It is only 
by regarding the Buddhadharma as extremely important that you 
will be able to comprehend the principles which I explain. 

!. Dharma Master Fa Hai was a “room entering disciple” of the Sixth Patriarch. 

That means that the Sixth Patriarch had transmitted the wonderful mind-seal 
Dharma to him and he was therefore privileged to enter the Patriarch’s room. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform is the specific title 
of this Sutra, and the word Sutra is a general term for all 
discourses given by the Buddha. In order to clarify their content, 
Sutra titles are classified into seven types, according to their 
reference to person, dharma, and analogy, as follows: 

A. Three Single: Three of the seven types of titles refer to 
only one of the categories of person, dharma, or analogy, and so 
they are called the “three single.” For example: 

1. 

The Buddha Speaks of Amitabha Sutra is a title 
established solely by reference to person; both the 
Buddha and Amitabha are persons, for only a person 
can cultivate and realize Buddhahood. The Buddha is a 
person, and people are just Buddhas. In Chinese, when 
we write the word Buddha (4), the symbol for 
“person” ( A_) stands on the left-hand side. 

The Mahaparinirvana Sutra is a title established by 
reference to the dharma, “nirvana.” Nirvana is a 
Sanskrit word which in Chinese is composed of two 
characters “(j2#%)-nieh p’an” which may be 
explained as “not produced and not destroyed.” 

The Brahma Net Sutra is a title established by reference 
to analogy. In this Sutra the Buddha explains the 
precepts. If you keep these precepts, you will give forth 
light, like the great net in the heaven of the Brahma 
King. But if you carelessly break the precepts, you 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

commit the grave offense of “knowing and yet 
deliberately violating dharma.” Your light then flows 
into the three evil paths: the hell beings, animals, and 
hungry ghosts, where there is not the slightest trace of 
merciful treatment. 

B. Three Double: Titles established by reference to person 
and dharma, person and analogy, or dharma and analogy are 
called the “three double.” For example: 

4. The Wonderful Dharma Lotus Flower Sutra is a title 
established by reference to dharma and analogy since 
the Wonderful Dharma is analogous to the Lotus 
Flower. 

5. The Lion Roar of the Thus Come One Sutra is a title 
established by reference to person and analogy. Thus 
Come One is the first of ten honorific titles given to 
every Buddha and therefore represents a person. The 
Lion Roar is analogous to his speaking the Dharma. 

6. The Sutra of the Questions of Manjushri is a title 
established by reference to a person, the Bodhisattva 
Manjushri of great wisdom, and the dharma he 
requested, Prajna. 

C. Complete in One: The seventh classification contains 

references to person, dharma, and analogy. 

7. The Great Universal Buddha Flower Adornment Sutra 
(Avatamsaka Sutra) refers to the Buddha as a person, 
Great and Universal as a dharma, and Flower 
Adornment as an analogy. 

The Sixth Patriarchs Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra is a 
Chinese, not an Indian Sutra, and its title is not classified 
according to the seven topics mentioned above. This sutra is 
classified according to person, dharma, and a place. The Sixth 

4 

Introduction 

Patriarch is a person, the Dharma Jewel is a dharma, and the 
Platform is a place. 

I will now explain the specific title of this Sutra. 

The Sixth Patriarch. Master Hui Neng of Nan Hua Temple, 
who spoke the Sutra at the beginning of the eighth century A.D., 
was the Sixth Chinese Patriarch. He lived six generations after 
Bodhidharma, who brought the Mahayana teaching to China 
from India and who became the First Chinese Patriarch. 
Bodhidharma was also the twenty-eighth Indian Patriarch, and 
so from the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, the Great Master Hui 
Neng is counted as the Thirty-Third Generational Patriarch. 

Dharma. Dharma is a method. It is like a rule, a model, or a 
pattern. If one cultivates according to this method, that is 
practicing “Dharma.” 

Jewel. The Dharma is like a precious jewel. 

Platform. The platform is the place where this Sutra was 
spoken. This Dharma Seat may be raised above the ground by 
three, five or nine feet, but never more than ten feet. In front of 
it sits a small table which holds Sutras. Dharma Masters speak 
Dharma, administer the Three Refuges’, and transmit precepts 
from the Dharma Seat, which Dharma protectors, good spirits, 
and numerous diamond-treasury Bodhisattvas® take turns 
protecting. 

2 One formally becomes a Buddhist only when one has received the Three 

Refuges, transmitted in a traditional ceremony by a qualified member of the 
Sangha. They are: refuge in: 1) the Buddha, 2) the Dharma (the teachings), and 3) 
the Sangha (Buddhist monks and nuns of the past, present and future). 

3. Bodhisattva is a Sanskrit word. Bodhi means “enlightenment” and sattva, 

“being”. They do not enter Nirvana but choose instead to remain in the world and 
save living beings. Thus Bodhisattvas are enlightened beings who enlighten other 
beings. “Diamond-treasury” refers to a division of Dharma-protecting Bodhisattvas. 

5 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra. The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform is the 
specific name of the Sutra, and the word “Sutra” is its general 
name. “Sutra” is a Sanskrit word which means “a tally.” Above, 
it tallies with the true principle of all Buddhas, and below, with 
the opportunities for teaching living beings. Above, it tallies 
with true suchness, the miraculous principle of all Buddhas, and 
below, it tallies with the living beings who need the teaching. 
Thus, a Sutra tallies with both the principle and the opportunity. 

The word Sutra has four additional meanings: 

1. 

Stringing together. The principles of the 
Buddhadharma are linked together by the Sutras just 
like beads are strung together on a string. 

2. Attracting. Creating the opportunities for teaching 

eR 

living beings, a Sutra attracts living beings just like a 
magnet attracts iron filings. All living beings who wish 
to study the Buddhadharma will be drawn to the 
principles in the Sutras, like iron filings to a magnet. 

Permanent. From antiquity to the present, a Sutra does 
not change. Not one word can be deleted; not one 
meaning can be added. Not increasing or decreasing, a 
Sutra is permanent, unchanging. 

4. Method. A Sutra is a method respected by living beings 

in the three periods of time. In the past, living beings 
relied upon this method to cultivate and attain 
Buddhahood. In the present, living beings depend upon 
it to move from the position of foolish common people 
to that of Buddhahood. In the future, living beings will 
also cultivate according to this method. A Sutra is a 
method, then, venerated throughout the three periods of 
time. 

Introduction 

The word Sutra has many more meanings. For example, a 
Sutra is like a bubbling spring; principles flow from it like water 
bubbling up out of the earth. It is also like a carpenter’s chalk- 
line, which makes a perfectly clear, straight guide. But if you 
understand the first four meanings, you understand the basic 
meanings. 

To explain a Sutra correctly, one must first outline it 
according to the Five Profound Meanings of the T’ien T’ai 
School: 

1. Explaining the Name. According to the seven kinds of 
Sutra titles explained previously, this Sutra is 
established by reference to person, Dharma, analogy, 
and place. 

2. Discriminating the Substance. This Sutra takes the Real 
Mark* as its substance. The Real Mark is without a 
mark, and yet there is nothing which is not marked by it. 

3. Clarifying the Principle. The principle of this Sutra is 
the realization of Buddhahood. If you cultivate 
according to this Sutra, you can realize the Buddha 
position. 

4. Discussing the Function. This Sutra’s function is to 
lead you to understand the mind and see your own 
nature. If you understand the mind, you have no 
worries. If you see your own nature, you have no cares. 
No longer do you quit worrying about one problem only 
to begin worrying about another and, when that one is 
solved, find yet another one coming to take its place. If 

4. The Real Mark denotes true reality, devoid of external appearances, attachments, 

and discriminations 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you understand the mind and see your own nature, then 
everything is easy. 

5. Determining the Teaching Mark. This Sutra is like 
sweet dew, the heavenly elixir of immortality. Drink it 
once and you will never die. The Sutra is also like ghee, 
a clarified butter with the most miraculous and subtle of 
tastes. Ghee is also used to describe the Sutras spoken 
by Shakyamuni Buddha during the Dharma Flower and 
Lotus-Nirvana periods of his teaching? : 

>» The T’ien T’ai School, systematized by the Great Master Chih-i (538-597), is one 
of the great teaching schools of Chinese Buddhism. It takes as its basic text the 
Wonderful Dharma Lotus Flower Sutra, and divides the Buddha’s teaching into five 
periods; each period is represented by an analogy to a milk product. 

Period Milk Product 
Avatamsaka (21 days) whole milk 
Agama (12 years) coagulated milk 
Vaipulya (8 years) curdled milk 
Prajna-paramita (22 years) butter 

Lotus Flower-Nirvana (8 years) clarified butter (ghee) 

The original dharma of the Avatamsaka is like fresh milk. With each new 
teaching, it becomes richer and purer, yet it is still the same basic substance— 
Dharma Food. 

The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

It wasn’t easy being the Sixth Patriarch. Many people wished to 
kill him and his disciples as well. For this reason, after the Great 
Master obtained the Dharma, he went into hiding, dwelling 
among hunters for sixteen years. Even after establishing his 
Dharma platform at Nan Hua Temple, followers of other 
religions tried to kill him, and so the Great Master hid inside a 
big rock. He sat there in meditation, and although they set the 
mountain on fire, he was untouched by the flames. The rock 
could still be seen when I was at Nan Hua Temple. 

Who wanted to kill him? In general, it wasn’t you and it 
wasn’t me. On the other hand, if you consider the insane things 
we have done in past lives, it might well have been you or it 
could have been me. But in this life it wasn’t you or me and so 
there is no need to worry about having broken precepts in this 
case. 

As I told you, the Great Master is counted as the Sixth 
Patriarch from the First Patriarch, Bodhidharma, who was the 
Twenty-eighth Indian Patriarch. “Bodhi” means enlightenment 
and “Dharma” means law. When Bodhidharma set sail from 
India, fulfilling Shakyamuni Buddha’s prediction that the 
Mahayana® teaching would be transmitted to China during the 
time of the Twenty-eighth Patriarch, the Buddhadharma already 
existed in China, yet it was as if it were not there at all. Although 
there were men who studied, there were few who lectured or 
recited the sutras and repentance ceremonies were seldom 

9 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

practiced. Cultivation was superficial. Scholars debated and 
argued, but none of them truly understood. 

The principles in the Sutras must be cultivated, but at that 
time in China they were not cultivated because everyone feared 
suffering. Now, in America, it is just the same. People sit in 
meditation. However, as soon as their legs begin to ache, they 
wince and fidget and then gently unbend them. People are just 
people and nobody likes to have aching legs. 

While still in India, Patriarch Bodhidharma sent two of his 
disciples, Fo T’o and Yeh She, to China to transmit the sudden 
enlightenment Dharma door. But no one, not even Chinese 
Bhikshus’, would speak to them. So they went to Lu Mountain 
where they met the Great Master Yiian Kung, who lectured on 
mindfulness of the Buddha. 

Master Ytian asked, “What Dharma do you transmit that 
causes people to pay you so little respect?” 

Fo T’o and Yeh She could not speak Chinese, so they used 
sign language instead. Raising their arms in the air, they said, 
“Watch! The hand makes a fist and the fist makes a hand. Is this 
not quick?” 

Master Yuan replied, “Quick indeed.” 

“Bodhi (enlightenment) and affliction,” they said, “are just 
that quick.” 

At that moment, Dharma Master Yiian became enlightened, 
realizing that originally Bodhi and affliction are not different, for 
Bodhi is affliction and affliction is Bodhi. He made offerings to 

6 The Mahayana or “great vehicle” teaching stresses the salvation of all beings, 

since all beings possess the Buddha nature and may realize Buddhahood. It is called 
“great” in comparison with the Hinayana or “lesser vehicle”, whose followers 
pursue personal salvation. 

7. A Bhikshu is a Buddhist Monk. 

10 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

Fo T’o and Yeh She, and shortly thereafter, the two Indian 
Bhikshus died on the same day, in the same place. Their graves 
may still be seen at Lu Mountain. 

Patriarch Bodhidharma saw that the roots of the Mahayana, 
the Great Vehicle Buddhadharma, were ripe in China. Fearing 
neither the distance nor the hardship of travel, he took the 
Dharma there. The Chinese called him “barbarian” because he 
talked in a way that no one understood. When children looked up 
at the bearded Bodhidharma, they ran away in terror. Adults 
feared that he was a kidnapper and so told their children to stay 
away from him. 

Patriarch Bodhidharma went to Nan Ching where he listened 
to Dharma Master Shen Kuang explained the Sutras. When Shen 
Kuang spoke, the heavens rained fragrant blossoms and a 
golden-petalled lotus rose from the earth for him to sit upon. 
However, only those with good roots, who had opened the five 
eyes® and the six spiritual penetrations were able to see that. 
Now! Isn’t this wonderful? 

After listening to the Sutra, Bodhidharma asked, “Dharma 
Master, what are you doing?” 

“T am explaining Sutras,” Shen Kuang replied. 

“Why are you explaining Sutras?” 

“T am teaching people to end birth and death.” 

“Oh?” said Bodhidharma, “exactly how do you do that? In 
this Sutra which you explain, the words are black and the paper 
is white. How does this teach people to end birth and death?” 

Dharma Master Shen Kuang had nothing to say. How did he 
teach people to end birth and death? He fumed in silence. Then, 
even though heavenly maidens rained down flowers and the 

% Opened through cultivation, the Five Eyes are: 1) the Buddha Eye, 2) the Dharma 

Eye, 3) the Flesh Eye, 4) the Heavenly Eye, and 5) the Wisdom Eye. 

11 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

earth gave forth golden lotuses, Dharma Master Shen Kuang got 
angry. This is what I mean when I say that the Buddhadharma 
existed in China, but it was as if it were not there at all. 

When angry, Dharma Master Shen Kuang used his heavy 
iron beads to level opposition. In response to Bodhidharma’s 
question, he reddened with anger and raged like a tidal wave 
smashing a mountain. As he whipped out his beads, he snapped, 
“You are slandering the Dharma!” and cracked Bodhidharma 
across the mouth, knocking loose two teeth. Bodhidharma 
neither moved nor spoke. He hadn’t expected such a vicious 
reply. 

There is a legend about the teeth of holy men. You must not 
ask about the principle, however, because it is too inconceivable. 
The legend says that if a sage’s teeth fall to the ground, it won’t 
rain for three years. Patriarch Bodhidharma thought, “If it 
doesn’t rain for three years, people will starve! I have come to 
China to save living beings, not to kill them!” So Bodhidharma 
did not let his teeth fall to the ground. Instead, he swallowed 
them and disappeared down the road. Although he had been 
beaten and reviled, Bodhidharma could not go to the government 
and file suit against Dharma Master Shen Kuang. Those who 
have left home have to be patient. How much more so must a 
patriarch forbear. 

Bodhidharma then met a parrot imprisoned in a wicker cage. 
This bird was much more intelligent than Dharma Master Shen 
Kuang. Recognizing Bodhidharma as the First Patriarch, the bird 
said, 

Mind from the West, 
Mind from the West, 

Teach me a way 
To escape from this cage. 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

Although Bodhidharma had received no response from 
people, this parrot recognized him. Hearing the bird’s plea for 
help, Bodhidharma whispered a secret expedient teaching to 
teach this bird how to end suffering. He said, 

To escape from the cage; 
To escape from the cage; 
Put out both legs, 
Close both eyes. 
This is the way 
To escape from the cage! 

The parrot listened attentively and said, “All right! I 
understand,” and stuck out his legs, closed his eyes, and waited. 

When the bird’s owner came home from work, he always 
played with his parrot. But this time when he looked in the cage 
he was shocked. The owner was on the verge of tears. He 
couldn’t have been more upset if his own son had died. He pulled 
open the cage door and scooped up the bird, which lay still and 
quiet in his hand. The body had not yet chilled. The owner 
looked with disbelief at the little body. He peeked at it from the 
left and right...it didn’t even quiver. Slowly, he opened his 
hand...PHLLRTTPHLRTTPHLRTT! The bird broke loose from 
his hand and flew away! 

Now, like the parrot, we are in a cage. How do we escape? 
You may say, “I am really free. If I want to eat, I eat; if | want to 
drink, I drink. I do not have to follow rules. I can do anything.” 

Don’t think you are quite so clever. This is not freedom, it is 
just confusion. To be free, you must be free of birth and death, 
and then, if you wish to fly into space you can fly into space, and 
if you wish to drop into the earth, you can drop into the earth. If 

13 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you can do this, you are truly independent. Like the parrot, you 
are free. 

As I explain The Sixth Patriarch Dharma Jewel Platform 
Sutra, I do not lecture well. This is not polite talk; it’s true. Some 
lecture well, yet do not dare explain. After I have lectured, you 
of true eloquence may follow. When you have opened your 
wisdom, you will understand. 

In his great anger, Dharma Master Shen Kuang knocked out 
two of Bodhidharma’s teeth. He thought he had won a great 
victory because the Barbarian put forth no opposition. But not 
long after, the Ghost of Impermanence, wearing a high hat, paid 
a call on Master Shen Kuang: 

“Your life ends today,” said the ghost. “King Yama, the King 
of the Dead, has sent me to escort you.” 

Master Shen Kuang said, “What? Must J die? When I speak 
the Dharma, flowers fall from the heavens and the earth bubbles 
forth golden lotuses, yet I still have not ended birth and death? 
Tell me, is there a person in this world who has ended birth and 
death?” 

“There is,” came the reply. 

“Who?” asked Shen Kuang. “Tell me, and I’ll follow him to 
study the Way.” 

“He’s that black-faced Bhikshu whose teeth you just 
knocked out. King Yama bows to him every day.” 

“Please, Old Ghost, speak to King Yama on my behalf. I 
want to follow that Bhikshu. I am determined to end birth and 
death. Can’t you allow me some more time?” 

“All right,” said the ghost. “Since you are sincere, King 
Yama will wait.” 

Dharma Master Shen Kuang was delighted. He was so quick 
to rush after Bodhidharma, that he forgot to thank the Ghost of 
Impermanence; in fact, he even forgot to put on his shoes. He ran 

14 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

until he met the parrot whom Bodhidharma had freed, and 
suddenly he understood, “Originally it is just this way! I need 
only act dead. I need only be a living dead person!” 

Bodhidharma walked on, ignoring the barefoot Dharma 
Master following behind. Arriving at Bear’s Ear Mountain in 
Loyang, the Patriarch sat down to meditate facing a wall. 
Dharma Master Shen Kuang knelt close by. For nine years, 
Patriarch Bodhidharma sat meditating and Dharma Master Shen 
Kuang knelt beside him, seeking the Dharma. 

Earlier, when I spoke this public record, an eleven year old 
child asked me, “During the nine years he knelt, did he eat or 
not?” I replied, “How could anyone kneel for nine years without 
eating and still live? When the Patriarch meditated, Shen Kuang 
knelt, and when the Patriarch ate, Shen Kuang ate.” But this is 
not recorded in the books. While the Patriarch was sitting, many 
people came to bow to him and were received as his disciples. 

One day a great snow fell, and it rose in drifts as high as Shen 
Kuang’s waist, and yet he continued to kneel. Finally, Patriarch 
Bodhidharma asked him, “Why are you kneeling here in such 
deep snow?” 

“T want to end birth and death,” replied Shen Kuang. “When 
I was lecturing Sutras I was unsuccessful. Please, Patriarch, 
transmit this dharma to me.” 

“What do you see falling from the sky?” asked Bodhidharma. 

“Snow,” said Shen Kuang. 

“What color is it?” asked Bodhidharma. 

“It’s white, of course.” 

“When red snow falls from the sky,” said Bodhidharma, “I 
will transmit the Dharma to you. You knocked out two of my 
teeth, and I have been most compassionate in not taking revenge. 
Do you really expect me to give you the Dharma?” This was the 
test Patriarch Bodhidharma gave to Master Shen Kuang. 

15 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

How did Shen Kuang complete the test? Cultivators of the 
Way carry a knife to protect the substance of their precepts. A 
true cultivator would rather cut off his head than break a precept. 

Shen Kuang drew his precept knife, and with one slice, cut 
off his arm and thus passed his test. His blood flowed onto the 
new fallen snow. He scooped up a bucket full of crimson snow, 
dumped it before Bodhidharma, and said, “Patriarch, do you 
see? The snow is red!” 

Bodhidharma said, “So it is, so it is.” He had tested Shen 
Kuang’s sincerity, and now the Patriarch was extremely happy. 
“My coming to China has not been in vain. I have met a person 
who dares to use a true mind to cultivate the Way, even forsaking 
his arm in search of the Dharma.” 

The Patriarch then spoke the Dharma door of “using the mind 
to seal the mind.”? It points straight to the mind to see the nature 
and realize Buddhahood. 

While hearing this dharma, Shen Kuang didn’t think about 
the pain in his arm, and before that he had thought only of 
making the snow turn red. But now, he once again produced 
discursive thought: “My arm really hurts!” he said. “My mind is 
in pain. Please, Patriarch, quiet my mind.” 

“Find your mind,” said Bodhidharma. “Show it to me and I 
will quiet it for you.” 

Dharma Master Shen Kuang searched for his mind. He 
looked in the ten directions: north, east, south, west, in the 
intermediate points, and up and down. He also looked in the 
same seven places that the Venerable Ananda looked when 

9. 7 GINN ep 43-1 hsin yin hsin, refers to the mind-to-mind transmission of 

Dharma passed through each generation from the time of Shakyamuni Buddha 
onwards. 

16 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

Shakyamuni Buddha asked him the same question in The 
Shurangama Sutra!®, That is, 

1. 

Dye ee ae tS 

He looked inside his body; 

He looked outside his body; 

He looked for it hidden somewhere in his sense organs. 
He looked where there was light; 

He looked at the place where conditions came together. 
He looked in the middle, between the organs and their 
objects; 

And, finally, he looked in the place of non-attachment, 
which is no-place. 

At last Shen Kuang said to Bodhidharma, “I can’t find my mind! 
Great Master, it is nowhere to be found.” 

“This is how well I have quieted your mind,” said the 
Patriarch. At these words, Shen Kuang understood the meaning 
of the Dharma transmission, the wonderful, ineffable principle. 

Ten thousand dharmas return to one; 
Where does the one return? 

Shen Kuang did not understand, 

And ran after Bodhidharma; 

Before him at Bear’s Ear Mountain 
Knelt nine years 

Seeking Dharma to escape King Yama 

With the transmission of the Dharma, Shen Kuang received 
the name “Hui K’o” which means “Able Wisdom.” 

at Shurangama Sutra, TF ie BE leng yen ching, from Roll I. T. 945. 

17 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Master Hui K’o asked Bodhidharma, “In India, did you 
transmit the Dharma to your disciples? Did you also give the 
robe and bowl as certification?” 

“T transmitted the Dharma in India,” replied Bodhidharma, 
“but I did not use the robe and bowl. Indian people are 
straightforward. When they attain the fruit, they know they must 
be certified. If no one certifies them, they do not say, ‘I have 
attained the way! I have given proof to Arhatship! I am a 
Bodhisattva!’ They do not speak like this.” 

“Chinese people, however, are different. Many Chinese have 
the Great Vehicle Root Nature!!, but there are also many people 
who lie. Having cultivated without success, such people claim to 
have the Way. Though they have not certified to the fruit, they 
claim to be certified sages. Therefore I transmit the robe and 
bowl to prove that you have received the transmission. Guard 
them well and take care.” 

While the Patriarch Bodhidharma was in China, he was 
poisoned six times. Dharma Master Bodhiruci and Vinaya 
Master Kuang T’ung were jealous of him. They prepared a 
vegetarian meal which contained an invariably fatal drug, and 
offered it to the Patriarch. Although he knew it was poisoned, he 
ate it. Then he vomited the food on to a tray, and it was 
transformed into a pile of writhing snakes. 

After this unsuccessful attempt, Bodhiruci tried again, using 
an even more potent poison. Again, Bodhidharma ate the food. 
Then he sat atop a huge boulder and spat out the poison. The 

\l. “Great Vehicle Root Nature” refers to the strong karmic affinity of those who in 
past lives have cultivated the Great Vehicle and who, by their meritorious actions, 
have sent down “deep roots,” that is, have established a firm foundation in the 
Buddhadharma, which enables them to successfully understand and practice it in 
the present. 

18 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

boulder crumbled into a heap of dust. In four more attempts, 
jealous people tried without success to poison the Patriarch. 

One day, the Great Master Bodhidharma said to Hui K’o, “I 
came to China because I saw people here with the Great Vehicle 
Root Nature. Now I have transmitted the Dharma and am ready 
to complete the stillness.” After his death, the Patriarch’s body 
was buried. There was nothing unusual about his funeral. 

In Northern Wei (386-532 A.D.), however, an official called 
Sung Yiin, met Bodhidharma on the road to Chung Nan 
Mountain in Ts’ung Ling. When they met, Bodhidharma was 
carrying one shoe in his hand. He said to Sung Yiin, “The king 
of your country died today. Return quickly! There is work to be 
done.” 

The official asked, “Great Master, where are you going?” 

“Back to India,” the Great Master replied. 

“Venerable One, to whom did you transmit your Dharma?” 

“In China, after forty years, it will be ‘K’o.’” 

Sung Yiin returned to his country and reported the incident. 
“Recently, in Ts’ung Ling, I met the Patriarch Bodhidharma who 
told me that the king of our country had died and instructed me 
to return to the capital. When I arrived I found it exactly as he 
had said. How did he know?” 

His countrymen scoffed, “Bodhidharma is already dead. 
How could you have met him on the road?” Then they rushed to 
the Patriarch’s grave and found it empty, with nothing inside but 
one shoe. 

Where did Bodhidharma go? No one knows. Perhaps he 
came to America. Wherever he wanders, no one can recognize 
him, because he can change and transform according to his 
convenience. When he came to China, he said he was one 
hundred and fifty years old, and when he left, he was still one 

19 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

hundred and fifty years old. No historical references can be 
found. 

When Bodhidharma was about to enter Nirvana he said, “I 
came to China and transmitted my Dharma to three people. One 
received my marrow, one my bones, and one my flesh.” After 
the transmission, the Patriarch himself no longer had a body. 
Great Master Hui K’o received the marrow and Ch’an Master 
Tao Yii received the bones. 

Bhikshuni Tsung Ch’ih could recite The Lotus Sutra from 
memory. After she died, a green lotus flower grew from her 
mouth. She received Bodhidharma’s flesh. In the end, the 
Patriarch had no body at all. So don’t look for him in America; 
you won’t find him. 

The Second Patriarch, Hui K’o of the Northern Ch’i (550- 
577 A.D.) whose family name was Chi, was formerly Shen 
Kuang. When he was born, his parents saw Wei T’ou 
Bodhisattva, the golden armored spiritual being, come to offer 
protection; thereupon they named their son “Shen Kuang” which 
means “spiritual light.” Not only was the Patriarch intelligent, 
but he had an excellent memory as well, and his skill and powers 
of discrimination were so remarkable that he could read ten lines 
in the time it took an ordinary person to read one. In a gathering 
of one hundred people, all talking at once, he could clearly 
distinguish each conversation. 

The Great Master, however, had great anger; he disagreed 
with everyone and was always ready to fight. When Shen Kuang 
explained Sutras, as I have told you, he used his iron beads to 
win his arguments. Later, after he knelt for nine years in quest of 
the Dharma, it was his great anger which enabled him to cut off 
his arm and feel no pain. It was also because of this anger that he 
later felt pain. Unafflicted by anger, he would have felt no pain. 
Pain is just an affliction and affliction is the cause of pain. 

20 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

The Second Patriarch was forty years old when he left 
Bodhidharma. Having obtained the Dharma, he went into hiding 
because Bodhiruci and Vinaya Master Kuang T’ung, who had 
made six attempts on the life of Bodhidharma, also wished to kill 
his disciples. So although Hui K’o had great anger, he 
nevertheless obeyed his teacher and went into hiding for forty 
years. When he was eighty, he began to propagate the 
Buddhadharma, teaching and transforming living beings. 

Later, the disciples of Bodhiruci and Vinaya Master Kuang 
T’ung tried to kill Master Hui K’o, who feigned insanity to 
lessen the jealousy of his rivals. But he never ceased to save 
living beings who were ready to receive his teaching. Because so 
many people continued to trust the Second Patriarch, 
Bodhiruci’s disciples were still jealous. They reported Hui K’o 
to the government, accusing him of being a weird inhuman 
creature. “He confuses the people who follow him,” they 
charged; “he is not even human.” The Emperor ordered the 
district magistrate to arrest him, and Hui K’o was locked up and 
questioned: 

“Are you human or are you a freak?” asked the Magistrate. 

“T’m a freak,” replied Master Hui K’o. 

The magistrate knew that the Patriarch said this to avoid 
causing jealousy, so he ordered him to tell the truth. “Speak 
clearly,” he demanded, “what are you?” 

The Great Master replied, “I’m a freak.” 

Governments can’t allow strange freaks to roam the earth, 
and so Hui K’o was sentenced to die. Now, isn’t this the way of 
the world? 

The Patriarch wept when he told his disciples, “I must 
undergo this retribution.” He was a courageous man, certainly 
not one to cry out of fear of death. He was sad because the 
Dharma had not become widely understood during his lifetime. 

21 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“The Buddhadharma will not flourish until the time of the Fourth 
Patriarch,” he announced, and then he faced the executioner. 

“Come and kill me!” he said. The executioner raised his axe 
and swung it towards the Master’s neck. What do you think 
happened? 

You are probably thinking, “He was a Patriarch with great 
spiritual power. Certainly the blade shattered and his head was 
not even scratched.” No. The axe cut off his head, and it didn’t 
grow back. However, instead of blood, a milky white liquid 
flowed onto the chopping block. 

You think, “Now really, this is just too far out.” If you 
believe it, that is fine. If you do not believe it, that is fine too; just 
forget it. However, I will give you a simple explanation of why 
blood did not flow from the Patriarch’s neck: When a sage enters 
the white yang realm!* his blood becomes white because his 
body has transformed completely into yang, leaving no trace of 
yin. “I don’t believe it,” you say. Of course you don’t. If you did, 
you would be just like the Second Patriarch. 

When the executioner saw that the Master did not bleed, he 
exclaimed, “Hey! He really is a freak! I chopped off his head, but 
what came out was not blood, but this milky white fluid. And his 
face looks exactly as it did when he was alive!” The Emperor 
knew that he had executed a saint, because he remembered that 
the Twenty-fourth Indian Patriarch, Aryasimha, had also been 
beheaded and had not bled, but a white milky liquid had poured 
forth, because he had been without outflows. When one has no 
ignorance, one may attain to a state without outflows and enter 
the white yang realm. 

oe =] iB tb FR — pai yang shih chieh. 

22 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

You think, “But you just said that Patriarch Hui K’o had 
great anger. How could he have been without ignorance?” You 
are certainly more clever than I am, for I did not think of this 
question. But now that you have brought it up, I will answer it. 
His was not petty anger like yours and mine which explodes like 
firecrackers, “Pop! Pop! Pop.” His anger was wisdom and 
because of it his body became yang. Great patience, great 
knowledge, great courage, and great wisdom: that’s what his 
temper was made of. 

Realizing that Hui K’o was a Bodhisattva in the flesh, the 
Emperor felt great shame. “A Bodhisattva came to our country,” 
he said, “and instead of offering him protection, we killed him.” 
Then the Emperor had all the great officials take refuge with this 
strange Bhikshu. Thus, even though the Second Patriarch had 
already been executed, he still accepted these disciples. 

The Third Patriarch, Seng Ts’an of the Sui Dynasty, was of 
unknown family name and origin. When he first came to visit the 
Second Patriarch, his body was covered with repulsive sores like 
those of a leper. 

“Where are you from?” asked the Second Patriarch. “What 
are you doing here?” 

“T have come to take refuge with the High Master, and to 
study and cultivate the Buddhadharma,” answered Seng Ts’an. 

“You have a loathsome disease and your body is filthy. How 
can you study the Buddhadharma?” 

Master Hui K’o was clever, but Dhyana Master Seng Ts’an 
was even more clever. “IJ am a sick man and you are a high 
master,” he said, “but in our true minds where is the difference?” 

Thereupon, the Second Patriarch transmitted the Dharma to 
Seng Ts’an saying, “This robe and bowl have been passed on 
from Bodhidharma. They certify that you have received the 
Dharma Seal. In order to protect it you must go into hiding, 

23 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

because Bodhiruci’s followers will try to harm you. Be very 
careful and let no one know that you have received the 
transmission.” 

The Third Patriarch Seng Ts’an also feigned insanity while 
he taught living beings. During the persecution of Buddhism by 
the Emperor Wu of the Northern Chou dynasty (reigned from 
561-577 A.D.), the Patriarch fled into the mountains. While he 
hid there, the tigers, wolves, leopards, and other fierce animals 
all disappeared. 

After transmitting the Dharma to the Fourth Patriarch, Tao 
Hsin, Master Seng Ts’an invited a thousand Bhikshus to a great 
vegetarian feast. After they had eaten, he said, “You think that to 
sit in full lotus is the best way to die. Watch! I’1l demonstrate my 
independence over birth and death!” The Master left the dining 
hall, followed by the thousand Bhikshus. He halted by the trunk 
of a tree, and after pausing for a moment, he leapt up and 
grabbed a big branch. Then while swinging from the tree by one 
hand, he entered Nirvana. No one knew his name or his 
birthplace. 

Someone is afraid and thinks, “The First Patriarch was 
poisoned, the Second Patriarch was beheaded, and the Third 
Patriarch died hanging from a tree. I certainly do not want to be 
a patriarch. It’s much too dangerous.” With this attitude, even if 
you wanted to be a patriarch you could not. As long as you fear 
death, as long as you fear anything at all, you cannot even be a 
patriarch’s disciple. Patriarchs are not afraid of suffering. They 
are not afraid of life and they are not afraid of death. Making no 
distinctions between life and death, they roam among people, 
teaching and transforming them. Like Fo T’o and Yeh She, they 
know that affliction is just Bodhi and that birth and death is 
Nirvana. So, tell me now, who is not afraid of birth and death? If 
there is such a one, I will make him a patriarch. 

24 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

The Fourth Patriarch’s name was Tao Hsin. While very 
young, Master Tao Hsin left home under Master Seng Ts’an and 
for sixty years he sat in Dhyana concentration, without lying 
down to rest. Although he seldom opened his eyes, he wasn’t 
asleep. He was working at cultivation. When he did open his 
eyes, everyone shook with terror. Why? No one knew. Such was 
the magnitude of his awesome virtue. 

Hearing of the Master’s great virtue, in the seventeenth year 
of the Chen Kuan Reign of the T’ang dynasty (643 A.D.), the 
Emperor sent a messenger to invite him to the palace to receive 
offerings. Unlike we common people, who would attempt to 
wedge ourselves into the court without being asked, the Great 
Master, the Fourth Patriarch, refused the invitation saying, “I am 
too old and the journey would be tiring. Eating on the road would 
be too difficult. I cannot undergo such hardship.” 

When the messenger delivered the Patriarch’s reply, the 
Emperor said, “Go back and tell him that the Emperor says that 
no matter how old he is or how difficult the journey, I have 
ordered him to come to the palace.” 

The messenger returned to the Patriarch and said, “Master, 
regardless of your health, you must come to the Emperor’s court. 
We will carry you back, if necessary!” At that time, since there 
were no airplanes or cars, travel was difficult. 

“No, I cannot go,” replied the Patriarch. “I am too old and ill. 
Take my head if you must, but my heart will not go.” 

The messenger thought, “There is nothing to do but to go 
back without him. I cannot take his head to the Emperor. This 
Bhikshu is very strange; he is hardly human.” 

The messenger then hurried back to the Emperor. “Your 
Excellency, you may have the Master’s head, but his heart will 
not move!” 

25 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Very well, go get his head,” replied the Emperor. He put a 
knife in a box and gave it to the messenger saying, “Slice off his 
head, but under no circumstances should you harm this 
Bhikshu.” 

The messenger understood. He returned to the Fourth 
Patriarch. “Venerable Master, if you refuse to come, the 
Emperor has ordered me to cut off your head,” he said. 

Patriarch Tao Hsin said, “If in this life my head gets to see 
the Emperor, that will be great glory. You may remove my head 
now.” The messenger took out the knife and prepared to cut off 
his head. The Great Master closed his eyes and waited calmly for 
about ten minutes. Maybe it was ten minutes, maybe it was nine 
or eleven. Don’t become attached. It is certainly not determined 
exactly how long he waited. But nothing happened, and finally 
Master Tao Hsin got angry, just like the Second Patriarch, and 
shouted, “Hey! Why don’t you slice off my head!” 

“The Emperor had no intention of harming you,” the 
messenger quickly replied. “He was just bluffing.” 

The Patriarch heard this and laughed aloud. Then he said, 
“Now you know that there is still a person in the world who does 
not fear death.” 

The family name of the Fourth Patriarch was Ssu Ma and his 
personal name was Hsin. Ssu Ma was an honorable ancestral 
name. Both the Emperor Ssu Ma of the Chin dynasty and the 
historian and skilled writer Ssu Ma Ch’ien of the Han dynasty 
had this name. When the Fourth Patriarch became a Bhikshu he 
took the new name Tao Hsin. He lived seventy-two years, sixty 
of which were spent without lying down even once to sleep. The 
Fourth Patriarch’s realm of accomplishment was inconceivable. 

While Tao Hsin was cultivating, a nearby city was besieged 
by bandits for more than a hundred days, depriving its 
inhabitants of water and supplies. Seeing the lives of the people 

26 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

in danger, Master Tao Hsin left his mountain retreat to rescue the 
city dwellers. He taught them all to recite “Mahaprajna- 
paramita.” After they had recited for a time, the bandits fled and 
water reappeared in the wells. This is the response based on the 
Way which Master Tao Hsin evoked as a result of his superior 
cultivation. 

When the Fourth Patriarch decided to build a temple, he 
looked with his Buddha eye and saw Broken Head Mountain 
surrounded by a purple cloud of energy. Observing this 
auspicious sign, the Master went there to dwell, changing its 
inauspicious name, “Broken Head,’ to “Double Peak” 
Mountain. 

The Master used expedient dharmas to teach living beings 
how to discard their bad habits. These stubborn living beings, 
however, often discarded what was good and continued doing 
evil. But the Master persisted and by using all kinds of skill-in- 
means caused these stubborn living beings to realize their 
mistakes. He propagated the Dharma for more than forty years, 
transforming living beings greater in number than seedlings of 
rice, stalks of hemp, shoots of bamboo, or blades of grass. 

One day the Fourth Patriarch said to his disciple Dharma 
Master Yuan I, “You should build me a Stupa!3, I am going to 
leave.” 

In the second year of Yung Hui, of the T’ang dynasty (651 
A.D.), on the twenty-fourth day of the ninth lunar month, 
Patriarch Tao Hsin, who had never been ill, sat down and entered 
Nirvana. His disciples locked his flesh body securely in the stone 
Stupa. A year later the iron locks fell away and the Stupa opened 
by itself. Looking in, everyone saw the body of the Fourth 

13. Stupas are reliquaries designed to hold the remains of Buddhas, Buddhist saints, 
and patriarchs 

27 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Patriarch still sitting in full lotus, appearing the same as when he 
was alive. The Master’s body had not decayed, but the flesh had 
dried out. The Fifth Patriarch, Hung Jen, wrapped the body with 
lacquered cloth and gilded it. This “true body” still exists today. 

The Fifth Patriarch, Hung Jen, also lived during the T’ang 
dynasty. His family name was Chou. He lived in Huang Mei 
County near Double Peak Mountain. When he was seven, he 
went to the temple on the mountain to attend upon the Fourth 
Patriarch. The Great Master Hung Jen cleaned the lamps and 
censer before the Buddha images; he swept the floor, carried 
water, split firewood, and worked in the kitchen. At age thirteen 
he took the ten novice precepts and studied under the Fourth 
Patriarch for over thirty years. 

The Fifth Patriarch was eight feet tall and had an 
extraordinary appearance. When others treated him badly, he 
remained silent and unmoved. Because he did not give rise to 
discrimination, he never spoke of “right” or “wrong”, and when 
fellow Bhikshus bullied him, he never fought back. His calm, 
quiet manner indicated that he had realized a state of peace. 

Even after working hard all day, the Master didn’t rest. 
Instead of sleeping, he sat in meditation, uniting body and mind 
in powerful samadhi. 

Master Hung Jen lived in the woods of P’ing Mao Mountain 
slightly east of Double Peak Mountain, so his teaching is called 
the East Mountain Dharma Door. Once, like his master the 
Fourth Patriarch, he saw a horde of bandits besieging a nearby 
city. Their leader, a Mongol named K’e Ta Ha Na Lu, and his 
followers had so tightly cut off the communications that even the 
birds couldn’t fly in or out. The Fifth Patriarch went down P’ing 
Mao Mountain toward the city. When the bandits saw him, they 
were terrified, for they saw not only the Patriarch, but also a 
retinue of golden-armored vajra king Bodhisattvas armed with 

28 

Introduction - The Five Previous Chinese Patriarchs 

jeweled weapons, manifesting awesome virtue and brightness. 
The thieves retreated, their siege broken. 

How was the Great Master able to command these vajra king 
Bodhisattvas? The Fifth Patriarch had cultivated and he recited 
the Shurangama Mantra. The Shurangama Sutra says that if you 
are constantly mindful of the Shurangama Mantra, eighty-four 
thousand vajra store Bodhisattvas will protect you from all 
danger. 

In the fifth year of the Hsien Ch’ing reign of the T’ang 
dynasty (660 A.D.), the Emperor invited Great Master Hung Jen 
to the palace. The Master declined the invitation. The Emperor 
sent a second invitation which the Master also declined. Finally, 
the Emperor sent a variety of gifts, including rare medicinal 
herbs, as an offering to the Great Master, the Fifth Patriarch. 

In the fifth year of the Hsien Hsiang reign of the T’ang 
dynasty (674 A.D.), the Fifth Patriarch said to his disciple, 
Master Hsiian Chi, “Build me a Stupa. I am going to leave.” In 
the second month on the fourteenth day he asked, “Is the Stupa 
ready?” Master Hstian Chi replied that it was. The Patriarch said, 
“For many years I have taught living beings. I have taken across 
those whom I must take across and have transmitted my Dharma 
to Hui Neng, the Sixth Patriarch. Now, in addition, you ten 
should become Dharma Hosts, and establish Bodhimandas to 
preserve and spread the teaching among living beings.” 

The ten he addressed were: Dharma Masters Shen Hsiu, Chih 
Hsien, I Fang, Chih Te, Hstian Chi, Lao An, Fa Ju, Hui Tsang, 
Hsiian Yao, and also Upasaka Liu Chu Pu, who had dealt with 
correspondence and accounting. The Fifth Patriarch sent each of 
these ten people to a different place to teach and transform living 
beings. 

Shortly thereafter, he sat very still and his energy dispersed 
as he entered Nirvana. During the seventy-four years of his life, 

29 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the Fifth Patriarch Hung Jen had accepted many disciples, and 
had transmitted the Dharma to the Great Master Hui Neng. 

30 

A General Introduction 
Edited by Bhikshu Fa Hai of the T’ang Dynasty 

What follows is not the Sutra text, but an introduction to the 
Sutra which was written by The Sixth Patriarch’s disciple, Fa 
Hai. When the Sixth Patriarch taught Dharma, Master Fa Hai 
followed him, recording all of the things the Patriarch said. 
Later, he compiled and edited his notes, calling them The Sixth 
Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra. Had he not done this, 
we would have no way to study the Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma. 
Therefore, we should certainly be grateful for such compassion 
as his. 

Dharma Master Fa Hai’s lay name was Chang, and his 
common name was Wen Yiin. He was a native of Ch’ii Chiang, 
which is about ten miles from Nan Hua monastery. He was a 
“room-entering disciple,” that is, a disciple to whom the Master 
had transmitted the Dharma. Though his introduction is not part 
of the Sutra proper, I will explain it to you, because it narrates 
some important events in the life of the Great Master. 

Text: 

The Great Master was named Hui Neng. His father 
was of the Lu family and had the personal name Hsing 
T’ao. His mother was of the Li family. The Master was 
born on the eighth day of the second month of the year 
Wu Hsi, in the twelfth year of the Chen Kuan Reign of 
the T’ang Dynasty (A.D. 638). 

31 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

At that time, a beam of light ascended into space and 
a strange fragrance filled the room. At dawn, two strange 
Bhikshus came to visit. They addressed the Master’s 
father saying, “Last night a son was born to you and we 
have come to name him. It can be Hui above and below, 
Neng.” 

The Father said, “Why shall he be called Hui Neng?” 

The Monk said, “‘Hui’ means he will bestow the 
Dharma upon living beings. ‘Neng’ means he will be able 
to do the Buddha’s work.” Having said this, they left. No 
one knows where they went. 

The Master did not drink milk. At night, spirits 
appeared and poured sweet dew over him. 

Commentary: 

The Great Master refers to the Sixth Patriarch, Hui Neng. 
The Master’s merit and virtue was great, he had great wisdom 
and compassion and so was a master of gods and humans. 

When one is alive, one has a personal name. After one dies, 
that name is avoided. Hence it is called a personal name, a name 
which is not spoken. 

When the Great Master’s mother gave birth to him, a fine 
beam of light arose, like that which the Buddha emits from his 
forehead. A strange, fragrant incense which had never been 
smelled before filled the room. 

At dawn, the heavens are half dark and half light. Chii Hsi in 
“The Song of Household Affairs” wrote: 

At dawn, get up; 

Sprinkle and sweep the hall. 
The inside, the outside, 

You must clean it all. 

32 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

In China at that time there was no linoleum. In the morning, 
people sprinkled water on the mud floors, waited a bit, and then 
swept their houses clean inside and out. 

The two strange Bhikshus were quite different from ordinary 
people. They were like the Fourth Patriarch who, by merely 
opening his eyes, caused everyone to tremble in fright. These 
two unusual Bhikshus came to name the Sixth Patriarch. Isn’t 
this strange? Who has two Bhikshus come to name him? 

To say “above” and “below” when referring to a person’s 
name, is a most respectful form of address. 

What the newly born Patriarch ate was sweet dew. 

Text: 

He grew up, and at the age of twenty-four he heard 
the Sutra!‘ and awoke to the Way. He went to Huang Mei 
to seek the seal of approval. 

Commentary: 

Some say that the Sixth Patriarch was twenty-four, others say 
that he was twenty-two. As the Chinese count he was twenty- 
four and as Westerners count, he was twenty-two. Whether he 
was twenty-two or twenty-four is not really important. 

When the Sixth Patriarch heard the layman recite The 
Diamond Sutra and reach the line, “One should produce that 
thought which is nowhere supported,” the Sixth Patriarch said, 
“Oh! Not supported anywhere!” He was immediately 
enlightened. 

4. The Vajra Prajna Paramita Sutra, also called The Diamond Sutra. 

This Sutra, with the Venerable Master Hua’s commentary is available in 
translation from IITBT of SABA. 

33 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

A great many people had heard The Diamond Sutra, but none 
of them had become enlightened. Now in the West, perhaps 
someone will hear, “One should produce that thought which is 
nowhere supported” and, understanding the principle, become 
enlightened. That is what I hope. Whether or not it will actually 
happen is another matter. 

After becoming enlightened, he did not say, “Hah! I am 
enlightened.” He was not like some people today who do not 
understand even a hair’s breadth of the Buddhadharma, yet 
claim to be enlightened. 

The ancients, even when they had become enlightened, did 
not recklessly say, “I am enlightened!” Even less would people 
who had not become enlightened claim to have done so. It is 
necessary to seek certification from a good knowing advisor, a 
person who has already awakened. That is why the Sixth 
Patriarch went to Huang Mei to seek the Fifth Patriarch’s seal of 
certification. 

Enlightened ancients did not attempt to certify themselves. 
Today, however, there are those who have not become 
enlightened and yet say that they have. Enlightenment and non- 
enlightenment are as different as heaven and earth. 

Moreover, many naive young people take stupefying drugs 
and claim to have “gone to the void.” Confused demons, posing 
as good knowing advisors, certify them saying, “Yes, you have 
attained to emptiness. However, there is no place for you to live 
in emptiness. Come Back. Come to my place. I have buildings 
and houses; I have a commune!” 

The young people say, “That’s not bad at all!” They take the 
demons as their teachers. Ultimately these “bad knowing 
advisors” do not know themselves if they are true or false. You 
and I do not know either. 

34 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

But now we should use the Sutras for certification. The 
Sutras do not say that any foolish person has a commune in 
empty space. Even though rockets now go to the moon, space 
settlements have not yet been built. So this kind of talk simply 
does not get by. 

Now we are exceedingly busy. In the morning, everyone gets 
up at four o’clock to recite Sutras. We are busy building houses 
on the Earth, not in heaven. Why? We are people on earth and so 
our houses should be built on the earth. We are forging our 
bodies into indestructible vajra bodies. Our bodies are our 
houses, but they sometimes go bad. Now, from morning to night, 
we are busy constructing them, cultivating them to be in the end 
like indestructible vajra bodies. 

With an indestructible vajra body you can go wherever you 
wish. You can go into empty space, up to the heavens, down into 
the earth, or to the dragon king’s palace. It is very simple and you 
do not need a passport or a schedule. You are free to take off at 
your convenience. But first construct your indestructible body. 
Then you can do it. 

Text: 

The Fifth Patriarch measured his capacity and 
transmitted the robe and Dharma so that he inherited the 
Patriarchate. The time was the first year of the reign 
period Lung Shuo, cyclical year Hsin Yu (A.D. 661). 

He returned south and hid for sixteen years. 

Commentary: 

After the Sixth Patriarch left Huang Mei, he had no safe place 
to live. Because Shen Hsiu’s disciples and followers of non- 

35 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Buddhist religions wished to harm him, the Great Master went to 
live with hunters for sixteen years. 

During this time no one knew that he was the Sixth Patriarch. 
He worked hard practicing Dhyana meditation while watching 
over the animals and birds the hunters had caught and secretly 
releasing the ones which had been only slightly injured and 
could still travel safely. He had much time to cultivate and 
perfect his skill, for no one came to trouble him. 

If you do not truly cultivate, everything is easy, but if you do 
cultivate truly, demon-obstacles arise from the four corners and 
the eight directions. Unexpected circumstances prevail and 
things you never dreamed could happen do happen. 

In his sixteen years with the hunters, the Sixth Patriarch 
dwelt without disturbance, living just as they did. That is 
genuine hiding. He did not seek fame or profit and he did not try 
to take advantage of circumstances. He practiced genuine 
cultivation. 

Text: 

On the eighth day of the first month in the first year 
of the reign period I Feng (A.D. 676), the cyclical year 
Ping Tsu, he met Dharma Master Yin Tsung. Together 
they discussed the profound and mysterious, and Yin 
Tsung became awakened to and united with the Master’s 
doctrine. 

Commentary: 

They talked back and forth, querying each other on principle. 
Who asked whom? Dharma Master Yin Tsung asked the Great 
Master, the Sixth Patriarch. The Great Master had solved the 
dispute over whether the flag or the wind moved, by explaining 

36 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

that it was the mind that moved, and Dharma Master Yin Tsung 
had been astounded to hear a layman speak in such a deep and 
wonderful way. He got down from his Dharma seat and escorted 
the Sixth Patriarch to his room for a chat. “Where did you come 
from and what is your name?” he asked. Dharma Master Yin 
Tsung knew that this layman was a room-entering disciple of the 
Fifth Patriarch, one to whom the Fifth Patriarch had transmitted 
the Dharma. He immediately bowed to the Great Master. They 
then investigated the profound and mysterious; they talked about 
the wind and the flag. Until his talk with the Sixth Patriarch, 
Dharma Master Yin Tsung had not correctly understood the 
principle of the Dhyana School. 

Text: 

On the fifteenth day of that month, at a meeting of all 
the four assemblies, the Master’s head was shaved. On 
the eighth day of the second month, all those of well- 
known virtue gathered together to administer the 
complete precepts. Vinaya Master Chih Kuang of Hsi 
Ching was the Precept Transmitter. 

Commentary: 

During the week of the eighth to the fifteenth day of the first 
month, Dharma Master Yin Tsung gathered the four assemblies 
together: the Bhikshus, Bhikshunis, Upasakas, and Upasikas. 
The purpose of the meeting was to shave the Master’s head so 
that he could leave home and become a Bhikshu. 

People leave home for various reasons. Some find it difficult 
to obtain food and clothing. They see that those who have left 
home are well provided for, and so they leave home so they can 
eat and be clothed. Others leave home because they are old and 

37 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

have no children. They think, “I will leave home and take a 
young disciple who will care for me as a son would.” It is 
uncertain whether people who leave home for these reasons can 
really cultivate. 

Some leave home because they are bandits or runaways. 
They leave home and cut off their hair so that the government 
won’t find them and cut off their heads! Some leave home when 
small, but it is not certain whether they can cultivate. 

Some people have “confused beliefs.” Even so, they still 
believe, and that is good. For instance, the parents of a sick child 
may say, “The child may die of disease. We should give him to 
a temple and he can become a Bhikshu and we can go visit him. 
That is better than letting him die!” So out of confused belief, the 
parents give their child to the temple. 

People of confused belief may not necessarily be bad, but 
people who “believe in confused principles” are definitely not 
good. They have faith, but it is misplaced. That is confusion 
within confusion and it is not good. 

Some are “confused and without belief.” In their confusion 
they do not believe in anything. Finally there are the “believing 
and unconfused.” These people study the Buddhadharma with a 
faithful heart until they are no longer confused. 

Of these last four types of people who have left home, one 
cannot say that any of them will be able to cultivate, nor can one 
say for sure that they cannot. Perhaps only one or two per cent 
can cultivate the Dharma. However, if you resolve to attain 
enlightenment in order to end birth and death, you can surely 
cultivate upon leaving home. 

Again, there are those who no longer have a family and so 
leave their worldly homes. 

Some leave the home of the three realms: the realm of desire, 
the realm of form, and the realm of formlessness. Once out of 

38 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

these three realms there are no desires, no forms, and no formless 
consciousness. Because of their non-attachment, these people 
see the three realms as empty, and so it is said that they have left 
the home of the three realms. 

Some leave the home of afflictions. It is essential to leave 
afflictions behind. If you do not cut them off, you may leave 
home, but you cannot know the Way. 

The Sixth Patriarch cannot be put into any of these 
categories, for he was a special case. He had attained mastery, 
and so whether or not he left home made no difference. Even 
when he appeared to be a layman, he practiced the profound 
conduct of a Bodhisattva and he did not behave like a layman. In 
this way his act of leaving home did not resemble that of others 
in the assembly. 

The eighth day of the second month is the day when 
Shakyamuni Buddha left home. On that day all the illustrious, 
virtuous and learned Dharma Masters gathered from the ten 
directions. Chinese Dharma Masters and Indian Dharma Masters 
came to administer the complete precepts to the Sixth Patriarch. 

Dharma Master Yin Tsung invited Dharma Master Chih 
Kuang of Hsi Ching to administer the complete precepts to the 
Sixth Patriarch. Hsi Ching is another name for Ch’ang An. 

The person who administers the precepts is called the Precept 
Transmitter. Precepts have a substance and mark and a dharma. 
If you wish a more detailed explanation, even finer 
discriminations can be made. 

I do not use Ting Fu Pao’s commentary because it is often in 
error. In this case he says that three people are required to 
administer the precepts, while actually only one is necessary. At 
that time, Dharma Master Chih Kuang acted as Transmitter. 

Chih Kuang was also a Vinaya Master, one who diligently 
studies the precepts and thoroughly understands the rules. In 

39 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

walking, standing, sitting and lying down, in each of these four 
great comportments, he must conduct himself in the awesome 
manner, not daring to deviate for the space of a single step. Every 
move a Vinaya Master makes must be in accord with the rules. 
Therefore the Shurangama Sutra says, “Severe and pure in 
Vinaya, they are noble models for the Triple World.” 

Text: 

Vinaya Master Hui Ching of Su Chou was the 
Karmadana. Vinaya Master T’ung Ying of Ching Chou 
was the Teaching Transmitter. Vinaya Master Ch’i To 
Lo of Central India recited the precepts. Tripitaka 
Master Mi To of India was the Precept Certifier. 

Commentary: 

Ting Fu Pao writes that there should be four Karmadanas, yet 
the Sutra mentions only one. He says that the one mentioned was 
the most famous of the four. Because he didn’t understand the 
precepts, his commentary is confused. There was only one 
Karmadana. 

Karmadana is a Sanskrit word which means “to arrange 
events,” or “to explain rules.” The Karmadana makes certain that 
everything is done in accord with Dharma, in accord with the 
rules established by Shakyamuni Buddha. Anything not in 
accord with the Buddha’s rules is unacceptable to the 
Karmadana. 

When conferring the precepts, the Precept Transmitter asks 
the Karmadana, “May the precepts be transmitted to this 
person?” The question is asked three times, and each time the 
Karmadana must reply, “Yes.” 

40 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

On the precept Platform, the Karmadana and the Teaching 
Transmitter sit immediately to the left and right of the Precept 
Transmitter. The remaining seven certifiers sit on either side. 
That is the arrangement of the three masters and seven certifiers. 
They represent the Buddhas of the ten directions in speaking 
Dharma and transmitting precepts. Therefore, when leaving 
home, receiving precepts is especially important. 

The Teaching Transmitter transmits the Sutras. 

Ch’i To Lo, transliterated from the Sanskrit, means “flower 
of merit and virtue.” 

Dharma Master Mi To understood the three divisions of the 
Tripitaka, Sutras, Sastras, and Vinaya, and so he is called a 
Tripitaka Master. He is closely associated with the Chinese 
Vinaya because he translated the Dharmagupta Vinaya from the 
Sanskrit into Chinese. All the precept spirits protected this 
intelligent master, and there are many miraculous events 
connected with his life. Mi To means flourishing. His full name 
was Ta Mo Mi To, flourishing Dharma. 

Text: 

Construction of the precept platform had begun in the 
former Sung Dynasty by Tripitaka Master Gunabhadra. 
He erected a stone tablet which said, “In the future, a 
Bodhisattva in the flesh will receive the precepts in this 
very place.” 

Commentary: 

The “former Sung” was the dynasty that preceded the Sui 
Dynasty, not the well-known Sung Dynasty of Sung T’ai Tsu. 

Gunabhadra means “a worthy of merit and virtue.” This 
master established a precept platform at what is now called 

41 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Kuang Hsiao Monastery. His engraving foretold the coming of a 
Bodhisattva in the flesh: not a Bodhisattva who had gone to 
Nirvana, but a living Bodhisattva. 

Text: 

Further, in the first year of the T’ien Chien reign of 
the Liang Dynasty (A.D. 502) Tripitaka Master 
Jnanabhaishajya came by sea from West India carrying 
a Bodhi-tree branch, which he planted beside the 
platform. He, too, made a prophecy, saying, “After one 
hundred and seventy years, a Bodhisattva in the flesh will 
proclaim the Supreme Vehicle beneath this tree. Taking 
measureless multitudes across, he will be a true 
transmitter of the Buddha’s mind-seal, a Dharma Host.” 

Commentary: 

Tripitaka Master Jnanabhaishajya, “wisdom medicine,” 
predicted that a living Bodhisattva would speak the Supreme 
Vehicle Dharma from beneath that Bodhi-tree, teaching the 
Dharma of a direct pointing to the mind to see the nature and 
realize Buddhahood. 

As a true transmitter of the Buddha’s mind-seal, this 
Bodhisattva would “use the mind to seal the mind.” Shakyamuni 
Buddha held a flower in his fingers and smiling subtly, 
transmitted the mind seal of all the Buddhas to the First 
Patriarch, Mahakashyapa. Transmitters of the mind-seal are 
patriarchs. A Dharma Host is one who lectures Sutras and 
explains the Dharma. 

Jnanabhaishajya brought a Bodhi-tree branch from India to 
China; not a whole tree, just a cutting. Bodhi-trees will grow 
almost anywhere. There are many such trees in China today. 

42 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

The Venerable Master Jnanabhaishajya’s flesh body has not 
decayed. It is preserved for veneration at Yueh Hua monastery 
about five miles from Nan Hua Monastery. The caretaker there, 
who has left home, does not feed visitors, so if you wish to visit, 
you must bring your own food. When I was living at Nan Hua 
Temple, I went to see the Master Jnanabhaishajya’s body and 
found it in excellent condition. 

Text: 

In keeping with the former predictions, the Master 
arrived to have his hair cut and to receive the precepts. 
He instructed the four assemblies on the essentials of the 
exclusive Dharma transmission. 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch had his head shaved and received the 
complete precepts. He then explained the Dharma for the four 
assemblies, teaching them the exclusive Dharma transmission, 
that is, the Dharma which has been passed down through every 
generation since the time of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Text: 

In the spring of the following year, the Master took 
leave of the assembly and returned to Pao Lin. Yin 
Tsung, together with more than a thousand black-robed 
monks and white-robed layfolk, accompanied him 
directly to Ts’ao Hsi. 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch left and returned to Ts’ao Hsi. 

43 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The black-robed are those who have left home; at that time 
laypeople wore white robes. They all went directly to Ts’ao Hsi 
with the Master. Some people say that they have been to Ts’ao 
Hsi when they have not. They falsely claim to transmit the Ts’ao 
Hsi Dharma and Dhyana source, the basis of meditation. The 
Dharma-ending age is just that: false Buddhists with phony 
credentials. 

Text: 

At that time Vinaya Master T’ung Ying of Ching 
Chou and several hundred students followed the Master 
and came to dwell there. When the Master arrived at Pao 
Lin, in Ts’ao Hsi, he saw that the hall the buildings were 
bleak and small, insufficient to contain the multitude. 
Wishing to enlarge them, he paid a visit to the villager, 
Ch’en Ya Hsien and said, “This Old Monk comes to the 
Almsgiver seeking a sitting cloth’s worth of ground. Is 
that possible?” 

Commentary: 

As soon as he realized that the Great Master was the Sixth 
Patriarch, a transmitter of the Buddha’s mind-seal, Vinaya 
Master T’ung Ying led his disciples to Ts’ao Hsi to study the 
Dharma under the Great Master. 

When the Sixth Patriarch arrived at Ts’ao Hsi, he saw that the 
buildings were too small. Wishing to enlarge them, he paid a 
visit to the wealthy landowner Ch’en Ya Hsien. In this passage, 
the Sixth Patriarch refers to himself as the “Old Monk.” When 
he was twenty-four, he went to see Huang Mei; then he hid for 
sixteen years. At forty years of age, he called himself an “Old 
Monk,” and so I am entitled to do the same. The Master told 

44 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

Ch’en Ya Hsien that if he gave alms, he could transcend birth 
and death. 

Text: 

Hsien asked, “How big is the High Master’s sitting 
cloth?” 

The Master took out his sitting cloth and showed it to 
Ya Hsien, who thereupon agreed. But when the Patriarch 
unfolded and spread out his sitting cloth, it completely 
covered the four borders of Ts’ao Hsi. The Four 
Heavenly Kings!> appeared and sat as protectors in each 
of the four directions. 

Commentary: 

The Great Master handed his sitting cloth to Ch’en Ya Hsien, 
who said, “If you only want that large a piece of land, fine.” 

But when he spread it out, the sitting cloth covered not only 
the area around Nan Hua Monastery, but everything within ten 
miles of where they stood. The Four Heavenly Kings appeared 
and stood guard in each of the four directions. 

Text: 

It is due to this occurrence that the mountain range 
bordering the monastery is called “The Range of the 
Heavenly Kings.” 

'S. Catur-maharajas, the four deva kings who dwell on each side of Mount Sumeru 
and ward of evil influences. In the East, Dhrtarashtra, “the king who holds his 
country,” in the South, Virudhaka, “deva of increase and growth,” in the West 
Virupaksa, the “broad-eyed” or “ugly-eyed,” and in the North Vaishravana, the king 
who is “greatly learned.” 

45 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Hsien said, “I know that the High Master’s Dharma 
power is vast and great. However, the burial ground of 
my great-great grandfather lies on this land. In the 
future, if you build a stupa, I hope that this area will 
remain undisturbed. As for the rest, I wish to give it all to 
be forever a treasured place. This ground has the flowing 
current of a living dragon and a white elephant. Level 
only heaven; do not level earth.” 

Later, the monastery was constructed according to his 
words. The Master roamed within these boundaries, and 
at places where the scenes of nature were fine he stopped 
to rest. 

Commentary: 

The area belongs to a living dragon; it has a flowing current 
and the mountain is like an elephant. Here, one may build a 
“treasured place,” a Bodhimanda. 

“Level only heaven; do not level earth,” that is, where the 
land is high, the buildings may be made lower, and where the 
land is low, the buildings may be made taller. But do not level 
the earth, for if you do you will ruin the fine conditions of wind 
and water and the land will lose its efficacious energies. 

The Sixth Patriarch often roamed about the countryside and 
stopped to rest where the landscapes were especially beautiful. 

Text: 

Accordingly, thirteen Aranyas were erected, among 
them the present Hua Kuo Hall. The site of the Pao Lin 
Bodhimanda was decided upon long ago by Indian 
Tripitaka Master Jnanabhaishajya, who, during his 
journey from Nan Hai, passed through Ts’ao Hsi, where 

46 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

he cupped up the water with his hands and found it to be 
delicious. Surprised, he told his disciples. “This water is 
not different from that in India. Its source would surely 
be an excellent site on which to build a monastery.” 

He followed the water and looked in the four 
directions. The mountains and waters encircled one 
another and the peaks were impressive. He sighed and 
said. “This is just like Jewelled Wood Mountain in 
India.” 

Commentary: 

Why is the area around Nan Hua Monastery called Pao Lin? 
Pao Lin means “jewelled wood.” When the Venerable 
Jnanabhaishajya drank the water at Ts’ao Hsi, its taste was 
identical to that of the water in a certain place in India. He knew 
that the source of the spring was indeed an efficacious spot on 
which to build a temple. At dusk, he reached the site of Nan Hua 
Monastery. Gazing up at the mountain, he said, “This mountain 
looks just like Jewelled Wood Mountain in India. We shall call 
this ‘Jewelled Wood Bodhimanda.”” 

Master Jnanabhaishajya was not alone; many of his disciples 
were travelling with him. He said to them, “The source of this 
stream is certainly a good site for building a temple.” Monastic 
buildings are called Aranyas, a Sanskrit word meaning, “silent 
place.” They are pure, quiet places for cultivation. 

The clear blue waters reflected the bright shining mountain 
peaks. The area was particularly beautiful. 

Text: 

He said to the villagers of Ts’ao Hou, “A pure 
dwelling may be built here. After one hundred and 

47 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

seventy years, the Unsurpassed Dharma Jewel will teach 
here. Those who attain the Way in this place will be as 
numerous as the trees of this forest. It should, therefore, 
be called ‘Pao Lin.’” 

At that time Magistrate Hou Ching Chung of Shao 
Chou reported these words to the Emperor who assented 
and conferred upon it the name ‘Pao Lin Bodhimanda.’ 
The construction of the pure halls began in the third year 
of the T’ien Chien reign of the Liang dynasty (A.D. 504). 

Commentary: 

The village was called Ts’ao Hou, “descendents of Ts’ao,” 
because its inhabitants were descendents of General Ts’ao Ts’ao 
of the Period of the Three Kingdoms. 

One hundred and seventy years after Master Jnanabhaishajya 
made this prediction, the Sixth Patriarch received the precepts 
and taught living beings at Pao Lin. The “Unsurpassed Dharma 
Jewel” refers to the Sixth Patriarch. 

Sangha and laypeople who were to attain enlightenment at 
this place would be as numerous as the trees in a forest. It was 
therefore to be called “Jewelled Wood.” 

Text: 

In front of the hall was a pond in which a dragon often 
swam, bumping and scraping the trees of the forest. One 
day he appeared, larger than ever, covering the area with 
a thick mist. The disciples were afraid, but the Patriarch 
scolded him, saying, “Hah! You can only make yourself 
appear in a large body, not in a small one. If you were a 
divine dragon, you could transform the great into the 
small and the small into the great.” 

48 

Introduction - A General Introduction 

Commentary: 

The dragon was so big that you could only see the dragon; 
you couldn’t see the pond at all. He danced on top of the water, 
splashing it everywhere in waves which were ten feet, twenty 
feet, and even thirty feet high. He was showing off. 

“Incredible!” said the disciples. “This dragon certainly 
intends to harm us.” 

The Sixth Patriarch shouted at the dragon. He said, “If you 
really had spiritual powers, you could transform nothing into 
something and something into nothing; you could transform 
yourself or not be transformed, just as you wished, manifesting 
the great within the small and the small within the great.” 

Text: 

The dragon suddenly disappeared, but returned an 
instant later in a small body, skipping about on the 
surface of the pond. The Master held out his bowl and 
teased him, saying, “You don’t dare climb into the old 
Bhikshu’s bowl.” At that moment the dragon swam in 
front of the Master, who scooped him out of the water 
with his bowl. The dragon couldn’t move. Holding the 
bowl, the Master returned to the hall and explained the 
Dharma to the dragon. 

Commentary: 

When the dragon heard the Sixth Patriarch dare him to 
manifest a small body, he disappeared. Strange? Think about it. 
Suddenly he wasn’t there. Then, in the time it takes to feel a 
hunger pang, a little dragon appeared, dancing on top of the 
water. The Great Master said, “You have a little body now, but 

49 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you wouldn’t dare get into my bowl, would you? You wouldn’t 
dare. Dragon! I dare you to get into my bowl!” 

The dragon flew across the water and swam up before the 
Patriarch. The Patriarch didn’t wait for the dragon to jump into 
his bowl, but reached right down and scooped him out of the 
water. 

In Manchuria, where I am from, there is a saying, “Before 
there were people in Manchuria, you could scoop up the fish 
with a bucket and chickens fell into the cooking pot.” As for 
rabbits, you could just step outside, swing a stick, and knock 
over a few. This is what is meant by “scooped.” Catching the 
dragon was as easy as scooping for fish in Manchuria. 

Text: 

The dragon then shed his skin and left. His bones, only 
seven inches long and complete with head, tail, horns, and 
claws, were preserved in the temple. Later the Master 
filled in the pond with earth and stones. Now, in that 
place, in the front of the hall on the right side is an iron 
stupa. 

Commentary: 

Dharma Master Fa Hai’s introduction says that the pond was 
on the left side of the hall, but it was actually on the right. One 
commentator, Ting Fu Pao, had never been there and 
consequently did not realize that the direction of the pond should 
have been determined from the Patriarch’s position when sitting 
in the hall, that is, on the right side. 

50 

CHAPTER I 

ACTION AND INTENTION 

Commentary: 

In this first chapter of the Sutra, the Sixth Patriarch gives his 
disciples a biographical sketch of himself. “Action” refers to the 
Sixth Patriarch’s activities and “intention” is that upon which he 
based his cultivation. “Action and Intention” refers to the 
source—where it all began. 

Sutra: 

At one time the Great Master arrived at Pao Lin. 
Magistrate Wei Ch’ti of Shao Chou and other local 
officials climbed the mountain and invited the Master to 
come into the city to the lecture hall of the Ta Fan Temple 
to speak the Dharma to the assembly. 

When the Master had taken his seat, the Magistrate 
and over thirty other officials, more than_ thirty 
Confucian scholars, and more than one thousand 
Bhikshus, Bhikshunis, Taoists, and laypeople, all made 
obeisance at the same time, wishing to hear the essentials 
of Dharma. 

Commentary: 

For every Sutra, six requirements must be met. Commonly 
explained in the opening sentences, they are: faith, hearing, time, 
host, place, and assembly. Only when these six are fulfilled is the 
orthodox Dharma being spoken. 

51 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

To conduct a Sutra session, there must be an assembly; 
Magistrate Wei Ch’t and the gathering of disciples and 
followers fulfills this requirement. 

Then there must be a place to speak the Dharma; Pao Lin 
Mountain fulfills this requirement. A Dharma Master who 
thoroughly understands the Dharma must be present as host; 
here it is the Great Master the Sixth Patriarch. “At one time” 
suffices for the time requirement, and that “all made obeisance 
at the same time” fulfills the faith requirement. They came 
“wishing to hear the essentials of Dharma,” and that fulfills the 
requirements of hearing. 

Wei Ch’ti and the officials climbed Pao Lin Mountain which 
is about ten miles from Shao Chou where Ta Fan Temple, now 
called Ta Chien Temple, is located. I lived there for a while. This 
is where the Sixth Patriarch spoke The Dharma Jewel Platform 
Sutra. 

Sutra: 

The Great Master said to the assembly, “Good 
Knowing Advisors, the self-nature of Bodhi is originally 
clear and pure. Simply use that mind, and you will 
straightaway accomplish Buddhahood. Good Knowing 
Advisors, listen while I tell you about the actions and 
intentions by which Hui Neng obtained the Dharma.” 

Commentary: 

The Great Master spoke to the assembly; “You are people 
with good roots and much wisdom. The self nature of Bodhi is 
one’s own originally enlightened clear and pure nature. It cannot 
be produced or destroyed, defiled or purified, increased or 
decreased. Use this mind. Don’t use your false-thinking mind.” 

52 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Using his own name, in the formal style, the Sixth Patriarch 
calls himself “Hui Neng,” saying, “Now I will tell you how Hui 
Neng obtained the Dharma. Listen!” 

Sutra: 

“Hui Neng’s stern father was originally from Fan 
Yang. He was banished to Hsin Chou in Ling Nan, where 
he became a commoner. Unfortunately, his father soon 
died, and his aging mother was left alone. They moved to 
Nan Hai and, poor and in bitter straits, Hui Neng sold 
wood in the market place.” 

Commentary: 

From his native district of Fan Yang, Hui Neng’s father was 
sent to Ling Nan. Because the father is more apt to discipline the 
children, he is respectfully called “stern.” The mother ordinarily 
offers loving kindness to her children, and so she is spoken of as 
“compassionate.” 

Hui, (4), “kind,” means that he was kind and 
compassionate, bestowing Dharma upon living beings. Neng, 
(A), “able,” means that he was able to do the Buddha’s work. 
The Sixth Patriarch’s family name was Lu. 

Hui Neng’s father was banished to Ling Nan, a frontier 
region during the T’ang Dynasty inhabited by government 
exiles. The Sixth Patriarch’s father, an official, may have been 
convicted of an offense and thus banished to Ling Nan. 

Hui Neng had an unfortunate and unlucky life. His father 
died when the Master was between the ages of three and five 
years, leaving him alone with his widowed mother. He and his 
mother moved to Nan Hai where they endured the hardships of 
poverty. How did they survive? Master Hui Neng hiked into the 

53 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

mountains and chopped wood, returned and sold it in the market 
place, using the money to buy rice for his mother and himself. 

Sutra: 

Once a customer bought firewood and ordered it 
delivered to his shop. When the delivery had been made, 
and Hui Neng had received the money, he went outside 
the gate, where he noticed a customer reciting a Sutra. 
Upon once hearing the words of this Sutra: “One should 
produce that thought which is nowhere supported.” Hui 
Neng’s mind immediately opened to enlightenment. 

Commentary: 

Because the Sixth Patriarch’s family was poor, he received 
little formal schooling and could not read. At that time in China 
one needed money to go to school. But in spite of his illiteracy, 
the Sixth Patriarch’s disposition was extremely sharp; and as 
soon as he heard the line of the Sutra which says that one should 
have a true mind which is nowhere attached, he immediately 
became enlightened. He understood what he had never 
understood before. 

Many will hear the sentence; “One should produce that 
thought which is nowhere supported.” Are there any who will 
open to enlightenment? 

Someone exclaims, “Why, I have!” 

I ask you, what is the enlightenment you have opened? What 
is the enlightenment unopened? Ask yourself. 

Sutra: 

Thereupon he asked the customer what Sutra he was 
reciting. The customer replied, “The Diamond Sutra.” 

54 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Then again he asked, “Where do you come from, and 
why do you recite this Sutra?” 

The customer said, “I come from Tung Ch’an 
Monastery in Ch’i Chou, Huang Mei Province. There the 
Fifth Patriarch, the Great Master Hung Jen dwells, 
teaching over one thousand disciples. I went there to 
make obeisance and heard and received this Sutra.” 

Commentary: 

The Great Master the Fifth Patriarch lived in Tung Ch’an 
Monastery with more than a thousand disciples whom he taught 
and transformed. At that time in China the study of the Dharma 
was so fervently pursued that it was not unusual to have a 
thousand people on one mountain studying the Buddhadharma 
together. 

Where in America are there a thousand Buddhist disciples 
studying the Dharma together? Such a large country yet there is 
no such place. It is possible, however, that later there will be 
more than ten thousand people studying the Buddhadharma, but 
this is not assured. We will have to watch my disciples and see 
how hard they work. 

Most Americans are intelligent, but there are some whose 
intelligence surpasses itself. Everyday from morning to night 
they are caught up in taking confusing drugs. By taking these 
drugs they may attain small and different states of consciousness 
which they cannot obtain without drugs. These people try drugs 
again and again until one day they see that it is useless. They 
think, “I’ve been taking drugs for such a long time now and I still 
have not become enlightened.” When they realize this, they may 
turn toward the truth. 

I teach you the Buddhadharma so in the future you can speak 
the Dharma to teach and transform living beings. Do not be 

55 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

careless, but work well and without confusion and then many 
will come to study. 

You who are now studying this Sixth Patriarch’s Sutra must 
know the origin of your learning. When people ask, “Where did 
you study the Buddhadharma?” you can reply, “We studied at 
the Buddhist Lecture Hall of the Sino-American Buddhist 
Association.” This is just what is meant by this passage of text. 

Sutra: 

“The Great Master constantly exhorts the Sangha 
and laity only to uphold The Diamond Sutra. Then, they 
may see their own nature and straightaway achieve 
Buddhahood.” 

Hui Neng heard this and desired to go and seek the 
Dharma, but he recalled that his mother had no support. 

From past lives there were karmic conditions which 
led another man to give Hui Neng a pound of silver, so 
that he could provide clothing and food for his aging 
mother. The man instructed him further to go to Huang 
Mei to call upon and bow to the Fifth Patriarch. 

Commentary: 

You should be clear that the “Great Master” referred to here 
is the Fifth Patriarch not the Sixth Patriarch. 

When Hui Neng heard that there was a place where over one 
thousand people were studying the Buddhadharma together, he 
became very excited. “What am I to do? I really want to study 
there!” he exclaimed to the customer. “I heard you recite The 
Diamond Sutra and | understood the principles. I want to go seek 
the Buddhadharma, but I have an aging mother who has no one 
to care for her. What can I do?” 

56 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Since Bodhisattvas do not seek fame, the Sixth Patriarch did 
not say which great Bodhisattva helped him at this time. The 
Sutra simply says that, because of former karmic conditions, a 
customer gave Hui Neng a pound of silver. This was certainly a 
valuable offering. The yield of a day’s work chopping firewood 
was worth only a few copper pennies in the market place so even 
if Hui Neng had sold all the wood gathered in a thousand days, 
its value would not have equaled the gift of silver. 

The silver provided for his mother’s food and lodging. 
Maybe the man said, “You are poor and yet you want to study 
the Buddhadharma. Here, I will help you a bit,” and gave him an 
offering that he might go and seek Dharma. The merit and virtue 
of this offering was great, and in the future this man will 
certainly be a flesh body Bodhisattva. Now, perhaps one of us is 
doing this kind of work; think to yourself, “Have I done this kind 
of meritorious deed?” You don’t remember? It doesn’t matter, 
there’s no need to have false thinking about it. 

The man urged him on, saying, “You have such great faith 
that as soon as you heard this Sutra you opened to enlightenment 
and understood the principle. Hurry! Go right away to see the 
Great Master at Huang Mei! It will surely be worth your while. 
Do not delay, go at once!” 

Sutra: 

After Hui Neng had made arrangements for his 
mother’s welfare, he took his leave. In less than thirty 
days he arrived at Huang Mei and made obeisance to the 
Fifth Patriarch, who asked him, “Where are you from 
and what do you seek?” 

Hui Neng replied, “Your disciple is a commoner from 
Hsin Chou in Ling Nan and comes from afar to bow to the 
Master, seeking only to be a Buddha, and nothing else.” 

57 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

58 

The Patriarch said, “You are from Ling Nan and are 
therefore a barbarian, so how can you become a 
Buddha?” 

Hui Neng said, “Although there are people from the 
north and people from the south, there is ultimately no 
north or south in the Buddha nature. The body of the 
barbarian and that of the High Master are not the same, 
but what distinction is there in the Buddha nature?” 

The Fifth Patriarch wished to continue the 
conversation, but seeing his disciples gathering on all 
sides, he ordered his visitor to follow the group off to 
work. Hui Neng said, “Hui Neng informs the High 
Master that this disciple’s mind constantly produces 
wisdom and is not separate from the self nature. That, 
itself, is the field of blessing. It has not yet been decided 
what work the High Master will instruct me to do.” 

The Fifth Patriarch said, “Barbarian, your faculties 
are too sharp. Do not speak further, but go to the back 
courtyard.” Hui Neng withdrew to the back courtyard 
where a cultivator ordered him to split firewood and 
thresh rice. 

More than eight months had passed when the 
Patriarch one day suddenly saw Hui Neng and said, “I 
think these views of yours can be of use but fear that evil 
people may harm you. For that reason I have not spoken 
with you. Did you understand the situation?” 

Hui Neng replied, “Your disciple knew the Master’s 
intention and has stayed out of the front hall, so that 
others might not notice him.” 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Commentary: 

As soon as the Sixth Patriarch made arrangements for his 
mother’s welfare, he left. Some thirty days later he arrived at the 
east side of Shuang Feng mountain, at Tung Ch’an Monastery. 
During his journey he had had no false thoughts and so he was 
unaware of how much time had passed before he arrived at 
Huang Mei. The Master was twenty-two years old at the time. 

When the Great Master asked from where he had come, Hui 
Neng told him that he was from the south, from Hsin Chou. “I 
don’t want anything at all!” he said, “I only want to be a Buddha. 
All the rest is irrelevant.” 

The Fifth Patriarch said, “You are a southerner, and 
southerners are all barbarians.” The word “barbarian” is, in 
Chinese, “ke liao.”!° “Ke” is dog-like animal with an extremely 
short snout. “Liao” refers to the coarse people of the 
borderlands. Basically, this means that those who cannot 
understand the principles of being human belong to the category 
of animals. “And how can you become a Buddha?” asked the 
Fifth Patriarch. 

The Sixth Patriarch answered him promptly: “Although 
people are from the north and from the south,” he said, “the 
Buddha nature is one and is everywhere the same.” 

The Fifth Patriarch’s disciples were gathered all around, so 
he said no more. He simply told the Sixth Patriarch, “Good, you 
have come. Now, go to work with the others. Hurry off!” 

Hui Neng said his own mind always produced wisdom. This 
wisdom is produced from one’s own self-nature, and the fields 
of blessings!” are not separate from it. “I do not yet know what 
the Master wants me to do,” he said. 

AG; rh th—“ke liao” 

59 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The Patriarch heard Hui Neng talking this way and said, 
“This barbarian has sharp roots!”!® He cautioned Hui Neng to be 
more discreet and not talk so much. “Speak no more!” he said. 
“Go to the back courtyard!” 

In the back courtyard a cultivator told Hui Neng what to do. 
When people first come to a place, they are always bullied. This 
disciple, who had not yet left home said to Hui Neng, “You! 
Every day you must cut wood, build the fire and cook the food. 
Here’s an axe, and be sure to cut kindling too! Besides that, 
every day you must thresh the rice.” 

Over eight months later, the Patriarch saw Hui Neng working 
on the threshing ground and said to him, “I think that your 
wisdom and opinions can be used, but fearing jealous people 
might harm you, I have not spoken with you too much. Did you 
know that?” 

Hui Neng said, “I understand. I have not dared go into the 
front Dharma hall to speak with the Master lest others notice my 
actions or the Master’s compassion toward me.” 

Sutra: 

One day the Patriarch summoned his disciples 
together and said, “I have something to say to you: for 
people in the world, the matter of birth and death is a 
great one. 

'7. Fields of blessings refer figuratively to the meritorious deeds one does before the 
Triple Jewel (the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha). Also, the robes worn by 
members of the Sangha are sewn in patches which resemble fields. By revering and 
making offerings to the Sangha, one “plants” seeds of merit and virtue in a place 
where they will certainly “ripen” and bear blessed fruit. 

'8. Roots refer to one’s capacity to hear, believe, understand, accept and maintain the 
Buddhadharma. People may be endowed with superior, ordinary or inferior roots. 

60 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

“All day long you seek fields of blessings only; you do 
not try to get out of the bitter sea of birth and death. If 
you are confused about your self-nature, how can 
blessings save you?” 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch said, “Regardless of whether you are 
extremely rich or bitterly poor, you cannot avoid birth and death. 
Consequently, you should know how you were born. If this 
question of birth and death is not resolved, life is dim and 
confused, and you are confused with coming and going. 

“You do nothing but seek merit among the gods and among 
humans; you do not know how to seek wisdom. Thus, you swirl 
and drift in the suffering sea of birth and death.” 

It is said that one who cultivates wisdom and does not 
cultivate merit is like an Arhat with an empty begging-bow]; he 
is very wise, but no one makes offerings to him. But if one 
cultivates merit and neglects wisdom, he is just like a big 
elephant wearing a pearl necklace; beneath the adornments of 
blessing, he is stupid and will never solve the problem of birth 
and death. 

Sutra: 

“Each of you go back and look into your own wisdom 
and use the Prajna-nature ° of your own original mind to 
compose a verse. Submit it to me so that I may look at it. 

“If you understand the great meaning, the robe and 
Dharma will be passed on to you and you will become the 
sixth patriarch. Hurry off! Do not delay! Thinking and 

19. “Transcendental wisdom.” See Chapter IT. 

61 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

considering is of no use in this matter. When seeing your 
own nature it is necessary to see it at the very moment of 
speaking. One who does that perceives as does one who 
wields a sword in the height of battle.” 

Commentary: 

“Verse” here is the Sanskrit word “gatha.” A gatha is 
composed of lines of uniform length, though the length may vary 
from gatha to gatha. 

“Go quickly!” said the Fifth Patriarch. “Go as if a fire were 
about to overtake you. Do not dawdle and procrastinate saying, 
‘Oh, I cannot do it today. I will do it tomorrow instead,’ and then 
the next day saying, “Not today either, perhaps tomorrow...’ Do 
not keep putting it off and do not try to think about it. It is useless 
to use your discriminating mind. If you have deep prajna 
wisdom, you understand the moment you hear the words spoken. 
Just as one grabs a weapon and confronts the oncoming enemy, 
so do you perceive. You can see your nature in the same 
immediate way. 

Sutra: 

The assembly received this order and withdrew, 
saying to one another, “We of the assembly do not need 
to clear our minds and use our intellect to compose a 
verse to submit to the High Master. What use would there 
be in this?” 

“Shen Hsiu is our senior instructor and teaching 
transmitter. Certainly he should be the one to obtain it. It 
would be not only improper for us to compose a verse, but 
a waste of effort as well.” 

62 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Hearing this, everyone put his mind to rest, and said, 
“Henceforth, we will rely on Master Shen Hsiu. Why vex 
ourselves writing verses?” 

Commentary: 

They went away to other courts, other gardens, and other 
buildings, saying to themselves, “Why worry about writing this 
verse? We do not need to waste the effort.” 

I believe the people who spoke this way were of Shen Hsiu’s 
party. Why did they not write verses? Because Shen Hsiu’s 
followers were trying to make him the patriarch; all his 
followers, disciples, Dharma brothers, friends, and relatives 
contrived to set up the position for Shen Hsiu. They convinced 
everyone else not to write verses, because if anyone else wrote 
verses, then perhaps Shen Hsiu might not get to be the next 
patriarch. 

They secretly passed it around and whispered behind the 
scenes, like friends of a candidate for President who say, “Hey! 
Vote for this one! He can be President!” They spread it about and 
stuffed the ballot box. 

Convinced that they had no learning, the assembly decided it 
was useless to write verses. Swayed by the rumors, they said, 
“The Senior-Seated Shen Hsiu is second to the Abbot. His 
literary skill is good, his virtue is high, he lectures on the Sutras 
and speaks Dharma for us. Certainly he should become the sixth 
patriarch.” 

When the assembly heard Shen Hsiu’s followers saying 
things like, “If we write verses, they will be very unpolished and 
certainly not good enough to submit,” they all decided not to 
write verses themselves. They didn’t want to compete with Shen 
Hsiu, their superior. 

63 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

Shen Hsiu then thought, “The others are not 
submitting verses because I am _ their teaching 
transmitter. I must compose a verse and submit it to the 
High Master. 

“If I do not submit a verse, how will the High Master 
know whether the views and understanding in my mind 
are deep or shallow? 

“If my intention in submitting the verse is to seek the 
Dharma, that is good. But if it is to grasp the 
patriarchate, that is bad, for how would that be different 
from the mind of a common person coveting the holy 
position? But, if I do not submit a verse, in the end I will 
not obtain the Dharma. This is a terrible difficulty!” 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch had announced that in order to obtain the 

Dharma, one must compose a verse. Shen Hsiu knew that if he 
did not submit one, the Fifth Patriarch would not know whether 
Shen Hsiu had wisdom and he could not transmit the Dharma to 
him. Shen Hsiu fretted and worried, “What shall I do? This is 
very hard; it is just too difficult!” 

Sutra: 

64 

In front of the Fifth Patriarch’s hall were three 
corridors. Their walls were to be frescoed by Court Artist 
Lu Chen with stories from the Lankavatara Sutra and 
with pictures portraying in detail the lives of the five 
patriarchs, so that the patriarchs might be venerated by 
future generations. 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Commentary: 

A court artist is one appointed as an official to the Imperial 
Court because of his talent. 

The title of The Lankavatara Sutra has two meanings: “city” 
and “cannot be gone to.” This city, located behind Malaya 
Mountain, is inaccessible to those without spiritual powers. 
Shakyamuni Buddha used his spiritual powers to go there and 
speak The Lankavatara Sutra for the benefit of those who had 
spiritual powers. The court artist was to depict the miraculous, 
inconceivable, wonderful transformations which took place in 
the assembly on Lanka Mountain. 

The court artist was also to paint pictures illustrating the flow 
of the Dharma from Great Master Bodhidharma, the First 
Patriarch, to the Great Master Hui K’o, the Second Patriarch, and 
onward from generation to generation, to the Fifth Patriarch, 
Great Master Hung Jen. The paintings would remain in the world 
so that future generations might receive benefit from respecting 
and making offerings to them. 

Sutra: 

After composing his verse, Shen Hsiu made several 
attempts to submit it. But whenever he reached the front 
hall, his mind became agitated and distraught, and his 
entire body became covered with perspiration. He did not 
dare submit it, although in the course of four days he 
made thirteen attempts. 

Commentary: 

Shen Hsiu’s students were not greedy to become patriarch, 
but Shen Hsiu had a great desire for the position. 

65 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Whenever he tried to submit his verse, he went a little crazy. 
“What am I going to do? Is this verse right or not? Can I submit 
it?” He did not know if it was right or wrong. “Ah, maybe...is it 
this way or is it that way? Maybe it isn’t. Maybe it is... more or 
less.” Endless questions flooded his mind, making him 
extremely nervous. Every time he tried to hand it in, he broke out 
in a heavy sweat. Why? It was a huge gamble; if he failed, he 
would not be a patriarch, but if he passed, he would. Fear of 
failure caused his extreme agitation. 

It was really suffering, really hard work! It is not easy to be 
a patriarch. Look at how much effort he expended. For four 
entire days and nights he never shut his eyes. He just kept trying 
to submit his verse. At night he would go as far as the Fifth 
Patriarch’s hall, peer around, break out in a sweat, and flee back 
to his room. During the day he tried again. In the periods in 
between, he could not sit, lie down, or sleep, and when he tried 
to eat, he couldn’t swallow. 

He went before the Patriarch’s hall thirteen times and still did 
not submit the verse. Now, when I give you a quiz, you write the 
answers very promptly and hand them in. Suppose I were to give 
you a patriarch test! I think your hands would tremble so that you 
could not write out the answers. Finally, after so many attempts, 
when Shen Hsiu had almost worried himself to death, he 
thought, “Hey! Get hold of yourself. Calm down and think this 
thing over. Meditate and enter samadhi!” 

Sutra: 

Then he thought, “This is not as good as writing it on 
the wall so that the High Master might see it suddenly. If 
he says it is good, I will come forward, bow, and say, 
‘Hsiu did it.’ If it does not pass, then I have spent my 

66 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

years on this mountain in vain, receiving veneration from 
others. And as to further cultivation—what can I say?” 

That night, in the third watch, holding a candle he 
secretly wrote the verse on the wall of the South corridor, 
to show what his mind had seen. 

Commentary: 

“That’s it!” he said with relief. “I will write it on the wall and 
when he sees it he will say, “This is truly a fine verse, truly 
wonderful!’ and I will admit that I wrote it. But if he says, ‘This 
is too confused. It is nothing but useless trash!’ then I will know 
that I have wasted my time here on the mountain.” 

He crept stealthily, like a thief in the night He carried just a 
little candle, for if the light were too bright, someone might have 
seen him. 

Sutra: 

Verse: 

The body is a Bodhi tree, 

The mind like a bright mirror stand. 
Time and again brush it clean, 

And let no dust alight. 

After writing this verse, Shen Hsiu returned to his 
room, and the others did not know what he had done. 

Then he thought, “If the Fifth Patriarch sees the verse 
tomorrow and is pleased, it will mean that I have an 
affinity with the Dharma. If he says that it does not pass, 
it will mean that I am confused by heavy karmic 
obstacles”? from past lives, and that I am not fit to obtain 

67 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the Dharma. It is difficult to fathom the sage’s 
intentions.” 

In his room he thought it over and could not sit or 
sleep peacefully right through to the fifth watch. 

Commentary: 

He bounded back to his room two steps at a time, as if he 
were being chased, but quietly, taking great, silent leaps like an 
expert military spy. He was afraid that if anyone saw him, they 
would know he wrote the verse. But no one saw him, no one 
knew-not even the ghosts and spirits. “If he likes this verse,” 
thought Shen Hsiu, “then I must have conditions with the 
wonderful mind-to-mind seal of the Buddhas, and it is my 
destiny to be patriarch. But if it does not pass, my confusion 
from the karma created in past lives must be a heavy obstruction. 
It is hard to figure out what he will say. There is just no way to 
know.” 

Actually, his verse was not bad, but he had not fully 
understood. So after he returned to his room, he was still uneasy. 

Sutra: 

The Patriarch already knew that Shen Hsiu had not 
yet entered the gate and seen his own nature. At 
daybreak, the Patriarch called Court Artist Lu Chen to 
fresco the wall of the south corridor. Suddenly he saw the 
verse and said to the court artist, “There is no need to 
paint. I am sorry that you have been wearied by coming 
so far, but The Diamond Sutra says, ‘Whatever has marks 

20. The results of bad deeds done in the past manifest as various kinds of hindrances 
which impede one’s cultivation and detain one’s enlightenment. 

68 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

is empty and false.’ Instead leave this verse for people to 
recite and uphold. Those who cultivate in accordance 
with this verse will not fall into the evil destinies and will 
attain great merit.” 

He then ordered the disciples to light incense and bow 
before it, and to recite it, thus enabling them to see their 
own nature. The disciples all recited it and exclaimed, 
“Excellent!” 

Commentary: 

“Tf you cultivate according to the principles contained in this 
verse,” said the Fifth Patriarch, “you will not fall into rebirth in 
the three evil paths of the hells, animals, or hungry ghosts, and 
you will receive many benefits.” 

Sutra: 

At the third watch, the Patriarch called Shen Hsiu 
into the hall and asked him, “Did you write this verse?” 

Shen Hsiu said, “Yes, in fact, Hsiu did it. He does not 
dare lay claim to the position of Patriarch, but hopes the 
High Master will be compassionate and see whether or 
not this disciple has a little bit of wisdom.” 

The Patriarch said, “The verse which you wrote 
shows that you have not yet seen your original nature but 
are still outside the gate. With such views and 
understanding you may seek supreme Bodhi, but in the 
end will not obtain it. Supreme Bodhi must be obtained at 
the very moment of speaking. In recognizing the original 
mind, at all times, in every thought, you yourself will see 
that the ten thousand Dharmas are unblocked; in one 
truth is all truth and the ten thousand states are of 

69 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

themselves ‘thus,’ as they are. The ‘thusness’ of the mind, 
just that is true reality. If seen in this way, it is indeed the 
self nature of supreme Bodhi.” 

Commentary: 

The Patriarch chose the same hour at which Shen Hsiu had 
written the verse on the wall the night before. He secretly called 
him in and said, “Psst! Was it you who wrote that verse?” 

“Yes, yes,” Shen Hsiu whispered back, “yes, in fact, I, Hsiu, 
wrote it. I do not dare seek the status of the patriarch, but...” 

“Your verse shows that you are still an outsider,” said the 
Fifth Patriarch. “You have not yet seen your nature. As soon as 
you speak the words, know your original nature!” 

When you understand the mind and see your own nature, you 
know that the nature is not produced and not destroyed; for at all 
times, all dharmas are perfectly fused, without the slightest bit of 
obstruction. There is no place where all dharmas are not 
identical. 

When you understand one truth, all truth is understood. The 
ten thousand externals are all produced from the state which is 
“thus, unmoving,” and within the mind which is “thus, thus, 
unmoving,” true reality is to be found. Seen in this way, this state 
is the original nature exactly; it is the highest enlightenment. 
And so, in response to Shen Hsiu, I wrote a verse myself: 

Because of the Way, 
ten thousand things are born. 
One who obtains it 
penetrates the mystery oneself; 
Awakened, the basic substance is 
fathomed: 
Bodhi does not decrease or increase. 

70 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Sutra: 

“Go and think it over for a day or two. Compose 
another verse and bring it to me to see. If you have been 
able to enter the gate, I will transmit the robe and 
Dharma to you.” 

Shen Hsiu made obeisance and left. Several days 
passed, but he was unable to compose a verse. His mind 
was agitated and confused and his thoughts and mood 
were uneasy. He was as if in a dream; whether walking or 
sitting down, he could not be happy. 

Commentary: 

After the Great Master had explained that the Bodhi self- 
nature cannot be sought with the mind that wants to take 
advantage of things, he told Shen Hsiu, “If you obtain the 
original substance, become enlightened and understand the mind 
and see your self-nature, entering the gate of the Buddhadharma 
so that you are no longer on the outside, I will transmit the 
Dharma to you.” “Enter the gate” means “understand the mind 
and see your own nature.” 

As the days passed, Shen Hsiu gradually went insane. 
Neither his mood nor his thoughts would calm down. Although 
he was unable to fall asleep he was as if in a dream. He didn’t 
know what he was doing because his desire to become patriarch 
was so great. I believe that, after he failed the initial test and then 
was unable to compose another verse, he even considered 
suicide. 

Sutra: 

Two days later, a young boy chanting that verse 
passed by the threshing room. Hearing it for the first 

71 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

time, Hui Neng knew that the writer had not yet seen his 
original nature. Although he had not yet received a 
transmission of the teaching, he already understood its 
profound meaning. He asked the boy, “What verse are 
you reciting?” 

“Barbarian, you know nothing,” replied the boy. 
“The Great Master has said that birth and death are a 
profound concern for people in the world. Desiring to 
transmit the robe and Dharma, he ordered his disciples to 
compose verses and bring them to him to see. The person 
who has awakened to the profound meaning will inherit 
the robe and Dharma and become the Sixth Patriarch. 
Our senior, Shen Hsiu, wrote this ‘verse without marks’ 
on the wall of the south corridor. The Great Master 
ordered everyone to recite it, for to cultivate in accord 
with this verse is to avoid falling into the evil destinies and 
is of great merit.” 

Commentary: 

A young lad ventured close to the threshing floor where the 
Sixth Patriarch was working, singing as he walked, 

The body is a Bodhi tree. 

The mind like a bright mirror-stand. 
Time and again, brush it clean; 

Let no dust alight. 

The youth was chanting Shen Hsiu’s verse because he 
wished to obtain great benefit, avoid the three evil destinies of 
rebirth, and see his nature. 

When the Sixth Patriarch asked the boy what he was reciting, 
the boy replied, “You barbarian! Don’t you know that the Fifth 

72 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Patriarch said that of all the problems people face, the problem 
of birth and death is the most grave?” 

A “verse without marks” is one which reveals that its author 
is not attached to marks. 

“You really have no good roots!” the boy said to the Sixth 
Patriarch. “After so many days, you still don’t know? You are 
useless, capable only of toiling at bitter work; all you can do is 
pound rice. You shouldn’t let such a fine opportunity slip by. 
Listen closely, and I will tell you what has happened and teach 
you this verse so that you too can become enlightened and see 
your nature. Pay attention and rely on this verse as you cultivate 
so that in your next life you won’t have to endure such suffering 
as you endure now. You won’t have to be a horse or a cow or fall 
among the other animals or into the hells. At the very least you’ll 
be a wealthy and respected person of good fortune.” 

The youth’s heart wasn’t bad at all. 

Sutra: 

Hui Neng said, “I, too, would like to recite it to create 
an affinity. Superior One, I have been pounding rice here 
for over eight months and have not yet been to the front 
hall. I hope that the Superior One will lead me before the 
verse to pay homage.” The boy then led him to the verse 
to bow. 

Hui Neng said, “Hui Neng cannot read. Please, 
Superior One, read it to me.” Then an official from 
Chiang Chou, named Chang Jih Yung, read it loudly. 
After hearing it, Hui Neng said, “I, too, have a verse. Will 
the official please write it for me?” 

The official replied, “You, too, can write a verse? That 
is strange!” 

73 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

The boy said, “Listen to me and I will teach you: ‘The body 
is a Bodhi tree.’ Can you remember that? ‘The mind is like a 
bright mirror-stand.’ You should remember that! Don’t forget! 
‘Time and again brush it clean; let no dust alight.’ If you 
remember that verse clearly and study as you chant, you'll 
certainly receive an efficacious response.” 

Because the lad had been so considerate, the Sixth Patriarch 
referred to him as “Superior One,” a title which is ordinarily 
reserved for one’s master. People who have left home often call 
their teachers, “Superior One,’ acknowledging their high 
achievement. 

Then the Sixth Patriarch said, “The layman Hui Neng is truly 
useless, for he can’t read a single word. Superior One, would you 
please recite it for me? Having heard the verse, he said, “Well, I 
have a verse, too, but I’m unable to write it. What can I do? 
Please, good official, Layman Chang, will you write it out for 
me?” 

The official was wide-eyed with surprise. He looked 
scormfully at the barbarian and said, “Ha! You can write a verse? 
This is very strange. In my whole life I have never heard of an 
illiterate who can write verses!” 

Sutra: 

Hui Neng said to the official, “If you wish to study the 
supreme Bodhi, do not slight the beginner. The lowest 
people may have the highest wisdom; the highest people 
may have the least wisdom. If you slight others, you 
create limitless, unbounded offenses.” 

74 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

The official said, “Recite your verse and I will write it 
out for you. If you obtain the Dharma you must take me 
across first. Do not forget these words.” 

Hui Neng’s verse reads: 

Originally Bodhi has no tree, 

The bright mirror has no stand. 
Originally there is not a single thing: 
Where can dust alight? 

When this verse had been written, the followers all 
were startled and without exception cried out to one 
another, “Strange indeed! One cannot judge a person by 
his appearance. How can it be that, after so little time, he 
has become a Bodhisattva in the flesh?” 

Commentary: 

Originally, Layman Lu had not planned to say a thing, but if 
he had remained silent, no one would have helped him write a 
verse. So in reply to the mocking of Layman Chang, the Master 
said, “If you wish to study the highest Bodhi, do not ridicule 
those who are studying the Buddhadharma for the first time.” 

It may well be that those who appear to be the lowest and 
stupidest have the highest wisdom, for those who have truly 
great wisdom may act as if they have no wisdom at all. No matter 
what they are asked, they reply, “I don’t know,” This is an 
example of the great wisdom which is like stupidity. For 
instance, when I ask a question of my disciples they often say, “I 
don’t know.” When they first came to study, they said, “I know 
everything!” 

75 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Once I met a person who said he knew everything. I asked, 
“How can you know everything? If you know all there is to 
know, I’ll ask you a question.” 

He said, “What is your question?” 

I replied, “Do you know how many grains of rice you 
swallowed at lunch today?” 

“No, I didn’t count them,” he admitted. 

“Your ‘not counting’ is just ‘not knowing,” I said. 

Those who do the most menial work often have wisdom 
excelling that of people in high positions. Then again, those who 
ordinarily have great wisdom may have times when their 
wisdom is suffocated by thoughts of desire. 

“O.K., O.K.,” said the official, “that’s right. You certainly 
speak with principle. Now, what is your verse? Recite it and I 
will write it out. You don’t have to say another word. But you 
must remember to take me across first because if I don’t write 
your verse no one will know of it.” 

Originally Bodhi has no tree. Bodhi is just the Way of 
enlightenment, and that’s all there is to it; how can there be a 
tree? If there is a tree, Bodhi becomes a mere thing, a place of 
attachment. Originally Bodhi doesn’t have anything. If you say 
you are enlightened, what is enlightenment like? Is it green or 
yellow? Is it red or white? Can you speak of the appearance of 
Bodhi when it has no appearance? 

The bright mirror has no stand. You may say the mind is like 
a bright mirror stand, but there is actually no stand at all. If you 
have a stand, you have a place where you can dwell. But you 
should “produce a thought which is nowhere supported;” how 
can you have a stand? If you have a stand, then you have a 
dwelling place, a place where you are attached; therefore, the 
bright mirror has no stand. What is the appearance? No 
appearance. 

76 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Originally there is not a single thing. Basically there is 
nothing at all: no style; no picture; no shape or mark. Originally 
there is nothing at all. 

Where can dust alight? Since there isn’t anything, where 
does the dust come from? Basically you have no dwelling place. 
The essential meaning of the verse is this: You should “produce 
a thought which is nowhere supported.” There should be no 
attachment at all. This was precisely the Buddha’s meaning 
when, upon becoming enlightened, he said, “All living beings 
have the wisdom and virtuous characteristics of the Thus Come 
One. It is merely because of false thinking and attachment that 
they are unable to certify to the attainment of them.” This was 
spoken specifically to instruct people to put aside attachment, to 
produce an unsupported thought. 

If you are attached, what are you up to? Huh? Now you are 
attached, but in the future will you die, or not? What will you be 
attached to when you die? 

All the Bhikshus, laymen, and assembled disciples stood in 
astonishment and whispered among themselves, “Hey! Hey! 
Does he have a verse, too? Oh! It’s really true, you can’t judge 
people by appearances. This rice-thresher, Layman Lu, can 
compose verses. We can no longer slander him and call him a 
barbarian.” 

“Why he hasn’t been here very long,” they continued, “but 
how can you deny that he’s a flesh body Bodhisattva?” Actually, 
some were mocking the Sixth Patriarch, babbling, “Don’t look 
down on him. He’s a flesh body Bodhisattva.” Perhaps there 
were Arhats”! in the assembly who intentionally made such 

21. The highest level of sagehood in the Lesser Vehicle, as contrasted with the Great 
Vehicle Bodhisattva. “Arhat” has three meanings: “worthy of gifts,” “slayer of the 
thieves of affliction,” and “not to be reborn.” 

77 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

comments so that people would look closely and clearly 
recognize that he actually was a flesh body Bodhisattva. Again 
there were those who said, “This is truly a flesh body 
Bodhisattva,” but meant it only as sarcasm and lighthearted 
ridicule, for they still didn’t know if the verse was correct. 

Everyone was chattering, exchanging comments, making 
such a racket that the Fifth Patriarch came to the hall and 
demanded, “What are you doing? What are you up to?” 

“This rice-thresher, this barbarian, can write verses!” they 
stammered. 

Sutra: 

The Fifth Patriarch saw the astonished assembly and 
feared that they might become dangerous. Accordingly, 
he erased the verse with his shoe saying, “This one, too, 
has not yet seen his nature.” 

The assembly agreed. 

Commentary: 

The gathering was so excited the Fifth Patriarch feared that 
someone might even try to assassinate Layman Lu. This 
sentence of text proves that people with twisted hearts, followers 
of Shen Hsiu, were already locked in a fierce battle for positions 
of power. If the Dharma and the Patriarchate were transmitted 
publicly to anyone other than Shen Hsiu, that person would have 
been murdered on the spot. But they didn’t know that the Fifth 
Patriarch was a bright-eyed one who read their scheming minds. 
So to protect the Sixth Patriarch he erased the verse and said, 
“This man’s verse is also incorrect.” 

Perhaps some of you are thinking, “The Fifth Patriarch lied! 
First he said that if one cultivated in accord with Shen Hsiu’s 

78 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

verse, he would not be subject to the three evil destinies, but 
would gain great benefit and see his own nature. Then the Fifth 
Patriarch told everyone that Layman Lu had not really seen his 
nature when, in truth, he had. Isn’t that false speech? 

No. This is a provisional teaching, not false speech. The Fifth 
Patriarch spoke to protect the new patriarch; he would not allow 
the others to harm him. In this way, the Buddhadharma could 
remain long in this world and be transmitted far and wide. 

“Yes,” said the followers, “he has not seen his nature.” 
Although they agreed, no one knew whether the verse was right 
or not. The first verse said, “Bodhi is a tree;” the second said, 
“Bodhi has no tree.” The first verse said, “The bright mirror has 
a stand,” and the second said, “There is no mirror stand.” Which 
was right? Which was wrong? No one understood. None of them 
had become enlightened, so they couldn’t recognize an 
enlightened verse. It is like the judging of a doctoral dissertation: 
if you only have a Master’s Degree, you cannot judge a doctoral 
dissertation. It is the same with the enlightened and the 
unenlightened: since they were not enlightened themselves, the 
followers did not understand, and so they simply agreed with the 
Master and said, “No, this one has not yet seen his nature.” 

Sutra: 

The next day the Patriarch secretly came to the 
threshing floor where he saw Hui Neng pounding rice 
with a stone tied around his waist, and he said, “A seeker 
of the Way would forget his very life for the Dharma. Is 
this not the case?” 

79 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

The next day everyone was quiet and no longer worrying 
about who was enlightened and who was not. The Fifth Patriarch 
secretly left his room and went quickly to the threshing floor to 
see the Great Master Hui Neng. As he went he peered about to 
see if anyone was looking; just like Shen Hsiu when he had 
finished writing the verse, he ran silently, darting glances over 
his shoulder to make sure no one saw him. 

When the Fifth Patriarch got to the threshing floor, he saw 
Hui Neng pounding rice. He had tied a stone around his waist 
and pounded rice so that others could eat. What was he doing? 
He was practicing the Bodhisattva Way, forgetting others and 
having no notion of self. He did not think, “Why should I pound 
rice for you to eat? You don’t work. You don’t do anything at all! 
I pound rice all day and it is very difficult!” He did not think that 
way. Instead, he thought, “You do not work? Fine, I will do it 
myself,” just like one of my disciples who is so busy that when 
he is called to lunch he says, “Wait a minute, wait a minute!” I 
really like that kind of disciple, but not everyone can be that way. 

“TIsn’t that so?” the Fifth Patriarch said. Remember this. It 
ought, it must be this way! You must give up being afraid of 
difficulty to the point of forgetting to eat. No one knows how 
many days the Sixth Patriarch went without eating. No one 
called him to eat, and he himself forgot about it until he had no 
strength. He tied a heavy rock around his waist to add weight to 
his body so that he could pound the rice. I think he used the stone 
to add to his weight because he had not eaten for some time; 
however, you should not get attached and think, “It was 
definitely like that.” On the other hand, do not think, “It 
definitely wasn’t like that.” The profound insight comes from 
precisely that kind of non-attachment. 

80 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Sutra: 

Then the Fifth Patriarch asked, “Is the rice ready?” 
Hui Neng replied, “The rice has long been ready. It is 
now waiting only for the sieve.” 

Commentary: 

This passage in The Sixth Patriarch’ Sutra is extremely 
important. The Fifth Patriarch found the Great Master Hui Neng 
toiling on the threshing floor and asked him, “Is the rice ready?” 
On one level the question means, “Have you finished threshing 
the rice?” On another level, the meaning is: “Have your efforts 
been successful? Has your work taken you up the road?” 

Why does the Sutra say, “rice”? Because rice is made up of 
many grains, perfectly shaped, so symbolizing the precious 
mani~ jewel of the self nature. “Is the mani jewel of your nature 
ready? Is the light of your mind full? Is the light of your nature 
full? Is the light of your body full?” 

When the raw grain is boiled in water it becomes edible. The 
Patriarch’s question means, “How is your cultivation of the 
Way? You have been pounding rice and cultivating Dhyana 
meditation. How is your skill?” There are many levels of 
meaning here. The Sixth Patriarch, of course, understood the 
Fifth Patriarch’s question, for it is said, 

One who has gone through, 

knows one who has gone through; 
Those who do, 

know those who do. 

ae jewel, a pearl, symbol of perfection and purity. 

81 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“The rice has long been ready. My skill was perfected long 
ago,” the Sixth Patriarch answered. “It is now waiting only for 
the sieve.” In threshing rice, a sieve is used to sift out the husks. 
Here, the sieve represents getting rid of the filth. The fourth 
chapter of Zhe Lotus Sutra tells of the poor son who spent twenty 
years getting rid of the filth of the delusions of views and 
delusions of thoughts7>. 

Although the Sixth Patriarch’s spiritual skill was perfected, 
it still waited for the sieve; he still had to sweep out the filth of 
the delusions of views and thought. Do you understand now why 
Sutras must be explained? If they were not explained, you would 
not even know enough to sweep away the filth, and you would 
be utterly useless. 

Sutra: 

The Patriarch rapped the pestle three times with his 
staff and left. Hui Neng then knew the Patriarch’s 
intention, and at the third watch he went into the 
Patriarch’s room. 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch rapped the pestle three times with his 
staff and left. Old monks who have left the home life to become 
Bhikshus often carry a walking stick. Sometimes these staffs are 
made of twisted vines. The Great Master Hsii Yiin’* said: 

23. ‘There are 88 categories of view-delusions, which arise when greed and love are 
produced with respect to externals, and there are 81 categories of thought-delusions, 
which arise when, confused about principles, one gives rise to discrimination. 

24. The seventeenth Buddhist patriarch in China (1839-1959) 

82 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

We go to pick the ivy, 
Lively like a dragon, 
Beating wind and rain, 
Beating empty space. 

The ivy vine curves and twists like a dragon who by attacking the 
wind and rain attacks empty space. That is certainly a case of 
going out to look for trouble. If that vine were as busy as my 
disciples it would have no time to beat space and wind. 

“Knock, knock, knock,” went the Fifth Patriarch’s staff, and 
how do you think he left? If you know, then you know. If you 
don’t know, then you must wait until I tell you. He went out with 
his two hands behind his back, holding his crooked staff. 

Why did the Patriarch rap three times? Do you understand 
the meaning of that? The Sixth Patriarch understood right away. 
The rapping meant, “Come to my room at the third watch, at 
midnight.” This is called “speaking the Dharma without words.” 
Here in the meditation hall, for example, when the wooden fish?> 
is hit twice, it means “Walk;” hit once, it means “Stop and sit 
down;” hit three times, it means, “Meditate! Work hard!” All 
that is “speaking the Dharma without words.” 

Why did the Fifth Patriarch carry his staff behind his back? 
Now you are going to ask me, “How do you know he carried it 
behind his back since it doesn’t say so in the Sutra?” Well, how 
do you not know? I know that you don’t know. He carried it 
behind his back to indicate that the Sixth Patriarch should come 
in by the back door. “Do not let the others see you come in!” 

If the Fifth Patriarch had said openly, “Come to my room at 
the third watch and we’ll have a little talk,” I am sure that the 

25. A wooden percussion instrument shaped like a fish, use in monasteries to 
accompany chanting and to give signals. 

83 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

word would have spread like fire to Shen Hsiu’s ears and Shen 
Hsiu and his disciples would not have been very kind to the Sixth 
Patriarch. The Fifth Patriarch tested the Sixth Patriarch’s 
wisdom by rapping his staff three times and putting it behind his 
back. 

The Sixth Patriarch understood but no one else did. They 
were all as if deaf and dumb, without any idea as to what had 
transpired in this wordless exchange of Dharma. 

At midnight, as soon as the Sixth Patriarch entered the room, 
there was a quick exchange. “What are you doing here?” 
demanded the Fifth Patriarch. 

“But the Patriarch told me to come at the third watch!” came 
the reply. 

“Really? Did I tell you that? How could I have forgotten? 
What do you think you are doing? Why did you come in the back 
door instead of the front door?” 

“Did the Master not tell me to use the back entrance?” 

The Fifth Patriarch laughed and said, “You are not bad, really 
not bad. You are all right!” 

You, ask how I know that? I ask, “How do you not know it?” 

Sutra: 

The Patriarch covered them with his precept sash so 
they could not be seen, and he explained The Diamond 
Sutra for him down to the line, “One should produce a 
thought that is nowhere supported.” 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch was afraid that someone might have seen 
the Great Master Hui Neng enter his room and might be outside 
the window eavesdropping. At that time the windows were made 

84 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

of paper; so, to insure privacy, the Fifth Patriarch pulled his robe 
over both their heads. 

The Fifth Patriarch’s explanation of The Diamond Sutra was 
not a public one, such as I have given you. His was a secret and 
very difficult explanation, telling the Sixth Patriarch how to 
forge an indestructible vajra body. When he heard the words, 
“One should produce a thought which is nowhere supported,” 
Hui Neng achieved the great enlightenment and knew that all the 
ten thousand dharmas are not separate from the self-nature. He 
suddenly experienced that even greater enlightenment 

Although the Sixth Patriarch knew the method, his afflictions 
of views and thought had not yet been completely eliminated. 
That he was waiting for the sieve can mean, also, that no one had 
certified him. Even though, in his intense vigor, he had reached 
a high peak, and the fire in the censer was pure green, he had not 
yet been certified by a good knowing advisor. So when the Fifth 
Patriarch heard him say that the rice was ready and merely 
waiting for the sieve, he prepared to certify the Sixth Patriarch. 

Because I have a kind of radar, I was able to record their 
conversation and I shall now replay it for you. Keep in mind that 
this is a T’ang Dynasty recording, not a present-day one: 

“Do you want to reach Buddhahood?” asked the Fifth 
Patriarch. 

“Yes,” said the Sixth Patriarch, “I just want to become a 
Buddha. I do not seek anything else. I only want to attain 
Buddhahood.” 

“Your resolution is extremely firm,” replied the Fifth 
Patriarch, “but if you want to realize Buddhahood you must first 
cut off ignorance, for it is ignorance which produces the 
afflictions of delusion, brought on by false views and false 
thought. If you want to cut off these afflictions, you must first cut 
off ignorance. 

85 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“For example, the cycle of birth and death is based on the 
state of emotional love. When you break through ignorance, then 
the delusions of false views and false thoughts which are tied to 
birth and death cease to exist, for ignorance is the root of birth 
and death. If you want to cut off ignorance and thereby put an 
end to birth and death, then, as The Diamond Sutra says, 
“produce a thought which is nowhere supported.” That means do 
not dwell in emotional love, get rid of desire, and cast out 
craving. Then you can bring an end to birth and death. 

The Sixth Patriarch heard this and suddenly became 
enlightened. He saw through to his original face and said, “Ah! 
It is basically just like this! It is not difficult at all! In fact, it’s 
very easy!” Thus he became enlightened. 

This has been a T’ang Dynasty recording which has just been 
played for you to hear. 

In cultivating and studying the Buddhadharma, you should 
produce an unsupported thought. That means to dwell neither in 
emotion nor love. If you dwell in emotion and love, you dwell in 
ignorance, and thus in birth and death. If you do not dwell in 
emotion or in love, if you do not dwell in existence or non- 
existence, you know the Middle Way. The Middle Way is not 
separate from existence and is not separate from emptiness, nor 
does it exist elsewhere. The ability to transform emotion and 
love into genuine Prajna wisdom is enlightenment. Not changing 
them is confusion. It is said, “Although the sea of suffering is 
inexhaustible, a turn of the head is the other shore.” The 
difference between confusion and enlightenment is just in 
knowing how to turn. If you accept emotion and love and run 
after desire, then the more you run, the more confused you 
become. If you can turn your head, you arrive at Nirvana, the 
other shore. If you do not turn your head, you become more and 
more confused. The more confused, the farther away you are and 

86 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

the deeper you sink into confusion. But although you are 
extremely far off, one turn can be sudden enlightenment. Sudden 
enlightenment is awakening. Awakening is the Buddha. 

You may be thinking, “If I become a Buddha, there won’t be 
any work for me to do. Wouldn’t I just sit in a lotus flower all 
day and wait for people to come and light incense and bow 
before me? Frankly, I don’t think that sounds the least bit 
interesting!” If that is what you think, you can go on being a 
living being, but you can be a living being who is a friend to 
others, taking them across to Buddhahood. 

You need not worry about Buddhahood being uninteresting. 
Yesterday I talked about the ghost who had no trouble and as a 
consequence did not want to become a person: 

I’ve been a ghost for three thousand years, 
Without happiness, without fears. 

Shen Kung tells me to go be a man, 

But I really just don’t think I can! 

The ghosts have no fears, but they only come out at night, 
because they belong to the yin, the darkness principle. The 
Buddha is totally yang, like the light of the sun. So, you decide. 
Do you want to be a ghost or a Buddha? If you want to be a ghost, 
then it is all right to have emotion and love. But if you want to 
be a Buddha, you must “produce a thought which is nowhere 
supported.” 

Sutra: 

At the moment he heard those words, Hui Neng 
experienced the great enlightenment and he knew that all 
the ten thousand dharmas are not separate from the self- 
nature. He said to the Patriarch: 

87 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

How unexpected! The self-nature is 
originally pure in itself. 

How unexpected! The self-nature is 
originally neither produced nor destroyed. 

How unexpected! The self-nature is 
originally complete in itself. 

How unexpected! The self-nature is 
originally without movement. 

How unexpected! The self-nature 
can produce the ten thousand dharmas. 

Commentary: 

Great enlightenment penetrates to the beginning and to the 
end: it is a complete understanding of the deep Prajna wisdom. 
Because the Sixth Patriarch understood Prajna wisdom he said, 
“The ten thousand dharmas are not separate from the self-nature, 
for the mind produces the ten thousand dharmas.” 

The Sixth Patriarch exclaimed that the self-nature is pure. 
Why, then, does the Sutra say earlier that the self-nature is 
neither defiled nor pure? 

The term “pure” represents the appearance of the original 
substance, because the concept cannot be represented any other 
way. Here, “pure” means “originally pure” and does not refer to 
the purity which is the opposite of defilement. 

Production and destruction, birth and death, occur because 
living beings become attached. Without attachments, where 
would birth and death come from? Where would they go? There 
is no such thing as birth and death! 

The Sixth Patriarch realized that the self-nature is originally 
complete in itself, with nothing lacking and nothing in excess. It 

88 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

cannot be added to or depleted. In the final analysis the Buddha 
is not greater than ordinary living beings. Why do living beings 
fail to understand that? Because they turn their backs on 
enlightenment and unite themselves with the “dust” of external 
objects. With their backs turned, they cannot recognize the 
precious things that are originally theirs. They cast the root aside 
and grasp at the branches seeking pleasurable sensations which 
are false. They grasp at fame and profit, stupidly. 

Living beings are upside-down; they have no concentration 
power. But, nevertheless, their self-nature is without movement. 
Not only is that true of the Sixth Patriarch’s self-nature, but the 
self-nature of all living beings is unmoving, too. All are equal. 

The ten thousand dharmas are produced from the self-nature, 
and the self-nature includes all of existence. The Master hadn’t 
comprehended that before, but now at last he understood the 
wonderful principles. 

Sutra: 

The Fifth Patriarch knew of Hui Neng’s 
enlightenment to his original nature and said to him, 
“Studying the Dharma without recognizing the original 
mind is of no benefit. If one recognizes one’s own original 
mind and sees one’s original nature, then one is called a 
great hero, a teacher of gods and humans, a Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch knew that the Sixth Patriarch had become 
enlightened, and that he recognized his original face and knew 
whether his nostrils faced up or down. When he held his hand 
over his head, the Sixth Patriarch knew whether it was upside- 
down or right-side up. Recently, I asked you all, “When your 

89 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

hand hangs at your side, is it upside-down and when you raise it 
up over your head, is it right-side up? Or is it that when it hangs 
at your side it is right-side up and when you raise it over your 
head it is upside-down?” None of you understood this principle. 
Why? Because there is basically no such thing as upside-down 
or right-side-up! The Sixth Patriarch was especially clear about 
such questions. The Fifth Patriarch knew that he understood and 
so he covered them both with his robe and said, “Unless you 
recognize your original mind, it is useless to study the Dharma.” 

It is said, “If one recognizes one’s own mind, the great earth 
doesn’t have an inch of dirt.” It changes into yellow gold, 
adorned with the seven precious things—gold, silver, lapis lazuli, 
crystal, mother-of-pearl, red pearls, and carnelian. 

You say, “It doesn’t look like that to me.” Of course it 
doesn’t. You haven’t recognized your original mind. When you 
recognize it, you will see things differently. It’s like wearing 
tinted glasses. If you wear red glasses, people look red, and if 
you wear green glasses, they look green. If your glasses are 
yellow, then everyone looks yellow. Because you haven’t 
recognized your original mind, the great earth appears to be 
covered with dirt. This is because the dirt within you is so great. 
What is the dirt? It is simply your scattered thoughts, for without 
them, the great earth doesn’t have an inch of dirt. 

Studying the Buddhadharma is of no benefit unless you 
recognize your original mind. Look at it! What color is it? Is it 
green, yellow, red, white, or black? Is it long or short, square or 
round? What does it look like? What is its appearance? To say it 
has an appearance is an analogy, because fundamentally it has no 
appearance. When you recognize this “no appearance” you will 
understand. But before you have recognized it, do not speak 
about it in a confused way. 

90 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Recognize your original mind and see your nature. At that 
point you are a Buddha, because in the final analysis living 
beings are the Buddha and the Buddha is a living being. We now 
have the opportunity to realize Buddhahood. Not recognizing, 
not seeing, however, you still must study the Buddhadharma. 

Sutra: 

He received the Dharma in the third watch and no one 
knew about it. The Fifth Patriarch also transmitted the 
Sudden Teaching and the robe and bowl saying, “You are 
the Sixth Patriarch. Protect yourself carefully. Take 
living beings across by every method and spread the 
teaching for the sake of those who will live in the future. 
Do not let it be cut off.” 

Commentary: 

At midnight, the Fifth Patriarch transmitted the wonderful 
Dharma to the Sixth Patriarch, using the mind to seal the mind, 
and no one at all knew about it. The insiders didn’t know, the 
outsiders didn’t know, not even the ghosts and spirits knew. 

The Fifth Patriarch transmitted the Teaching of Sudden 
Enlightenment which points directly to the mind to see the 
nature and realize Buddhahood. “Think this over,” he said. “You 
are the Sixth Patriarch. As you cultivate the Buddhadharma, you 
must walk the true path. Do not simply talk about enlightenment. 
Do not use ‘head-mouth zen’ and say ‘I have studied the Dharma 
to the point that when there is no principle, I can make one up. I 
can prove that there is no truth or falsehood, and that to 
understand that by itself is to understand the ultimate meaning of 
the Middle Way.’ Don’t talk that way. It is just head-mouth zen 
because it comes not from real cultivation but from jealousy and 

91 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

obstructions and an obsession to be number one. If you are like 
that, you certainly can’t be a Patriarch. 

The Fifth Patriarch gave the Dharma to Hui Neng because 
Hui Neng always practiced the Bodhisattva Way. He pounded 
rice for everyone to eat and so helped them in their cultivation. 
That same Bodhisattva conduct is practiced here in the kitchen 
of this temple by the cooks. They make extremely fine food! 
However, when I eat I don’t notice whether it is good or not 
because I don’t have time to investigate eating-dharmas. Today, 
at lunch, didn’t I say that one who tastes his food and thinks it’s 
good or bad has no spiritual skill? 

Bodhisattvas help others at every level, not obstructing them, 
but, like the superior man, mentioning their good points instead. 
For instance, when I announced that several people were going 
to leave home and asked if anyone objected, no one did. You 
said, “I commend those who want to leave home.” Your not 
objecting is practicing the Bodhisattva Way. 

Late at night, the Sixth Patriarch easily obtained the 
Patriarchate. The Fifth Patriarch approved, but he didn’t consult 
anyone because he knew they would have protested. 

“Go out into the world,” said the Fifth Patriarch. “Protect the 
robe and bowl, for they have been handed down from 
Shakyamuni Buddha from generation to generation. Take 
everyone across and spread the Dharma into the future. Do not 
let it be cut off!” 

The Fifth Patriarch, sad and worried, was on the verge of 
tears. How do I know he wanted to cry? The Second Patriarch, 
at his execution, had wept as he said, “During the time of the 
Fourth Patriarch, The Lankavatara Sutra will become a mere 
name and appearance. No one will understand it.” Now, in the 
same way, the Fifth Patriarch’s heart welled up within him as he 
said, “Don’t allow the Dharma to be cut off. Be careful. Pay 

92 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

attention, Don’t be muddled or take your job lightly. It is 
extremely important that the Dharma not be cut off.” 

Sutra: 
Listen to my verse: 

With feeling comes the planting of the seed. 
Because of the ground, the fruit is born again. 
Without feeling there is no seed at all. 
Without that nature there is no birth either. 

Commentary: 

“With feeling comes the planting of the seed.” I have a 
feeling of loving kindness and so I have come to plant a seed. 
“Feeling” can mean compassion. I have a compassionate feeling 
and so I have come to plant the seed, to transmit the 
Buddhadharma to you. 

“Because of the ground, the fruit is born again.” This 
transmission is like putting a seed into the ground so that the 
plant can grow and bear fruit. 

“Without feeling there is no seed at all.” Without feeling, no 
seed is planted. If no one transmits the Buddhadharma to you, 
then there is no Bodhi-seed. 

“Without the nature there is no birth either.” Where there is 
no nature, there is no birth. That is one way to explain this verse. 
There is another way: 

“With feeling comes the planting of the seed.” The feeling is 
an emotional feeling of love. The seed is planted because of this 
feeling of love and people study the Dharma because of it. If they 
are not relatives, they are friends. Relatives have relative’s 
emotional feelings and friends have friend’s emotional feelings. 

93 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Because you have these emotional feelings you come to study 
the Dharma; you come to plant the seed. 

“Because of the ground the fruit is born again.” Emotional 
feeling plants the seed of Bodhi because of the ground which is 
the place where one can reap the fruit. On this piece of ground, 
you can grow the Bodhi-fruit. 

“Without feeling there is no seed at all.” If there is no feeling 
or emotion, there is no seed. That is, if no one came to this 
Bodhimanda to study the Dharma, there would be no feeling and 
no seed planted. 

“Without that nature, there is no birth either.”” You cannot 
realize Buddhahood without the Buddha nature. Now, the 
Buddha nature is here and you should realize Buddhahood. 

The verse may be explained in many ways, so long as the 
explanation is in accord with principle. 

Sutra: 

The Patriarch further said, “In the past, when the 
First Patriarch Great Master Bodhidharma first came to 
this land and people did not believe in him yet, he 
transmitted this robe as a symbol of faith to be handed 
down from generation to generation. The Dharma is 
transmitted from mind to mind, leading everyone to self- 
awakening and self-enlightenment. 

“From ancient times, Buddha only transmits the 
original substance to Buddha; master secretly transmits 
the original mind to master. Since the robe is a source of 
contention, it should stop with you. Do not transmit it, for 
if you do, your life will hang by a thread.” 

94 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Commentary: 

Didn’t I say before that Chinese people have no respect for 
Indian people? When Bodhidharma arrived in China everyone 
said, “He’s a hick.” No one knew who he was. Even after five 
years in China, he was not recognized as the Patriarch. 

True patriarchs accept the robe and bowl as certification of 
their rightly inherited position, while impostors may try to steal 
the robe and take the Dharma by force. Shen Hsiu thought a 
forced inheritance would be real; but it could only be false. 

During the time of the Fourth Patriarch, three attempts were 
made to steal the robe and bowl, and another three attempts were 
made during the time of the Fifth Patriarch. But the thieves 
always failed because the Bodhisattvas came to the Patriarchs’ 
aid. 

When the Sixth Patriarch was guarding the robe, six attempts 
were made. Later the robe and bowl were taken by Empress Wu 
Tse T’ien. It is not certain who it was entrusted to afterward. 

The Fifth Patriarch cautioned Hui Neng: “If you suspend a 
hundred-pound rock from a thread, it is certain to snap; so with 
your life if you continue to transmit the robe.” 

Sutra: 

“You must go quickly for I fear that people might 
harm you.” 

Hui Neng asked, “Where shall I go?” 

The Patriarch replied, “Stop at Huai and hide at 
Hui.” 

Hui Neng received the robe and bowl in the third 
watch. He said, “Hui Neng is a Southerner and does not 
know these mountain roads. How does one reach the 
mouth of the river?” 

95 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The Fifth Patriarch said, “You need not worry. I will 
accompany you.” 

The Fifth Patriarch escorted him to the Chiu Chiang 
courier station and ordered him to board a boat. The 
Fifth Patriarch took up the oars and rowed. Hui Neng 
said, “Please, High Master, sit down. It is fitting that your 
disciple take the oars.” 

The Patriarch replied, “It is fitting that I take you 
across.” 

Hui Neng said, “When someone is deluded, his master 
takes him across, but when he is enlightened, he takes 
himself across. Although the term ‘taking across’ is the 
same in each case, the function is not the same.” 

Commentary: 

The Fifth Patriarch instructed the Sixth Patriarch to leave 
quickly, for he knew that Shen Hsiu’s followers would certainly 
want to kill him when they realized he had inherited the 
patriarchate. “Do not stay here,” the Fifth Patriarch said. “Stop 
at Huai and hide at Hui.” Huai is a district in Kuang Hsi, Wu 
Chou, and Hui is Szu Hui, now called Hsin Hui. 

High Master is a respectful form of address used for a teacher 
or an Abbot, so the Sixth Patriarch used it to address the Fifth 
Patriarch “High Master, it is only proper that your disciple take 
the oars.” 

“Hey!” said the Fifth Patriarch, “Let me take you across the 
river.’ The Master and disciple exchanged courtesies, but 
although they each used the same term “taking across,” it meant 
something different in each case. For the teacher to take the 
disciple across is not the same thing as for the disciple to take the 
teacher across. Hui Neng understood. “When the student is 

96 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

confused,” he said, “the teacher must save him. But when the 
student becomes enlightened, he must save himself.” 

Before becoming enlightened and obtaining the original 
substance of the self-nature, the disciple is confused and lost. His 
teacher advises him to work hard: “Do not be afraid of the pain 
in your legs when you sit in meditation. If you are afraid of 
suffering you cannot become enlightened.” The Sixth Patriarch, 
when he hung a stone around his waist so he could pound the rice 
harder, was not afraid of suffering. The rock which the Layman 
Lu, the Sixth Patriarch, used to tie around his waist when he 
pounded rice is still on P’ing Mao Mountain at Tung Shan Ch’an 
Monastery and carved on the rock is the inscription: “The rock 
Hui Neng, the former Layman Lu, tied around his waist.” 

Sutra: 

“Hui Neng was born in the frontier regions and his 
pronunciation is incorrect, yet he has received the 
Dharma transmission from the Master. Now that 
enlightenment has been attained, it is only fitting that he 
take his own nature across.” 

The Patriarch replied, “So it is, so it is. Hereafter 
because of you, the Buddhadharma will be widely 
practiced. Three years after your departure I will leave 
this world. Start on your journey now and go south as fast 
as possible. Do not speak too soon, for the 
Buddhadharma arises from difficulty.” 

Commentary: 

Because he was from the south, the Sixth Patriarch spoke 
Cantonese rather than Mandarin, so few people understood him. 

97 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Nevertheless, he inherited the mind seal of the wonderful 
Dharma. 

Master Hui Neng was truly enlightened, unlike some people 
who are not enlightened but cheat and say that they are, who 
have not testified to the fruit of enlightenment but lie and say that 
they have. 

The Fifth Patriarch thought, “This disciple knows my heart.” 
He said to Hui Neng, “Yes, it is just that way.” 

One should take one’s own nature across. Remember that. 
For example, someone must teach you to recite the Shurangama 
Mantra, but once you know how, you must recite it on your own. 
People should not have to say, “It is time for you to recite the 
Shurangama Mantra.” Again, someone must teach you to recite 
Sutras, but then you must do it yourself. That is what is meant by 
“taking one’s own nature across.” 

A teacher shows you how to remove afflictions. He says that 
anger is harmful, and that one should transform one’s nasty 
temper into Bodhi. Once taught, the nature cannot be taken 
across unless the method is applied. The Master says, “Don’t get 
upset. When faced with a crisis, proceed as if nothing has 
happened. All things are like flowers in the sky or the moon’s 
reflection in water—unreal, illusory, like a dream or a dewdrop. 
Remember that and there will be no affliction.” If, when faced 
with a situation, or a state of mind, you see through it and put it 
down, you have taken your nature across. 

Smoking can be a problem. The teacher says, “Stop 
smoking! Smoking hinders cultivation.” When I said that to one 
disciple he said, “Stop smoking? Ill give it a try,” and he 
stopped. He took his nature across. 

Another disciple is fond of drinking. Having studied the 
Buddhadharma, he ought to have quit drinking, but he says, “I’m 
confused. I’m not enlightened.” If you stop you become 

98 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

enlightened; if you don’t, you sink into confusion. Whether or 
not you become enlightened is entirely up to you. 

Cutting off all unwholesome activities is to become 
enlightened and to take your nature across. Not understanding, 
you may think, “The Dharma Master says that drugs are bad, so 
Ill take some more. Ill take a double dose. No, I'll take five 
times as much! Ill keep getting high until I am enlightened.” 
Continue to take drugs and you will poison yourself and die 
instead. Confused by drugs, you cannot take your nature across. 

Before studying the Buddhadharma, you should not do 
confused and wicked things. After you have studied the 
Buddhadharma, the prohibition is even stronger. If you continue 
to misbehave, you commit the crime of “knowing and 
intentionally violating the Dharma,” and you are certain to fall 
into the hells. There is nothing polite about these matters. If you 
do confused and wicked things, you will fall into the hells. If I 
do them, I will fall into the hells. If someone else does them, he 
will fall into the hells. No one can avoid this. 

In a hundred thousand ages, 

The karma made is not destroyed; 

When the causes and conditions rebound, 
You undergo the retribution by yourself. 

No one can suffer for you in the hells. Karma refers to acts of 
killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and drinking, all of 
which bear retribution in the future. Your karma does not get 
lost, and it is you, and you alone, who must suffer the 
consequences. However, 

If you end your confusion 
and get rid of the dirt, 

99 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

You can easily take 
your own nature across. 

The dirt in your nature is your upside-down actions, your false 
thinking, your ignorance, your outflows*°, and your bad habits. 
Eliminate these and you have taken your nature across. 

When I lectured this Sutra in another place, I said, “If you 
create offense-karma, you will go to the hells; if someone else 
creates offense-karma, he will go to the hells, if I create offense 
karma, I will go to the hells.” One person who was there 
objected: 

“Dharma Master,” he said “I have never seen these hells. 
Where are they? I would like to take a look at them because I 
simply don’t believe they exist.” 

I said, “It is easy enough to fall into the hells, and if you try 
to fall into them you will fall even more quickly and not escape 
for a very long time.” I hope that those who wish to try out the 
hells will reconsider. 

What kind of person can take his own nature across? A 
person with wisdom. Deluded people, on the other hand, cannot 
take their nature across, and what is more, even if a teacher tries 
to help them, they refuse to listen. It is like trying to teach a dog. 
You say, “Don’t bite people,” and, the first chance it gets, the 
dog bites someone. So you hit it and it still bites people. Why? 
Because it has a stupid nature. Cats are just the same. You can 
tell a cat, “Do not kill mice, do not take life, but nevertheless the 
cat kills the first mouse it sees. You may try to teach a mouse not 
to steal, but still it sneaks off and steals. 

°6. Refer to the discharge of energy through the six sense organs; hence, defilement, 
affliction; that which obstruct cultivation. 

100 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Smoking and drinking are done by those who do not know 
any better. People with true and proper understanding do not do 
mixed-up things. People with mixed up understanding do not do 
true and proper things. You must correct your own faults. Your 
teacher shouldn’t have to watch your every move and follow you 
around to make sure that you behave. You must take your own 
nature across. 

This is a general explanation, for if I were to speak in detail, 
I would not finish until the exhaustion of the boundaries of the 
future. 

“T have transmitted my Dharma, and in three years I will 
complete the stillness and go to Nirvana,” said the Fifth 
Patriarch. “Go well, and whatever you do, don’t be lazy. Go 
well, don’t go bad. Don’t go the wrong way. Don’t take drugs 
and ruin your body, for your body is your means of cultivation. 
If you ruin your body, how will you be able to cultivate? Go 
well, go well, do your best. Quickly head south.” That is 
certainly the kind of advice the Fifth Patriarch gave. 

“But don’t speak of the Dharma too soon. Hide your light and 
store up your potential, as troops are fed well so that they may 
conquer every enemy and capture every city. The 
Buddhadharma is hard to bring forth. It arises from difficulty.” 

Sutra: 

After Hui Neng took leave of the Patriarch, he set out 
on foot for the South. In two months he reached the Ta 
Yu Mountains. 

The Fifth Patriarch returned to the monastery but for 
several days he did not enter the hall. The assembly was 
concerned and went to ask: “Has the Master some slight 
illness or problem?” 

101 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“There is no illness,” came the reply, “but the robe 
and Dharma have already gone south.” 

“Who received the transmission?” they asked. 

“The Able One obtained it,” said the Patriarch. 

The assembly then understood, and soon several 
hundred people took up pursuit, all hoping to steal the 
robe and bowl. 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch left the Fifth Patriarch, no longer 
attending upon the High Master or making offerings to him. He 
walked south from P’ing Mao Mountain and in a little over two 
months, he finally reached the Ta Yii mountain range which 
forms the border between Nan Hsiung and Kuang Tung. 

The Fifth Patriarch returned to his room. For many days he 
did not go into the hall to speak Dharma or take his meals. The 
assembly was curious. “High Master,” they said, “you’re not ill, 
are you?” 

“You may all disperse,” said the Fifth Patriarch, “because I 
no longer have the Buddhadharma. The robe and Dharma have 
gone south. I intend to rest now, I am going to retire.” 

“Who received the transmission?” they asked. 

“The Able One,” said the Patriarch. “He who was able 
obtained it. Whoever the able one is, he got it.” 

When this announcement was made there were those in the 
assembly who had keen intelligence, one of them being Dharma 
Master Fa Ju. He was one of the ten people to whom the Fifth 
Patriarch gave instructions before he entered Nirvana, telling 
them, “Each of you go to a different direction and be a Dharma 
Host.” But now, when Fa Ju heard the Fifth Patriarch say that the 
Able One had obtained the transmission, he cried out, “No! That 
must mean the southern barbarian has got the Dharma! How 

102 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

strange.” The “Able One” refers to Hui Neng: “Able” (neng) was 
his name. 

Word spread, and soon everyone knew. They all objected 
violently. “No! No!” they shouted, “How can it be? Let’s go take 
it from him right now.” Several hundred powerful people ran 
after Hui Neng. Consider the situation: the Fifth Patriarch had 
transmitted the Dharma to a barbarian, and the entire assembly 
was resentful. “How could you give it to him?” they said. “We 
have been following you for so many years. Why didn’t you give 
it to us?” They thought to themselves, “The Patriarch’s brain 
must be addled. How else could he give the Dharma to such a 
hick? How can he become the Sixth Patriarch? We should get 
back the robe and bowl-by force!” 

Sutra: 

One Bhikshu, Hui Ming, a coarse-natured man whose 
lay name had been Ch’en, had formerly been a fourth 
class military official. He was intent in his search and 
ahead of the others. When he had almost caught up with 
Hui Neng the latter tossed the robe and bowl onto a rock, 
saying, “This robe and bowl are tokens of faith. How can 
they be taken by force?” Hui Neng then hid in a thicket. 

When Hui Ming arrived, he tried to pick them up, but 
found he could not move them. He cried out, “Cultivator, 
Cultivator, I have come for the Dharma, not for the 
robe!” 

Hui Neng then came out and sat cross-legged on a 
rock. Hui Ming made obeisance and said, “I hope that the 
Cultivator will teach the Dharma for my sake.” 

Hui Neng said, “Since you have come for the Dharma, 
you may put aside all conditions. Do not give rise to a 
single thought and I will teach it to you clearly.” After a 

103 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

time, Hui Neng said, “With no thoughts of good and with 
no thoughts of evil, at just this moment, what is Superior 
One Hui Ming’s original face?” At these words, Hui Ming 
was greatly enlightened. 

Commentary: 

Bhikshu Hui Ming was coarse and uneducated. He never 
opened his mouth unless it was to scold someone, and if they 
refused to listen, he beat them. He could smash a rock of several 
hundred pounds with one blow. With this extraordinary strength 
he became a fourth class army officer. 

Hui Ming had one peculiar trait. His feet were covered with 
feathers which enabled him to run fast. He could travel sixty 
miles a day, compared to the ordinary man’s thirty. His feathered 
feet and great strength carried him far ahead of the others. As he 
flew along, his mind raced, “TI’ll get the robe and bowl and then 
it will be mine! It belongs to the strongest man.” 

When Hui Neng saw this big crude feather-footed pursuer, he 
was a bit frightened. Although he had obtained the Dharma, he 
had just begun to cultivate and did not yet have great spiritual 
power. He shouted into empty space: “This robe and bowl are 
symbols of the faith. How can you take them by force? How can 
there be any dispute?” 

What do you think? 

Hui Ming had actually intended to grab the robe and bowl 
and run. But he could not move them. Why do you suppose he 
couldn’t move them? After all he was so strong he could have 
smashed the bowl to smithereens with a single blow and have 
ripped the robe to shreds. Yet for all his strength and as light as 
the robe was, he couldn’t budge it. This indicates that there were 
Dharma protectors—gods, dragons, and others of the eight 
divisions present guarding the robe and bowl. Since he couldn’t 

104 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

grab them, he thought, “That’s strange. I can’t use force here. 
Ah! Ill ask for the Dharma instead.” Had he truly been seeking 
the Way he wouldn’t have first tried to grab the robe and bowl 
but would immediately have said, “Cultivator, Cultivator, I 
come for the Dharma, not for the robe and bowl.” Don’t you 
think my opinion about this is logically sound? 

Hui Neng emerged and sat in lotus position on a rock. Hui 
Ming bowed to the Sixth Patriarch. He understood now that the 
Dharma of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas cannot be taken by 
force. “You say you’ve come for the Dharma.” said Hui Neng. 
“Really? Did you really come for the Dharma and not to steal the 
robe and bowl? Fine. Put aside all conditions. Put your mind to 
rest. Stop grasping at conditions and then I will explain the 
Dharma clearly for you.” 

For seven or eight minutes the Great Master sat waiting. 
Neither he nor Hui Ming gave rise to a single thought. 
Everything stopped. Not even the ghosts and spirits knew what 
was happening. Everything was empty. 

Hui Ming was not giving rise to thought. He was not thinking 
north, south, east, or west. So Hui Neng said, “With no thoughts 
of good and no thoughts of evil, at just that moment, what is 
Superior Ming’s original face?” Since the Sixth Patriarch was at 
that time still a layman he respectfully addressed Hui Ming as 
“Superior One.” 

The word “what” means “who”. In the Dhyana School we 
meditate on the question, “Who is reciting the Buddha’s name?” 
When Hui Ming heard the word “what” he became enlightened. 
“Oh!” he said, “originally it’s just this way!” 

Hearing these words, have you become enlightened? 

105 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

Hui Ming asked further, “Apart from the secret 
speech and secret meanings just spoken, is there yet 
another secret meaning?” 

Hui Neng said, “What has been spoken to you is not 
secret. If you turn the illumination inward, the secret is 
with you.” 

Hui Ming said, “Although Hui Ming was at Huang 
Mei he had not yet awakened to his original face. Now 
that he has been favored with this instruction he is like 
one who drinks water and knows for himself whether it is 
cold or warm. The cultivator is now Hui Ming’s master.” 

“Tf you feel that way,” said Hui Neng, “then you and I 
have the same master, Huang Mei2’. Protect yourself 
well.” 

Hui Ming asked further, “Where should I go now?” 

Hui Neng said, “Stop at Yiian and dwell at Meng.” 

Commentary: 

All of the Sixth Patriarch’s pursuers were greedy, but Hui 
Ming was the worst. He had just seen his original face, he had 
just become enlightened, but he wasn’t satisfied. He wanted to 
know if he had missed anything. “Are there any more secrets?” 
he asked. “Is there something even more wonderful?” 

“What I have said is not the most miraculous and wonderful 
thing,” said the Sixth Patriarch, ““What is most important is that 
you turn the light back around and illuminate inward so that you 

27. i e., The Fifth Patriarch. The Masters are often referred to honorifically by the 

place where they lived and taught. 

106 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

may see the wonderful secret which is within you. It is all within 
you; it is not here with me.” 

“Great Master,” said Hui Ming, “I wish to take you as my 
teacher.” 

“Tf that is how you feel,” said the Sixth Patriarch, “we have 
the same teacher, Huang Mei. We both have the Fifth Patriarch’s 
Dharma transmission and are Dharma brothers. That is fine! 
Now, take good care of the Dharma and don’t allow it to become 
extinct.” 

It was not until three years after this encounter with the 
Patriarch that Hui Ming went to Meng Mountain in Yiian 
District. There he met a ghost who, in his last life, had been a 
top-ranking scholar under the imperial examination system. The 
ghost composed a poem and sang it to Hui Ming: 

Still, still, barren waste—a dream. 

Then, now, triumph, loss lazy thought measures. 
Wild grass, idle flowers picked, how many? 
Bitter rain, sour wind, how many broken hearts? 

At night, with firefly light I come and go. 

At dawn, the cock crows; I hide away my form. 
Regret from the first not tilling the mind ground: 

Two streams are caused to fall-green mountain tears. 

Seeing the ghost’s plight, Hui Ming explained the Dharma to 
the ghost and took him across. Ever since then there has been the 
“ceremony of Meng Mountain” which is performed to take 
ghosts across and liberate them. 

107 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

Hui Ming bowed and left. Reaching the foot of the 
mountain, he said to the pursuers. “Up above there is 
only a rocky, trackless height. We must find another 
path.” The pursuers all agreed. Afterwards, Hui Ming 
changed his name to Tao Ming to avoid using Hui Neng’s 
first name. 

Commentary: 

After receiving instruction from the Sixth Patriarch, feather- 
footed Hui Ming went down the mountain and told the pursuers 
that he had not seen the Sixth Patriarch. 

Hui Ming usually told the truth, and so everyone believed 
him now, even though he was lying. Actually this was not a lie, 
but an expedient device used to protect the Sixth Patriarch from 
those who, unlike Hui Ming, had not received the Dharma and 
therefore still wished to kill the Sixth Patriarch. 

Hui Ming dared not presume to be his Master’s equal. He 
changed his name from Hui Ming to Tao Ming to avoid using the 
Patriarch’s first name. 

Sutra: 

Hui Neng arrived at Ts’ao Hsi where he was again 
pursued by men with evil intentions. To avoid difficulty, 
he went to Szu Hui and lived among hunters for fifteen 
years, at times teaching Dharma to them in an 
appropriate manner. 

The hunters often told him to watch their nets, but 
whenever he saw beings who were still living he released 
them. At mealtime he cooked vegetables in the pot 

108 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

alongside the meat. When he was questioned about it, he 
would answer “I only eat vegetables alongside the meat.” 

Commentary: 

Shen Hsiu still wanted to kill the Sixth Patriarch and steal the 
Patriarchate. Hui Neng escaped to Szu Hui, the present Hsin Hui, 
where he lived with a band of hunters for fifteen years. Who 
would have suspected that a Buddhist would choose to live with 
hunters? No one. Shen Hsiu’s party searched far and wide, but 
they never found him. 

Some say the Great Master lived with the hunters for sixteen 
years, but their calculation includes the time he spent coming 
and going. He actually lived with them for only fifteen years. 

For lunch, the Great Master gathered wild vegetables on the 
mountain and cooked them in the pot beside the meat. If 
someone asked him, “Why are you doing that?” he said, “I only 
eat the vegetables. I don’t eat meat.” 

Sutra: 

One day Hui Neng thought, “The time has come to 
spread the Dharma. I cannot stay in hiding forever.” 
Accordingly, he went to Fa Hsing Monastery in Kuang 
Chou where Dharma Master Yin Tsung was giving 
lectures on The Nirvana Sutra. 

At that time there were two bhikshus who were 
discussing the topic of the wind and a flag. One said, “The 
wind is moving.” The other said, “The flag is moving.” 
They argued incessantly. Hui Neng stepped forward and 
said, “The wind is not moving, nor is the flag. Your 
minds, Kind Sirs, are moving.” Everyone was startled. 

109 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Dharma Master Yin Tsung invited him to take a seat 
of honor and sought to ask him about the hidden 
meaning. Seeing that Hui Neng’s exposition of the true 
principles was concise and to the point and not based on 
written words, Yin Tsung said, “The cultivator is 
certainly no ordinary man. I heard long ago that Huang 
Mei’s robe and bowl had come south. Cultivator, is it not 
you?” 

Hui Neng said, “I dare not presume such a thing.” 

Yin Tsung then made obeisance and requested that 
the transmitted robe and bowl be brought forth and 
shown to the assembly. 

Commentary: 

The Great Master went to Kuang Chou, to Fa Hsing 
Monastery, now called Kuang Hsiao Monastery, where Dharma 
Master Yin Tsung was lecturing on The Mahaparinirvana Sutra, 
which the Buddha spoke just before entering Nirvana. At the 
monastery the Master met the two monks arguing over the topic 
of the wind and a flag. One said the wind moved, the other said 
the flag moved, and he told them, “You are both wrong. Neither 
the wind nor the flag is moving. Your minds are moving. If your 
minds were not moving, then neither the wind nor the flag would 
move.” 

Everyone was astonished to hear this layman speak in such a 
wonderful and mysterious way. Yin Tsung asked him, “Aren’t 
you the holder of Huang Mei’s robe and bowl?” 

“T am unworthy of such a title,” the Master said modestly. 

Yin Tsung knew, however, that the Great Master was only 
being polite. Yin Tsung recognized Layman Lu as the Sixth 
Patriarch. 

110 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Sutra: 

He further asked, “How was Huang Mei’s doctrine 
transmitted?” 

“There was no transmission,” replied Hui Neng. “We 
merely discussed seeing the nature. There was no 
discussion of Dhyana samadhi or liberation.” 

Yin Tsung asked, “Why was there no discussion of 
Dhyana samadhi or liberation?” 

Hui Neng said, “These are dualistic dharmas. They 
are not the Buddhadharma. The Buddhadharma is a 
Dharma of non-dualism.” 

Yin Tsung asked further, “What is __ this 
Buddhadharma which is the Dharma of non-dualism?” 

Hui Neng said, “The Dharma Master has been 
lecturing The Nirvana Sutra which says that to 
understand the Buddha-nature is the Buddhadharma 
which is the Dharma of non-dualism. As Kao Kuei Te 
Wang Bodhisattva said to the Buddha, ‘Does violating 
the four serious prohibitions, committing the five 
rebellious acts, or being an icchantika and the like cut off 
the good roots and the Buddha-nature?’ 

“The Buddha replied, ‘There are two kinds of good 
roots: the first, permanent; the second impermanent. The 
Buddha-nature is neither permanent nor impermanent. 
Therefore it is not cut off.’ 

“That is what is meant by non-dualistic. The first is 
good and the second is not good. The Buddha-nature is 
neither good nor bad. That is what is meant by non- 
dualistic. Common people think of the heaps 8 and 
realms”? as dualistic. The wise man comprehends that 
they are non-dualistic in nature. The non-dualistic nature 
is the Buddha-nature.” 

111 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Hearing this explanation, Yin Tsung was delighted. 
He joined his palms and said, “My explanation of Sutras 
is like broken tile, whereas your discussion of the 
meaning, Kind Sir, is like pure gold.” 

He then shaved Hui Neng’s head?” and asked Hui 
Neng to be his master. Accordingly, under that Bodhi 
tree, Hui Neng explained the Tung Shan Dharma-door. 

Commentary: 

The four serious prohibitions are killing, stealing, lying, and 
sexual misconduct. The five rebellious acts are matricide, 
patricide, killing an Arhat, shedding the blood of a Buddha, and 
breaking up the harmony of the Sangha. What happens to the 
good roots and the Buddha-nature of one who commits such 
offenses? 

Icchantika is a Sanskrit word which may be explained as 
meaning “of incomplete faith.” Are the good roots and the 
Buddha-nature of icchantikas cut off? 

Kao Kuei Te Wang Bodhisattva asked the Buddha these 
questions because he mistook good roots for the Buddha-nature 
itself. In his answer, the Buddha makes it clear that good roots 
are not the Buddha-nature. 

28. What appears to be the “self” or “personality” may be broken down into five 
impersonal components called heaps: a)form, b)feelings, c)perceptions, d)impulses, 
e)consciousness. 

29. There are eighteen realms of sense, 1.e. the six sense organs (eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, body, and mind), the six objects of the sense organs (forms, sounds, smells, 
tastes, touchables, and mind objects [dharmas]) plus the six consciousnesses which 
arise between the organs and the objects (eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, 
etc.) 

30. thus accepting him into the Sangha. 

112 

Chapter |. Action and Intention 

Because the Great Master obtained the Dharma from the 
Fifth Patriarch at Tung Shan, “East Mountain,” it is called the 
Tung Shan Dharma-door. 

Sutra: 

“Hui Neng obtained the Dharma at Tung Shan and 
has undergone much suffering, his life hanging as if by a 
thread. 

“Today, in this gathering of the magistrate and 
officials, of Bhikshus, Bhikshunis, Taoists, and laymen, 
there is not one of you who is not here because of 
accumulated ages of karmic conditions. Because in past 
lives you have made offerings to the Buddhas and planted 
good roots in common, you now have the opportunity to 
hear the Sudden Teaching, which is a cause of obtaining 
the Dharma. 

“This teaching has been handed down by former 
sages; it is not Hui Neng’s own wisdom. You who wish to 
hear the teaching of the former sages should first purify 
your minds. After hearing it, cast aside your doubts, and 
that way you will be no different from the sages of the 
past.” 

Commentary: 

Thus, the Sixth Patriarch concludes the narrative of his life. 
We in America who are so fortunate to hear this Sutra explained 
have also for ages established common karmic conditions by 
making offerings to the Buddhas. 

“The Dharma is transmitted from former sages, Buddhas, 
and Bodhisattvas. It is not my own wisdom,” said Hui Neng. “If 

113 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you listen to me carefully, it will be just as if you were listening 
to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas speaking.” 

Sutra: 

Hearing this Dharma, the entire assembly was 
delighted, made obeisance, and withdrew. 

114 

CHAPTER II 

PRAJNA 

Sutra: 

The following day, at the invitation of Magistrate Wei, 
the Master took his seat and said to the great assembly, 
“All of you purify your minds and think about Maha 
Prajna Paramita.” 

Commentary: 

This second chapter of the Sutra is an explanation of Prajna, 
given by the Master upon the request of Magistrate Wei. 

Prajna is a Sanskrit word which means “wisdom.” There are 
three kinds of Prajna: literary Prajna, contemplative Prajna, and 
real mark Prajna. 

Because the word Prajna encompasses these three meanings, 
it has a fuller connotation than the word “wisdom.” Therefore 
the Chinese translators of Sutras did not translate it, but instead 
transliterated it.*! 

The Sixth Patriarch took his seat and said, “All of you should 
quit daydreaming. Listen to the Dharma with a pure mind and a 
united heart. Be mindful of Maha Prajna Paramita.” 

31. There are five kinds of terms which the Great Master Hsiian Tsang of the T’ang 
Dynasty transliterated: a) the esoteric terms; b) terms with many meanings; c) terms 
for things which did not exist in China; d) the honorific terms, e) terms which 
should be used following the example of the Ancients. 

115 

The 

Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Maha Prajna Paramita is called “great wisdom.” Maha means 

great; Prajna means wisdom; Paramita means arrived at the other 
shore. 

Sutra: 

116 

He then said, “Good Knowing Advisors, the wisdom 
of Bodhi and Prajna is originally possessed by worldly 
people themselves. It is only because their minds are 
confused that they are unable to enlighten themselves 
and must rely on a great Good Knowing Advisor who can 
lead them to see their Buddha-nature. You should know 
that the Buddha-nature of stupid and wise people is 
basically not different. It is only because confusion and 
enlightenment are different that some are stupid and 
some are wise. I will now explain for you the Maha 
Prajna Paramita Dharma in order that each of you may 
become wise. Pay careful attention, and I will explain it to 
you. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, worldly people recite 
‘Prajna’ with their mouths all day long and yet do not 
recognize the Prajna of their self-nature. Just as talking 
about food will not make you full, so, too, if you only 
speak of emptiness you will not see your own nature in 
ten thousand ages. In the end you will not have obtained 
any benefit. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, Maha Prajna Paramita is 
a Sanskrit word which means ‘great wisdom which has 
arrived at the other shore.’ It must be practiced in the 
mind, and not just recited in words. When the mouth 
recites and the mind does not practice, it is like an 
illusion, a transformation, dew drops, or lightning. 
However, when the mouth recites and the mind practices, 

Chapter II. Prajna 

then mind and mouth are in mutual accord. One’s own 
original nature is Buddha; apart from the nature there is 
no other Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

The Master said, “Worldly people recite ‘Prajna, Prajna, 
Prajna,’ but they do not know the Prajna of their own original 
nature, or their own inherent wisdom. You may recite recipes 
from a cookbook from morning to night saying, ‘This is 
delicious!’ but you will never fill your stomach that way. Saying 
‘Prajna is empty’ is not to do anything about it. In the end it is of 
no benefit. It is nothing more than ‘head-mouth zen’ and will not 
help you to see your own inherent Prajna.” 

Instead, see everything as empty and put it aside: see it, 
smash it, and put it down. Empty everything. Then you need not 
recite it all day long with your mouth. If your mouth recites but 
your mind does not practice, your recitation is a worthless 
illusion. If you see the Prajna wisdom of your own nature, you 
will not become entangled in stupid affairs. You will not be 
ignorant. If you remain ignorant, your mind is not practicing. 

If you use your mind as well as your mouth in cultivating 
Prajna, you will see that your own fundamental nature is itself 
the Buddha. 

Everyone can realize Buddhahood. You need only cultivate. 
What should you cultivate? Your nature. Do not seek outside 
yourself, but turn the light inward; reverse the illumination and 
look within. 

Sutra: 

“What is meant by Maha? Maha means ‘great.’ The 
capacity of the mind is vast and great like empty space, 

117 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

and has no boundaries. It is not square or round, great or 
small. Neither is it blue, yellow, red or white. It is not 
above or below, or long or short. It is without anger, 
without joy, without right, without wrong, without good, 
without evil, and it has no head or tail. 

“All Buddha-lands are ultimately the same as empty 
space. The wonderful nature of worldly people is 
originally empty, and there is not a single dharma which 
can be obtained. The true emptiness of the self-nature is 
also like this. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, do not listen to my 
explanation of emptiness and then become attached to 
emptiness. The most important thing is to avoid 
becoming attached to emptiness. If you sit still with an 
empty mind you will become attached to undifferentiated 
emptiness.” 

Commentary: 

Because the mind first thought of going there, we now send 
rockets to the moon. The mind has no limits or boundaries. You 
can’t say that it is big or small, for there is nothing bigger and 
nothing smaller. 

The self-nature is the Middle Way. Your true mind is neither 
right nor wrong, true or false. In your true mind there are no 
thoughts of good or evil. Therefore the Sixth Patriarch asked Hui 
Ming, the ex-soldier who had come to steal the robe and bowl, 
“With no thoughts of good and with no thoughts of evil, at just 
this moment, what is the Superior One Hui Ming’s original 
face?” He posed this question to reveal that there is neither good 
nor evil in the true mind. As they say in philosophy, “It has no 
head or tail!” 

There is not even one single dharma. It is empty. 

118 

Chapter II. Prajna 

The self-nature is like empty space; 

It contains within itself both truth and falsehood. 
Enlighten yourself to the original substance; 

In one penetration, penetrate all. 

“When you hear me say that Prajna is empty, do not become 
attached to undifferentiated emptiness. If you do you will sit as 
if dead,” continued the Sixth Patriarch. 

We should cultivate true emptiness, which is wonderful 
existence, not vacuity. In true emptiness everything is known 
and everything is not known. 

Understanding, complete and clear, 
Like water reflecting the moon. 

The mind in samadhi, like the sky, 
For ten thousand miles, not a cloud. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the emptiness of the 
universe is able to contain the forms and shapes of the ten 
thousand things: the sun, moon, and stars; the 
mountains, rivers, and the great earth; the fountains, 
springs, streams, torrents, grasses, trees, thickets, and 
forests; good and bad people, good and bad dharmas, the 
heavens and the hells, all the great seas, Sumeru” and all 
mountains—all are contained within emptiness. The 
emptiness of the nature of worldly men is also like this. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the ability of one’s own 
nature to contain the ten thousand dharmas is what is 

32. The central mountain of every world system. Translated into Chinese as ay — 
miao kao, “wonderfully high.” 

119 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

meant by ‘great.’ The myriad dharmas are within the 
nature of all people. If you regard all people, the bad as 
well as the good, without grasping or rejecting, without 
producing a defiling attachment, your mind will be like 
empty space. Therefore it is said to be ‘great,’ ‘Maha.’” 

Commentary: 

Empty space not only holds all good things, it includes all 
bad people as well. Empty space would never say, “You bad 
person! Get out of my empty space! Good people, come on in!” 

In the same way, you should see good and bad people 
without being attached to the good or repulsed by the bad. As I 
have told you before, bad people have something in them which 
is extremely good. You should hope that they reform. I have 
many disciples who do not obey me. I tell them to go south and 
all day long they run north; I tell them to go east and they go 
west. Although they disobey, I wait patiently because I know the 
time will come when they will change. 

All good and all bad are included within the self-nature; you 
should neither grasp it nor cast it aside. Grasping and rejecting 
are defiling attachments. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the mouth of the confused 
person speaks, but the mind of the wise person practices. 
There are deluded men who sit still with empty minds, 
vainly thinking of nothing and declaring that to be 
something great. One should not speak with these people 
because of their deviant views. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the capacity of the mind is 
vast and great, encompassing the Dharma realm. Its 

120 

Chapter II. Prajna 

function is to understand clearly and distinctly. Its 
correct function is to know all. All is one; one is all. 
Coming and going freely, the mind’s substance is 
unobstructed. That is Prajna.” 

Commentary: 

The deluded person does not do what must be done. He 
merely talks. A wise person, on the other hand, always puts 
principle into practice, not with head-mouth zen, but with 
constant cultivation. 

The Great Master said, “You are all very wise. The vast mind 
pervades the all-inclusive Dharma realm. It is like a mirror; 
when things come, it reflects them; when things go, it is empty. 
The true mind knows everything when it is used. To have Prajna 
is to have complete understanding and be free of all stupidity.” 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, all Prajna wisdom is 
produced from one’s own nature; it does not enter from 
the outside. Using the intellect correctly is called the 
natural function of one’s true nature. One truth is all 
truth. The mind has the capacity for great things, and is 
not meant for practicing petty ways. Do not talk about 
emptiness with your mouth all day and in your mind fail 
to cultivate the conduct that you talk of. That would be 
like a common person calling himself the king of a 
country, which cannot be. People like that are not my 
disciples.” 

121 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

Do not seek Prajna outside your self-nature. Do not make the 
mistake of using the intellect, the discriminating mind. The self- 
nature is not meant for small things. 

The Great Master said, “Do not say, ‘Empty, empty, empty, 
Prajna, Prajna, Prajna...’ People who do that are not my 
disciples.” Why? Because they don’t listen. I tell them not to get 
attached to emptiness, and they get attached to emptiness. I tell 
them not to get attached to existence and they get attached to 
existence. I tell them not to have sexual desire, and they still do 
not cut it off. “Oh, no problem,” they say, “Slowly, slowly.” 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, what is meant by ‘Prajna?’ 
Prajna in our language means wisdom. Everywhere and 
at all times, in thought after thought, remain undeluded 
and practice wisdom constantly; that is Prajna conduct. 
Prajna is cut off by a single deluded thought. By one wise 
thought, Prajna is produced. Worldly men, deluded and 
confused, do not see Prajna. They speak of it with their 
mouths, but their minds are always deluded. They 
constantly say of themselves, ‘I cultivate Prajna!’ and 
though they continually speak of emptiness, they are 
unaware of true emptiness. Prajna, without form or 
mark, is just the wisdom mind. If thus explained, just this 
is Prajna wisdom.” 

Commentary: 

If you have Prajna, then in thought after thought you clearly 
understand; in thought after thought you are not confused; in 
thought after thought you have no ignorance. 

122 

Chapter II. Prajna 

“Prajna is cut off by a single deluded thought.” To speak of 
it as “cut off’ is merely an analogy. Actually it is not cut off. 
How could proper wisdom, which is without production or 
destruction, be cut off? “Cutting off’ merely describes the 
moment of delusion, because at that moment Prajna is not 
apparent. 

“By one wise thought Prajna is produced.” When you are not 
deluded or confused, Prajna is produced. I will give you an 
example of how confusion cuts off Prajna: When people say that 
drinking is harmful, smoking is not good, and taking confusing 
drugs is bad, and you do not believe it, you cut off Prajna. If you 
change, you give rise to Prajna and true intelligence. When 
someone tries to teach you, but you refuse to understand or 
believe, that is delusion. In short, delusion is to know clearly that 
something is wrong, but to go ahead and do it anyway. Such 
delusion cuts off Prajna. The great majority of people in this 
world are deeply deluded, for they do not see Prajna and they do 
not know how to cultivate it. 

Their mouths speak about wisdom, but their actions betray 
their stupidity. They talk about Prajna saying, “Emptiness is 
Prajna. There are twenty kinds of emptiness related to Prajna. 
You should empty everything.” But they do not know true 
emptiness. Perhaps they understand a little of the Sutras, or 
recite a few lines of a mantra, but even though they speak they 
do not change their own faults and therefore do not recognize 
true emptiness. 

You must give up ignorance, bad habits, faults, and 
obstructions, if you are to understand true emptiness. 

“Prajna, without form or mark, is the wisdom mind.” 
Wisdom has no form or characteristic. Didn’t the Sixth Patriarch 
just say that Prajna is neither long nor short, neither square nor 
round, neither big nor small? Nor is it green, yellow, red, white 

123 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

or black. What is it, then? It is the wise mind, free from 
ignorance, which knows right dharmas from wrong dharmas. 

Sutra: 

What is meant by Paramita? It is a Sanskrit word 
which in our language means ‘arrived at the other shore,’ 
and is explained as ‘apart from production and 
extinction.” When one is attached to states of being, 
production and extinction arise like waves on water. That 
is what is meant by ‘this shore.’ To be apart from states 
of being, with no production or extinction, is to be like 
freely flowing water. That is what is meant by ‘the other 
shore.’ Therefore it is called ‘Paramita’. 

Commentary: 

To reach the other shore is to be separated from birth and 
death. This shore is birth and death; the other shore is Nirvana. 
To go from this shore to the other, you must cross the great sea 
of afflictions. Because there are afflictions, there is also birth, 
death, and Nirvana. If you have no afflictions, then birth and 
death are Nirvana and Nirvana is birth and death. Birth, death, 
and Nirvana are nothing more than names. 

The absence of birth and death is Nirvana. If you have no 
afflictions, then in the midst of birth and death you have no birth 
and death. We are born and we die because of affliction. This is 
very important and you should all remember it: birth and death 
exist because of afflictions; affliction exists because of 
ignorance; and ignorance is simply whatever you don’t 
understand. 

124 

Chapter II. Prajna 

What don’t you understand? What do you understand? 
Knowing you do not understand is ignorance. Knowing you do 
understand is Prajna. There is just that small difference. 

“When one is attached to states of being, production and 
extinction arise like waves on water.” What is meant by the other 
shore? What is Nirvana? Nirvana is like water without waves. 
When the wind rises, the waves swell. The wind of ignorance, 
the waves of affliction are “this shore.” 

“To be apart from states, with no production or extinction, is 
to be like freely flowing water.” The principle is clear: the nature 
is like water, the water of wisdom. When there are no waves, 
there is no birth and death. 

We should work hard to understand why our minds have so 
many extraneous thoughts. These thoughts are like so many 
waves. Without them there would be no production or 
extinction, no birth or death. With production and extinction you 
are on this shore, but if you separate yourself from production 
and extinction you are like freely flowing water, permeating the 
universe with wisdom. That is what is meant by ‘the other 
shore.’ 

That section of text is very useful. Use a little effort and you 
will understand it and derive from it inexhaustible benefit. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, deluded people recite with 
their mouths, but while they recite they live in falsehood 
and in error. When there is practice in every thought, 
that is the true nature. You should understand this 
dharma, which is the Prajna dharma; and cultivate this 
conduct, which is the Prajna conduct. Not to cultivate is 
to be a common person, but in a single thought of 
cultivation, you are equal to the Buddhas.” 

125 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

In each thought, avoid doing stupid things. If you understand 
this dharma, you realize that Prajna is to refrain from stupidity. 
What is stupidity? Doing what you absolutely should not do. 
Most important is the matter of sexual desire. You absolutely 
should not give rise to sexual desire, for when it arises you get 
confused and forget everything. You forget Prajna, you forget 
Paramita. At that time you cannot even recite their names. You 
become involved in it and no longer pay attention to principle. 
Although it is the stupidest thing one can do, people still like to 
do it. They want to be stupid instead of wanting to cultivate the 
Prajna dharma. If you want to cultivate and practice Prajna for 
even a single thought, you must cut off desire and cast out love. 
The absence of sexual desire is the practice of Prajna and “in a 
single thought of cultivation, you are equal to the Buddhas.” 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, common people are 
Buddhas and affliction is Bodhi. Past thoughts deluded 
are the thoughts of a common person. Future thoughts 
enlightened are the thoughts of a Buddha. Past thoughts 
attached to states of being are afflictions, and future 
thoughts separate from states of being are Bodhi.” 

Commentary: 

Where does the Buddha come from? He starts out as a 
common person. Yes, the Buddha was a common person who 
cultivated and eventually achieved Buddhahood. Why are we 
common people? Simply because we do not cultivate the Prajna 
dharma. Our nature flows out and becomes emotion; our 
emotions flow out and become desire. Common people are that 

126 

Chapter II. Prajna 

way. But the returning of desire to one’s own nature, so that one 
is unmoved by ignorance: that is the Buddha. 

“Affliction is Bodhi.” Without affliction there is no Bodhi. 
So you say, “Then I will not get rid of my afflictions. I will keep 
them.” If you keep them, they are still afflictions, and afflictions 
are just afflictions. You should use a scientific method to temper 
your afflictions. How? Actually, this change is no change, it is 
merely a returning to your original nature. 

My hand, for example, has a palm and a back to it. The back 
of the hand represents affliction and the palm represents Bodhi. 
All you need to do is flip it over and everything is all right. There 
is no addition or subtraction required. Just turn it over! If you do 
not turn it over, you are off by just that margin, and affliction is 
affliction and Bodhi is Bodhi. But as soon as you turn it around, 
affliction is Bodhi and birth and death is Nirvana. I have often 
spoken of this. At Berkeley I said: 

Affliction is Bodhi, ice is water, 
Birth and death and Nirvana are empty dharmas. 

If you understand, then dharmas are also empty. If you do not 
understand, then there are still dharmas. You should understand 
that people and dharmas are both empty. 

“Past thoughts deluded are the thoughts of a common person. 
Future thoughts enlightened are the thoughts of a Buddha.” With 
stupid thoughts, you are common person; with wisdom and 
enlightenment, you are a Buddha. 

“Past thoughts attached to states of being are afflictions, and 
future thoughts separate from states of being are Bodhi.” When 
thought is attached to states, affliction arises. You may think, 
“This is San Francisco. It surely isn’t the same as New York!” 
Fundamentally San Francisco and New York are the same. They 
are both big cities. But you make distinctions. “In San 

127 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Francisco,” you say, “there is no snow, but New York has lots of 
snow.” This is just the discriminating mind. Basically the two 
cities are the same. 

If you are unattached to states of being, you will not have so 
much affliction. If you do not use your discriminating mind, 
there is no affliction. Past thoughts, which were attached to 
states, discriminated between San Francisco and New York, and 
therefore affliction arose. A later thought, which is unattached, 
makes you say, “They are empty! San Francisco and New York 
are the same. Why bother to discriminate one from the other?” If 
you do not discriminate, that is Bodhi. 

It is easy to speak that way, but putting down all 
discrimination is another matter. That is difficult. When you 
understand that kind of state, there is no home and no country. 
There is nothing at all. This is to “produce that thought which is 
nowhere supported.” It is also to “produce that body which is 
nowhere supported.” Not dwelling anywhere, you can manifest 
a body that can go everywhere. Is this not wonderful dharma? It 
is nothing less than Bodhi. There’s no need to sigh. If you can be 
enlightened, then you are enlightened. If you can’t be yet, then 
slowly, slowly, you can be. 

Nature in samadhi, 
Demons defeated: 
Everyday—happiness. 

False thought 
not arising: 
Everywhere-peace. 

When your mind is in samadhi, there is not so much false 
thinking. Everyday you are happy and at peace. Why are you 
unhappy now? Because of false thoughts. Without false 

128 

Chapter II. Prajna 

thoughts, every place is the Land of Ultimate Bliss**, and you 
can “produce that body which is nowhere supported.” 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, Maha Prajna Paramita is 
the most honored, the most supreme, the foremost. It 
does not stay; it does not come or go. All Buddhas of the 
three periods of time emerge from it. You should use 
great wisdom to destroy affliction, defilement, and the 
five skandhic heaps. With such cultivation as that you 
will certainly realize the Buddha Way, transforming the 
three poisons into morality, concentration, and wisdom. 

Commentary: 

The Great Master again addressed the assembly, saying, “In 
the self-nature of each of you there is limitless wisdom. Maha 
Prajna Paramita is originally fully present within your self- 
nature. You need not seek it outside. 

“Tt does not stay; it does not come or go.” The Prajna wisdom 
of your self-nature is unattached. All Buddhas of the three 
periods of time, the past, present and future, issue from Maha 
Prajna Paramita-the highest, most supreme, most honored, 
number one dharma. 

“You should use this great wisdom, not small wisdom, to 
destroy affliction, defilement and the five skandhic heaps of 
form, feelings, perceptions, impulses and consciousness. 
Without Prajna you cannot see that the five heaps are empty, and 
therefore you have affliction and are unable to cut off 
defilement. If you wish to have genuine Prajna, you must 

33. Paradise, the pure land of Amitabha Buddha. 

129 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

‘illumine and view the five skandhas all as empty,’ as 
Avalokiteshvara did when deeply practicing the Prajna 
Paramita. Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva worked a long time 
practicing the deep Prajna Paramita. He could not, in just a short 
time, illumine and view the five heaps as empty. If you practice 
the deep Prajna Paramita, you can see the five heaps in this way, 
and when you destroy all affliction and attachment to sense- 
objects, the original Prajna nature manifests itself. 

“With such cultivation as that, you will certainly realize the 
Buddha Way, transforming the three poisons into morality, 
concentration, and wisdom.” There is no doubt that you will 
realize the Way, turning greed, hatred, and stupidity into 
morality, concentration, and wisdom. Let’s see whether or not 
you can change. If you change, you will dwell in Prajna; if you 
do not change, you will wander among the deluded. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, my Dharma-door*4 

produces 84,000°° wisdoms from the one Prajna. Why? 
Because worldly people have 84,000 kinds of defilement. 
In the absence of defilement, wisdom is always present, 
since it is not separate from the self-nature. 
“Understand that this dharma is just no-thought, no- 
remembrance, non-attachment, and the non-production 
of falsehood and error. Use your own true-suchness 
nature, and, by means of wisdom, contemplate and 
illuminate all dharmas without grasping or rejecting 

34. The Dharma doors are the doctrines, discourses, and wisdom of the Buddhas, the 
cultivation of which lead to enlightenment. 

35. This term is used in the general sense for a great number. 

130 

Chapter II. Prajna 

them. That is to see one’s own nature and realize the 
Buddha Way. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, if you wish to enter the 
extremely deep Dharma realm and the Prajna samadhi, 
you must cultivate the practice of Prajna. Hold and recite 
The Diamond Prajna Sutra and that way you will see your 
own nature.” 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “From one kind of wisdom, 
measureless Prajnas are produced.” These 84,000 kinds of 
wisdom are just 84,000 kinds of Prajna. If you change the 
defilement of external objects, it becomes wisdom. 

Do not use your discriminating consciousness to contemplate 
and illuminate all dharmas. Use wisdom. 

If you wish to enter the Sutra store and have wisdom like the 
sea, if you wish to master all dharmas and the Prajna Samadhi, 
you must cultivate the Prajna conduct. How do you practice the 
Prajna Dharma-door? Hold and recite The Diamond Prajna 
Sutra. Because the Sixth Patriarch became enlightened upon 
hearing The Diamond Sutra, he tells everyone, “You should all 
recite The Diamond Sutra. Hold it in your mind. Do not be 
distracted or forgetful. Hold The Diamond Sutra and you will see 
your own nature.” 

In reciting Sutras it is essential to avoid giving rise to false 
thinking and extraneous thoughts. Once there was a man who 
recited The Diamond Sutra every day. One night he dreamt that 
a ghost asked him to take him across to a more favorable rebirth 
just as we perform the Ullambana ceremony on the fifteenth day 
of the seventh month in order to take across parents from this and 
past lives. The ghost said, “Please recite a Sutra to take me 
across.” 

131 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“How many times shall I recite it?” the man asked. 

The ghost said, “One recitation will be enough.” 

The next day, halfway through the recitation, one of the 
man’s servants brought him a cup of tea. He pushed the cup 
aside, thinking, “I do not want it,” and continued to recite. 

That evening the ghost returned. ““You promised to recite the 
Sutra for me,” he said, “but you only recited half of it.” 

“What do you mean?” the man replied, “I recited the whole 
Sutra.” 

The ghost said, “You recited the whole Sutra, but halfway 
through you thought, ‘I do not want it,’ so the merit from the 
second half of the recitation was lost.” 

The man then realized what happened. “Yes,” he replied “I 
did think, ‘do not want,’ but it was tea I did not want, not the 
Sutra’s merit.” 

It took only these words “I do not want” halfway through the 
recitation to convince the ghosts and spirits that he did not want 
the merit. Probably the ghosts took the merit for themselves. The 
man said, “I will recite it again.” This time he recited without 
interruption and the next evening the ghost happily bowed to 
him in thanks for the compassionate recitation. 

So when you recite The Diamond Sutra do not think, “I do 
not want.” Reciting “Subhuti*®, Subhuti, I don’t want Subhuti,” 
Subhuti will probably run away. 

Sutra: 

“You should know that the merit and virtue of this 
Sutra is immeasurable, unbounded, and indescribable, as 
the Sutra text itself clearly states. 

36 Tt was Subhuti, the foremost of the Buddha’s disciples in understanding 
emptiness, that the Buddha addressed when he spoke The Diamond Sutra. 

132 

Chapter II. Prajna 

“This Dharma-door is the Superior Vehicle, taught 
for people of great wisdom and superior faculties. When 
people of limited faculties and wisdom hear it, their 
minds give rise to doubt. 

“Why is that? Take for example the rain which the 
heavenly dragons shower on Jambudvipa>’. Cities and 
villages drift about in the flood like thorns and leaves. But 
if the rain falls on the great sea, its waters neither 
increase nor decrease. 

“If people of the Great Vehicle, the Most Superior 
Vehicle, hear The Diamond Sutra, their minds open up, 
awaken, and understand. They then know that their 
original nature itself possesses the wisdom of Prajna. 
Because they themselves use this wisdom constantly to 
contemplate and illuminate, they do not rely on written 
words. 

“Take for example the rain water. It does not come 
from the sky. The truth is that the dragons cause it to fall 
in order that all living beings, all plants and trees, all 
those with feeling and those without feeling may receive 
its moisture. In a hundred streams it flows into the great 
sea and there unites in one substance. The wisdom of the 
Prajna of the original nature of living beings acts the 
same way.” 

Commentary: 

People without good roots say, “The Diamond Sutra is 
meaningless! What good points does reciting it have? If you 

37. Every world system contains one sun, one moon, and one Mount Sumeru as well 
as four great continents. Jambudvipa is the continent located south of Mount 
Sumeru; it is the continent upon which we live. 

133 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

recite it every day, can you go without eating and still live? Keep 
reciting and we will see if you can go without eating.” People of 
shallow roots and wisdom do not believe in this Sutra. 

The great sea represents people of great roots and energy. As 
soon as they hear this dharma, they realize that Prajna is 
originally complete within the self-nature, and so they believe it. 
People of small roots and wisdom, however, are like grass and 
leaves which float on the surface of the water and sink as soon 
as it rains. They doubt the Great Vehicle Dharma. 

Reflecting within, it is not necessary for those of great 
wisdom to be highly literate in order to understand Prajna 
wisdom. 

The Prajna wisdom of the self-nature of living beings is just 
like the rain from the heavens which flows into the great sea. The 
sea represents our inherent wisdom. No matter how much rain 
falls, the sea neither increases nor decreases. 

The Buddhadharma is like a great sea; 
Only those with faith can enter. 

It may also be said, “Only those with wisdom can enter,” 
because without wisdom it is difficult to enter this sea. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, when people of limited 
faculties hear this Sudden Teaching, they are like the 
plants and trees with shallow roots which, washed away 
by the great rain, are unable to grow. But at the same 
time, the Prajna wisdom which people of limited faculties 
possess is fundamentally no different from the Prajna 
that men of great wisdom possess. 

134 

Chapter II. Prajna 

“Hearing this Dharma, why do they not become 
enlightened? It is because the obstacle of their deviant 
views is a formidable one and the root of their afflictions 
is deep. It is like when thick clouds cover the sun: if the 
wind does not blow, the sunlight will not be visible. 

“Prajna wisdom is itself neither great nor small. 
Living beings differ because their own minds are either 
confused or enlightened. Those of confused mind look 
outwardly to cultivate in search of the Buddha. Not 
having awakened to their self-nature yet, they have small 
roots. 

“When you become enlightened to the Sudden 
Teaching, you do not grasp onto the cultivation of 
external things. When your own mind constantly gives 
rise to right views, afflictions and defilement can never 
stain you. That is what is meant by seeing your own 
nature.” 

Commentary: 

Deluded people do not become enlightened because their 
deviant views are too strong and too formidable an obstruction, 
and cause them to disbelieve. Their ignorance is great and they 
give rise to much affliction, which is like thick clouds covering 
the sun. The sunlight is simply the Prajna of your self-nature and 
the clouds are your deviant views and afflictions. If no wind 
blows the clouds away, the sunlight will not shine through. 

Some living beings are heavily afflicted by bad habits. 
Having created a great deal of bad karma, they are confused. 
Those with fewer bad habits and lighter karma can become 
enlightened. The confused person seeks the Dharma outside his 
own mind. Seeking outwardly, he does not recognize the 

135 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

originally complete Buddha of his own self-nature. The more he 
seeks the Buddha outside the farther away he goes. 

You should enlighten yourself and not seek outside. If you 
hear the Sudden Teaching you may become enlightened right 
away. Understand the Prajna of your own nature and always hold 
to right knowledge and vision. You will then be without 
affliction or defilement. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the ability to cultivate the 
conduct of not dwelling inwardly or outwardly, of coming 
and going freely, of casting away the grasping mind, and 
of unobstructed penetration, is basically no different 
from The Prajna Sutra.” 

Commentary: 

Inside there is no body and mind, outside there is no world. 
But this is not dull emptiness. It is not to say, “My body and mind 
do not exist; the world does not exist!’ and then to fall into 
vacuity. What is spoken of here is non-attachment: non- 
attachment to the body, to the mind, and to the world. Then you 
may “come and go freely.” 

Coming here, going there, coming back to the body and 
mind, going out into the Dharma Realm, you are free if you are 
unattached to the coming and the going. If you are attached, you 
are in bondage. 

Unattached, you are free with respect to life and death. “If I 
want to live, I live. If I want to die, I die.” You asked, “Is this 
suicide?” No. You need simply sit down, enter Dhyana Samadhi, 
and go. You need not take poison to make sure than you will die. 
Isn’t this freedom? If it were not freedom, you would not be able 

136 

Chapter II. Prajna 

to go. How was the Third Patriarch, Seng Ts’an, able to reach up 
and grasp the limb of a tree and, while hanging there, die? How 
could he enter Nirvana in this way? He could do this because he 
was free to live or die, free to come or go. 

If I wish to live, then I may never die. 
If I wish to die, I die right now. 

This is what is meant by “coming and going freely.” 

If you are free to come and go, you can end your life even 
while in the midst of talking, just like the Great Master Tao 
Sheng. He was really a good sport. The first part of The 
Mahaparinirvana Sutra said that the icchantikas, those of little 
faith, do not possess the Buddha nature, but Tao Sheng 
disagreed: “I say that icchantikas do have the Buddha nature!” 

Everyone said, “He’s crazy! He’s mentally ill! He knows 
what the Sutra says, yet he deliberately contradicts it.” They 
scolded him, they shunned him. “Get out of here,” they said. 

Master Tao Sheng then made a vow. He said, “If my 
explanation of Dharma is in agreement with the Buddha’s Sutras 
and the Buddha’s Mind, then in the future I shall end my life 
while lecturing from the Dharma seat. But if I have spoken 
contrary to the Buddha’s Mind, this vow will not be fulfilled.” 

He then went into the mountains and lectured on Sutras to the 
rocks and ragged boulders. When the rocks heard him, they 
nodded their heads in acceptance of his principles. 

When Sheng, the Venerable, 
spoke the Dharma, 

Even the rocks 
bowed. 

137 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

He continued to lecture on Sutras until once when, 
mysteriously and wonderfully, he paused while lecturing and 
died sitting in the Dharma seat. The assembly looked up and 
cried, “He has gone to rebirth!” 

Wasn’t he a good sport? This is what is meant by “coming 
and going freely.” 

You say, “Dharma Master, I quite agree with you. I don’t 
want to be attached. In fact, I don’t want to follow the rules. 
After all, the rules are just an attachment.” Wrong! If you can 
“cast away your grasping mind” and be unattached, you should 
be unattached to what is wrong, but you should not be 
unattached to what is right. For example, if you follow the rules 
you can become a Buddha. But if you think, “I am not attached. 
I don’t have to follow the rules,” then you cannot become a 
Buddha. 

Go down the right road. 
Retreat from the wrong one. 

Do not become attached to principles which are in opposition 
to the Way, but grasp and hold tightly to those principles which 
are in accord with it. Holding to and reciting may be an 
attachment, but holding to and reciting The Diamond Sutra is 
cultivation. 

Do not say, “I am attached. I have a small fault which I do 
not want to give up. What is more, I do not want anyone to know 
about it.” That is to be even more attached. “All right then,” you 
say, “I don’t care if anyone knows about it. If people say I am 
wrong, I will be unattached and pay no attention.” That is 
deviant knowledge and deviant views. The more you cultivate 
that way, the farther you drift from the Buddhadharma. 

Once you have left attachments behind, you can penetrate 
and understand without obstruction and be without obstacles to 

138 

Chapter II. Prajna 

your progress. The ability to cultivate this conduct “‘is basically 
no different from The Prajna Sutra.” If you cannot cultivate this 
conduct, you will be in opposition to the principle of The 
Diamond Sutra, but if you can cultivate, it is Prajna wisdom 
manifest. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, all Sutras and writings of 
the Great and Small Vehicles, the twelve divisions of 
Sutras, have been devised because of people and 
established because of the nature of wisdom. If there were 
no people the ten thousand dharmas would not exist. 
Therefore you should know that all dharmas are 
originally postulated because of people, and all Sutras are 
spoken for their sakes.” 

Commentary: 

On the higher plane, a Sutra tallies with the principles of all 
the Buddhas, and below, it tallies with the opportunities for 
teaching living beings; for that reason the word Sutra took on the 
meaning “‘to tally.” 

The twelve divisions of Sutra text are: 

1. Prose; 

Verse; 

Transmitting of Predictions; 
Interpolations; 

SS come ae Ss 

The speaking of Dharma without its having been 
requested; 

6. Discussion of causes and conditions; 
7. Analogies; 

139 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

8. Events of the past lives of the Buddhas; 

9. Events of the past lives of the Bodhisattvas and 
disciples; 

10. Writings which explain principle in an especially 
expansive way; 

11. Dharma which has never been spoken before; 
12. Commentaries. 

Sutras exist because people exist. If there were no people, the 
Sutras would be useless. In the same way, troubles exist only 
because there are people to have them. The Dharma teaches 
people how to end their troubles; to get rid of the 84,000 kinds 
of defilement and trouble, the Buddha teaches 84,000 Dharma- 
doors But if there were no people, the troubles would never have 
arisen. 

The Buddha spoke all Dharmas 
For the minds of human beings. 
If there were no minds 

Of what use would Dharmas be? 

Sutra: 

“Some people are deluded and some are wise; the 
deluded are small people and the wise are great people. 
The deluded question the wise and the wise teach 
Dharma to the deluded. When the deluded people 
suddenly awaken and understand, their minds open to 
enlightenment and they are no longer different from the 
wise. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, unenlightened, the 
Buddha is a living being. At the time of a single 
enlightened thought, the living being is a Buddha. 

140 

Chapter II. Prajna 

Therefore you should know that the ten thousand 
dharmas exist totally within your own mind. Why don’t 
you, from within your own mind, suddenly see the true 
suchness of your original nature? 

“The Bodhisattva-shila Sutra says, ‘Our fundamental 
self-nature is clear and pure.’ If we recognize our own 
mind and see the nature, we shall all perfect the Buddha 
Way. The Vimalakirti Nirdesha Sutra says, ‘Just then, 
suddenly regain your original mind.’” 

Commentary: 

If, in the very shortest space of time, the space of a thought, 
you suddenly understand, you wake up and become a Buddha. 
Confused, you are a living being; enlightened, you are a Buddha. 

One confused thought: 
you are a living being. 
Thought after thought confused: 
thought after thought, a living being. 
One enlightened thought: 
you are a Buddha. 
Thought after thought enlightened: 
thought after thought, a Buddha. 

What does it mean to be enlightened? Ask yourself! 
Ultimately, what advantage do emotion and desire have? 
Emotion and desire harm your body; that is a serious problem. 
They rob you of your life; they make you stupid. If in thought 
after thought you have desire, then thought after thought you are 
deluded. It is said, 

141 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Karma ended, emotion emptied, 
is the true Buddha. 

Karma heavy, emotion turbid, 
is the living being. 

Enlightenment is here: put down defiled thoughts and pick up 
the pure. What are defiled thoughts? Thoughts of desire are 
defiled thoughts. I will make it even clearer: thoughts of sexual 
desire are defiled thoughts. You should clearly recognize your 
thoughts of sexual desire. Should you give way to sexual desire 
with your body, then the action of your body, your body-karma, 
is impure. If you talk about sex, the action of your mouth is 
impure. If you constantly think about sex, your mind-karma is 
impure. However, if you are without offense in body, mouth, and 
mind, you are not far from Buddhahood. 

Most people turn their backs on enlightenment and unite 
themselves with the dust of external objects and states. Falling 
into states of emotion and desire they become defiled. Leaving 
emotion and desire behind and turning your back on the dust, 
you are united with enlightenment. You are clear and pure and 
can realize Buddhahood. However, as long as you have the 
slightest trace of defilement, you cannot realize Buddhahood; 
you remain a living being. One confused thought makes you a 
living being for the space of that thought. If every thought is 
confused, you are continually a living being. One enlightened 
thought makes you a Buddha for the space of that thought. If 
every thought is enlightened, you are always a Buddha. 

Do you see? It is very simple. Still, you need the help of a 
Good Knowing Advisor who will teach you that, in order to be 
clear and pure, it is of the utmost importance to be unselfish. Not 
working for your own benefit and being without greed, hatred, 

142 

Chapter II. Prajna 

stupidity, and a view of self, you may attain purity. That is 
enlightenment. 

Some people hear, “One enlightened thought; you are a 
Buddha,” and they say, “Everyone is a Buddha!” Right. All 
living beings are Buddhas, but they must first wake up to it. To 
say, “Everyone is a Buddha” when you are not enlightened is to 
be like the common person mentioned earlier in the Sutra who 
called himself the king. The real king would throw that man in 
prison. 

Heaven cannot hold two suns; 
The citizens cannot serve two kings. 

Why don’t you cultivate your own mind? Get rid of the 
defilement and then you can see your own nature as it truly is. 
See it right now. Do not say, “Wait a minute, wait a minute.” See 
it immediately! 

If you see your nature, you realize Buddhahood. If I see my 
nature, I realize Buddhahood. If someone else sees his nature he 
realizes Buddhahood. There is no inequality here. This principle 
is completely democratic: whoever sees his nature realizes 
Buddhahood. 

You need not wait. See right through it, and suddenly, you 
don’t know how, you are enlightened. Strange and unspeakably 
wonderful. You return to yourself and regain your original mind. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, when I was with the High 
Master Jen, I was enlightened as soon as I heard his 
words, and suddenly saw the true suchness of my own 
original nature. That is why I am spreading this method 
of teaching which leads students of the Way to become 

143 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

enlightened suddenly to Bodhi as each contemplates his 
own mind and sees his own original nature.” 

Commentary: 

“All of you of great knowledge, hear me!” said the Sixth 
Patriarch. “I have explained so much Dharma to you. Have you 
become enlightened yet? When I was with the High Master Jen, 
the Fifth Patriarch, I awoke as soon as I heard him speak. 

“T, the Sixth Patriarch, an illiterate barbarian, a stupid 
country person, met the High Master Jen.” The Master did not 
say the Fifth Patriarch’s full name, but merely said “Jen” as a 
gesture of respect. “The High Master Jen” he said, “endured the 
temper of many.” Those below him tried to pressure him into 
transmitting the Dharma to Shen Hsiu. The Fifth Patriarch was 
not even free to transmit the Dharma, but was forced to endure 
the tyranny of his own disciples. His name, Jen, means “to 
endure.” He endured, practicing the perfection of patience until, 
one day, the barbarian arrived. “I will give the Dharma to the 
barbarian,” the Fifth Patriarch thought, “and forget about all of 
you. Do you think you can bully a Patriarch? I will transmit the 
Dharma to someone who can’t even read. What use is your 
education now?” Thus, the High Master Jen ceased enduring and 
transmitted the Dharma to the Sixth Patriarch. 

The Sixth Patriarch was a friend who understood. “High 
Master,” he said, “you have suffered greatly!” Then he told the 
assembly, “I was enlightened as soon as I heard his words.” 

Why did the Fifth Patriarch transmit the Dharma to this 
barbarian? It was not just because he wanted to defy Shen Hsiu. 
Rather it was because this barbarian was so intelligent that, as 
soon as he heard the Fifth Patriarch speak, he said in reply, “So 
that’s how it is! My self-nature is originally pure. My self-nature 

144 

Chapter II. Prajna 

is originally bright and light. My self-nature is originally 
unmoving. How wonderful it is!” 

“Yes,” said the Fifth Patriarch, “you are right. It is just that 
way.” 

The Sixth Patriarch told the assembly, “I propagate this 
Sudden Teaching in order to cause all students of the Way to 
become enlightened suddenly to their own mind and see their 
own nature.” 

Sutra: 

“If you are unable to enlighten yourself, you must 
seek out a great Good Knowing Advisor, one who 
understands the Dharma of the Most Superior Vehicle 
and who will direct you to the right road. 

“Such a Good Knowing Advisor possesses great 
karmic conditions, which is to say that he will transform 
you and guide you and lead you to see your nature. It is 
because of the Good Knowing Advisor that all wholesome 
Dharmas can arise. All the Buddhas of the three periods 
of time, and the twelve divisions of Sutra texts as well, 
exist within the nature of people, originally complete 
within them. If you are unable to enlighten yourself, you 
should seek out the instruction of a Good Knowing 
Advisor who will lead you to see your nature.” 

Commentary: 

If you can’t enlighten yourself, you must seek out a bright- 
eyed knowing one, one who has “gone through.” 

Wishing to travel the mountain tracks, 
Ask someone who has taken the trip. 

145 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Ask him, “Where does this road lead?” If you do not ask 
someone who has traveled the road before, but instead ask a 
blind man for directions, the blind man will say, “Just keep 
walking. Go wherever you wish.” If you ask the blind man, “Is 
this emptiness?” he will say: “It certainly is. No one can hinder 
you here!” But is it really emptiness? 

The great Good Knowing Advisor understands the Dharma 
of the Superior Vehicle and directs you to the right road. 

If there is a great affinity between you, you may meet a 
bright-eyed knowing one who will teach you to understand your 
mind and see your nature. All good dharmas arise because of 
him. Your good roots flourish because he watches over their 
growth. He explains the Dharma to you every day and causes 
your good roots to grow. 

All the Buddhas of the past, present, and future and the 
twelve divisions of Sutra text are originally complete within 
your own nature. But if you cannot understand that, you should 
seek out the instruction of a Good Knowing Advisor. He will 
teach you to behold the pure and wonderful substance of your 
self-nature. 

Sutra: 

“If you are one who enlightens himself, you need not 
seek a teacher outside. If you insist that it is necessary to 
seek a Good Knowing Advisor in the hope of obtaining 
liberation, you are mistaken. Why? Within your own 
mind there is self-enlightenment which is a Knowing 
Advisor. 

“But if you give rise to deviant confusion, false 
thoughts, and perversions, although a Good Knowing 
Advisor external to you instructs you, he cannot save 
you.” 

146 

Chapter II. Prajna 

Commentary: 

If you seek outside yourself, you will not obtain it. You must 
enlighten yourself, by recognizing the Prajna of your self-nature. 
Your true Good Knowing Advisor is within your self-nature; he 
is simply your own wisdom. 

“Deviant” means “not right.” “Confusion” means, “lack of 
understanding.” Not understanding what? Not understanding 
what is right. For example, people have certain fondnesses. 
Some have the deviant confusion of sex. You should not regard 
these confusions as unimportant, for when you do, your 
confusion deepens and the small confusions become large ones. 
Thinking the large confusions to be unimportant, you arrive at 
old age with old confusions and go to your death with death- 
confusions. Even at the time of death you are confused and 
unclear. How pitiful! 

“False thoughts” are untrue thoughts. They are vain and 
unreal. “Perversions” occur when you clearly know that 
something is wrong, but do it anyway. You understand perfectly 
well that it is not right, but you say, “It is right! It is right!” 

If you continue to do things contrary to Dharma, you are 
perverted. You are perverted when you not only do these things 
yourself, but influence others to do them as well. To discuss this 
thoroughly would take a long time. To have success, students of 
the Buddhadharma must not be perverted. If you have deviant 
confusion, false thoughts, and perversions, although a Good 
Knowing Advisor external to you, such as your good teacher or 
good friend, instructs you, he cannot save you. 

Your good teacher and worthy friend may try to help you, but 
if you refuse to obey him he can do no more. Your Good 
Knowing Advisor is not a policeman! If you break his laws, he 
cannot put you in jail. He can only hope that you will gradually 
change your faults. If living beings obey, the master is certainly 

147 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

pleased, but if they do not, although he cannot get angry, he is 
unhappy in his heart because he has no way to help them. 

Sutra: 

“If you give rise to genuine Prajna contemplation and 
illumination, in the space of an instant all false thoughts 
are extinguished. If you recognize your self-nature, in a 
single moment of enlightenment you will arrive at the 
stage of a Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

“Genuine” means “not deviant and confused.” “Prajna” is 
genuine wisdom. To “contemplate and illuminate” is to slice off 
deviant confusion, false thought, and upside-down actions with 
the sword of wisdom. If you do not swing the wisdom-sword and 
cut through your deviant confusion, your false thinking, and 
your upside-down actions, you are deluded, lack wisdom and do 
upside-down things. 

Recognize your own original nature. Understand it once, 
and, in that one moment of enlightenment, you will go to the 
Buddha realm. On the other hand, where do you go in one 
moment of confusion? To the ghost realm. 

Enlightened, 
a Buddha. 
Confused, 
a living being. 
In the space of an instant all false thoughts are extinguished, 
destroyed by your wisdom-sword like ice melted by the sun. 

148 

Chapter II. Prajna 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisor, when you contemplate and 
illuminate with the wisdom which brightly penetrates 
within and without, you recognize your original mind. 

“The recognition of your original mind is the original 
liberation. The attainment of liberation is the Prajna 
Samadhi, is no-thought.” 

Commentary: 

Using your inherent wisdom, observe inwardly the mind and 
body and outwardly the world. Completely understand both, as 
you would look through a pane of glass: from the outside seeing 
in and from the inside seeing out. Inwardly, there is no body and 
mind, and, outwardly, there is no world. But, although there is 
no body nor mind nor world, the body and mind and the world 
function in accord with one another. Although they function 
together, they are not attached to one another. This is called 
“recognizing your own original mind.” The original self-nature, 
the true mind, clearly penetrates within and without. 

The recognition of your original mind is liberation. When 
you are not attached to sense objects or false thought, you obtain 
liberation. This is the Prajna Samadhi of your self-nature and is 
simply no-thought. 

I previously spoke about non-recollection, no-thought, and 
non-falseness. Non-recollection is morality, no-thought is 
Samadhi, and non-falseness (i.e. being without false thought) is 
wisdom. When morality, Samadhi, and wisdom all manifest, 
greed, hatred, and delusion disappear. 

149 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

“What is meant by ‘no-thought?’ No-thought means 
to view all dharmas with a mind undefiled by attachment. 
The function pervades all places but is nowhere attached. 
Merely purify your original mind and cause the six 
consciousnesses to go out the six gates, to be undefiled 
and unmixed among the six objects, to come and go freely 
and to penetrate without obstruction. That is the Prajna 
Samadhi and freedom and liberation, and it is called the 
practice of no-thought.” 

Commentary: 

No-thought means to view all dharmas with a mind undefiled 
by attachment. When the mind is undefiled by attachment, 
dharmas are empty. If dharmas are empty, then why must you 
get attached to your bad habits and weaknesses? 

Someone hears this and wants to try to become unattached to 
dharmas by ignoring his faults. He may be unattached to 
dharmas but he can’t get rid of his faults. How can this be called 
“undefiled by attachment?” Since to be undefiled by attachment 
there must be no dharmas, there must even more emphatically be 
no faults. The Diamond Sutra says, “Even dharmas must be 
forsaken, so non-dharmas must be forsaken even more.” 

If you do not put down your bad habits and your faults, what 
kind of Buddhadharma do you study? I ask you! You are nothing 
but a fraud who cheats himself and cheats others. Students of the 
Dharma must definitely give up their faults. If you cannot, even 
though you may be able to explain a few sentences of Dharma, 
you are utterly useless. You are at the height of delusion. 

“Prajna Samadhi pervades all places” and illuminates all 
places, but is nowhere attached. It is just like empty space. 

150 

Chapter II. Prajna 

“Merely purify your original mind” so that it is undefiled and 
unattached, and cause the six consciousnesses (visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory, tactile and mental awareness) to go out the 
Six gates (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind) and among the 
six objects (forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touchables and objects 
of mind), but to be undefiled and untainted to come and go 
freely, and to penetrate without obstruction. 

If you examine this conglomeration, you will see that the six 
organs and six objects ordinarily unite to form a corporation. 
Where there is a corporation, there is defilement and mixing. Do 
not incorporate! 

They should freely come and go: 

The eyes view forms outside; 
Inside there is nothing. 

The ears hear sounds outside; 
But the mind does not know. 

What does this mean? You don’t understand? Then study the 
Buddhadharma diligently. 

At the time of unobstructed penetration, the ten thousand 
changes and the ten thousand transformations of the correct use 
are unhindered, unblocked and inexhaustible. “That is Prajna 
Samadhi, and freedom and liberation, and it is called the practice 
of no-thought.” 

Sutra: 

“Not thinking of the hundred things and constantly 
causing your thought to be cut off is called Dharma- 
bondage and is an extremist view.” 

151 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

If you sit, saying, “J am sitting here, not thinking of anything. 
I am thinking of nothing!” and in this way try to cut off your 
thought, you still have not cut off the thought of “not thinking of 
anything.” If you do this, you will be tied up in the dharmas, and 
will not obtain release. Thought, no-thought: falling into either 
of the two extremes is not the Middle Way. 

In telling you to awaken to the no-thought dharma, it is not 
to say that you should be like dead ashes or rotten wood. What 
use are ashes without fire? They are nothing but dirt. What use 
is rotten wood? You can’t burn it. If you sit, thinking, “Do not 
think! Do not think of the hundred things!” your thought of not 
thinking is itself a thought! 

Trying not to think is like trying to prevent the grass from 
growing by pounding on it with a rock and shouting, “Don’t 
come up!” You push the rock into the soil, but when you move 
it again the grass grows up thicker, stronger, and more dense 
than ever. 

Then how does one attain to the no-thought dharma? It 
requires the samadhi power that comes from having right, not 
deviant, thought. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, one who awakens to the 
no-thought dharma completely penetrates the ten 
thousand dharmas; one who awakens to the no-thought 
dharma sees all Buddha realms; one who awakens to the 
no-thought dharma arrives at the Buddha position.” 

152 

Chapter II. Prajna 

Commentary: 

Do you know the realms of all Buddhas? Do you know what 
their state is like? If you do, then you understand the no-thought 
dharma. “No,” you say, “I do not understand the Buddha 
realms.” Then you do not understand the no-thought dharma. 

Do not be like a certain person who does not know anything 
at all, who cannot even explain the Five Esoteric Meanings and 
the Seven Sutra Title Topics, but who still runs around 
“lecturing” on Sutras and cheating those who do not understand 
the Buddhadharma. People stream in like ants to hear him. They 
come marching, “deng, deng, deng.” What for? Who knows? 
Ultimately, what Buddhadharma do they study? That man reads 
an English translation of a Sutra aloud; he simply reads it. 
Anybody can read it: you can read it, he can read it—I couldn’t 
read it. Why? Because I can’t read English! 

To explain Sutras, one must explain every sentence and 
every word, every paragraph and every chapter. You say, “He 
doesn’t do it that way.” Of course he doesn’t. He doesn’t know 
how to, so how could he? 

Don’t march off with the ants. 

If you enlighten to the dharma of no-thought, you go to the 
Buddha position. Now, isn’t that important? 

When I explain Sutras, people come to hear, not ants. The 
people are few, but they come to study the Dharma, not to eat 
honey like ants. Here, we gather to eat bitterness; we don’t come 
to eat candy. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, those of future generations 
who obtain my Dharma should take up this Sudden 
Teaching Dharma door and with those of like views and 

153 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

like practice they should vow to receive and uphold it as 
if serving the Buddhas. To the end of their lives they 
should not retreat, and they will certainly enter the holy 
position. In this way it should be transmitted from 
generation to generation. It is silently transmitted. Do not 
hide away the orthodox Dharma and do not transmit it to 
those of different views and different practice who believe 
in other teachings, since it will harm them and ultimately 
be of no benefit.” 

Commentary: 

“All of you Good Knowing Advisors,” continued the Sixth 
Patriarch, “the Dharma was transmitted from Shakyamuni 
Buddha to Mahakashyapa, to Ananda, and so forth to 
Bodhidharma, and then to the Second Patriarch, the Third 
Patriarch, reaching to me, the Sixth Patriarch. You should 
transmit the Mind-Seal Dharma-door in just that way, from 
generation to generation. Do not hide the orthodox Dharma and 
transmit deviant dharma instead.” 

Why was the Great Master a Patriarch? Because he never 
slighted the lowly. When he was at Huang Mei, everyone looked 
down on him because he was an illiterate country person. He 
knew the pain of enduring ridicule himself, and so he did not 
slight others. He addressed everyone as “Good Knowing 
Advisors” whether they were or not. 

“You should not transmit this Mind-Seal to those of different 
views and practice,” he said. Why? 

Sutra: 

“I fear that deluded people may misunderstand and 
slander this Dharma-door, and will cut off their nature 

154 

Chapter II. Prajna 

which possesses the seed of Buddhahood for hundreds of 
ages and thousands of lifetimes. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, I have a verse of no-mark 
which you should all recite. Those at home and those who 
have left home should cultivate according to it. If you do 
not cultivate it, memorizing it will be of no use. Listen to 
my verse: 

With speech and mind both understood, 

Like the sun whose place is in space, 

Just spread the ‘seeing-the-nature way’ 
Appear in the world to destroy false doctrines. 

Dharma is neither sudden nor gradual, 
Delusion and awakening are slow and quick 
But deluded people cannot comprehend 
This Dharma-door of seeing-the-nature. 

Although it is said in ten thousand ways, 
United, the principles return to one; 

In the dark dwelling of defilements, 
Always produce the sunlight of wisdom. 

The deviant comes and affliction arrives, 

The right comes and affliction goes. 

The false and true both cast aside, 

In clear purity the state of no residue is attained. 

Bodhi is the original self-nature; 
Giving rise to a thought is wrong; 

155 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

156 

The pure mind is within the false: 
Only the right is without the three obstructions. 

If people in the world practice the Way, 

They are not hindered by anything. 

By constantly seeing their own transgressions, 
They are in accord with the Way. 

Each kind of form has its own way 
Without hindering one another; 
Leaving the Way to seek another way 
To the end of life is not to see the Way. 

A frantic passage through a life, 

Will bring regret when it comes to its end. 
Should you wish for a vision of the true Way, 
Right practice is the Way. 

If you don’t have a mind for the Way, 
You walk in darkness blind to the Way; 
If you truly walk the Way, 

You are blind to the faults of the world. 

If you attend to others’ faults, 

Your fault-finding itself is wrong; 
Others’ faults I do not treat as wrong; 
My faults are my own transgressions. 

Simply cast out the mind that finds fault, 
Once cast away, troubles are gone; 

Chapter II. Prajna 

When hate and love don’t block the mind, 
Stretch out both legs and then lie down. 

If you hope and intend to transform others, 
You must perfect expedient means. 

Don’t cause them to have doubts, and then 
Their self-nature will appear. 

The Buddhadharma ts here in the world; 
Enlightenment is not apart from the world. 
To search for Bodhi apart from the world 
Is like looking for a hare with horns. 

Right views are transcendental; 

Deviant views are all mundane. 

Deviant and right completely destroyed: 
The Bodhi nature appears spontaneously. 

This verse is the Sudden Teaching, 
Also called the great Dharma boat. 
Hear in confusion, pass through ages, 
In an instant’s space, enlightenment.” 

Commentary: 

“With speech and mind both understood.” Understanding 
speech is to know how to lecture on Sutras and explain the 
Dharma. Understanding the mind refers to the mind-ground 
Dharma door of Dhyana meditation. If you can lecture on Sutras, 
speak Dharma, and cultivate Dhyana meditation, you are “Like 
the sun whose place is in space;” you are like bright light which 
illuminates the void and yet is nowhere attached. 

157 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

999, 

“Just spread the ‘seeing-the-nature Way’”; the Dharma door 
which the Sixth Patriarch transmits teaches you to understand 
your mind and see your nature. Understand the mind and there 
are no difficulties. See your nature and there is no anxiety. When 
you see your original face, you understand the Buddhadharma. 

“Appear in the world to destroy false doctrines.” This 
Dharma-door exclusively speaks of transcendental principles, 
and destroys all heretical, non-Buddhist religions. 

Dharma is neither sudden nor gradual, 
Delusion and awakening are slow and quick. 

Essentially, the Dharma is neither sudden nor gradual. 
However, confused people must be taught to cultivate gradually, 
while wise, enlightened people understand the sudden Dharma. 
If you are stupid, you become enlightened a little slower. If you 
are intelligent, you become enlightened a little faster. 

Today I will tell you the plain truth. Everyday I lecture the 
sutras, but rarely do I speak plain truth. Today I'll say a little. 
Why? I can’t speak much plain truth because you won’t believe 
it. I say a little and you cannot believe it, so if I were to say more 
you would believe it even less. That’s because you don’t like to 
hear the truth, nor do you like to actually cultivate. So I have no 
way to speak true Dharma for you. I have to wait. I wait for an 
opportunity. And now an opportunity presents itself because we 
have come to this verse and the doctrine should be explained 
here. What is the Sudden Teaching? Sudden means, “cut it off.” 
Cut what off? Cut off your sexual desire. Can you do it or not? 
You say, “What’s the use of that?” Do you see? You don’t 
believe. Very well, then, I will not talk about it. If I say more, 
you will disbelieve even more strongly. That’s all there is to it. 
It’s just this much: 

158 

Chapter II. Prajna 

Cut Off Ignorance Immediately! 

Ignorance is just sexual desire. Can you cut it off? Can you? You 
can’t cut it off, and so you don’t believe in the true Dharma. 
When you do cut it off, you will attain the Sudden Teaching. 

What is the gradual teaching? “Slowly, slowly,” you say. “I 
can’t cut it off all at once. How can I put it down? How can I let 
it go?” The sudden becomes gradual. That’s all there is to it. Do 
you get the point? I give intelligent people this little bit and they 
cut it off. But stupid people can’t put their desire down. “I don’t 
believe this is the true Dharma,” they say. “I don’t believe this is 
the Sudden Teaching.” That’s why I have never spoken this way 
before. If you believed, you would have become a Buddha long 
ago. It’s just because you don’t believe that you are still 
wallowing in the mud, turning in the six paths of rebirth. If you 
want to turn, turn. Nobody is forcing you to stop. 

It is a question of sooner or later. You may not want to cut it 
off now, but when you decide to become a Buddha, you will 
certainly have to cut it off. 

But stupid people cannot comprehend 
This Dharma-door of seeing the nature. 

The Sudden Teaching is the Dharma-door of seeing the 
nature. If you cut off sexual desire you can understand your mind 
and see your nature. 

Don’t speak of this Dharma to stupid people. They cannot 
understand it and they won’t believe it, just as now, when I told 
you to cut it off and you couldn’t do it. Stupid people cannot 
comprehend, they cannot understand. If you tell them, they 
won’t believe you. 

159 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Although it is said in ten thousand ways, 
United, the principles return to one. 

There are a thousand, ten thousand, millions of Dharma- 
doors used to explain this principle. There are 84,000 Dharma- 
doors to counteract just this kind of affliction, just that kind of 
ignorance. But when you trace them to the root, they are all just 
one, just the Sudden Dharma which tells you to cut off ignorance 
immediately and manifest the Dharma-nature. 

In the dark dwelling of defilements, 
Always produce the sunlight of wisdom. 

Having affliction, you are in a dark room, but having 
wisdom, you are out in the dazzling sunlight. 

The deviant comes and affliction arrives, 
The right comes and affliction goes. 

Today I will give you a little basic Dharma. If I never say it, 
you will never know. Deviant refers to the arousing of sexual 
desire. Do not take it as happiness; it is an affliction. 

What is “right” is Prajna wisdom. Genuine wisdom breaks 
through ignorance and casts out affliction. 

The false and true both cast aside, 
In clear purity the state of no residue is attained. 

This is Nirvana without residue. You say, “The verse says, 
‘The false and true both cast aside’—I’ll ignore both of them!” If 
you ignore them, you are still in the dark dwelling. When you 
have transcended the deviant and the right, then they have no 
use. There is only “right” because there is “deviant;” there is 

160 

Chapter II. Prajna 

only “deviant” because there is “right.”” When neither one exists, 
that is clear purity, Nirvana without residue. 

Bodhi is the original self-nature; 
Giving rise to a thought is wrong. 

Do not seek Bodhi outside yourself. The enlightenment 
nature is already complete within the Prajna wisdom of your 
self-nature. Nevertheless you still give rise to false thoughts. 
Originally, in clear and pure Nirvana without residue, there is no 
thought, no recollection, and no falseness. It is complete in 
samadhi, morality, and wisdom. 

The pure mind is within the false: 
Only the right is without the three obstructions. 

The pure mind is within the false, like water in the ice; the ice 
has the potential to become water. 

In order to separate yourself from the three obstacles, you 
need only cultivate and uphold the right Dharma. The three 
obstacles are the karma obstacle, that is, all the karma you have 
created in past lives and in the present one; the retribution 
obstacle, that is, your body, which undergoes the obstructive 
effects of your karma; and the affliction obstacle, that is, all your 
troubles and worries. 

If people in the world practice the Way, 
They are not hindered by anything. 

You can realize the Way by success in any Dharma-door at 
all. But first you must understand the true Dharma. Then you can 
cultivate it walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, with no 
obstacles whatsoever. 

161 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

By constantly seeing their own transgressions, 
They are in accord with the Way. 

Mind your own business. Don’t watch other people, like a 
camera which can only take pictures of what is outside, but can’t 
take pictures of itself. You say, “That person is bad! He drinks, 
smokes, and takes drugs. No one can teach him. He steals! He 
kills! Just look at him!” You talk nothing but big talk; you only 
criticize others. You never ask yourself, “Did I kill today? Did I 
steal? Did I have deviant thoughts of lust? Did I lie or drink?” 
You never turn the light inward because you are too busy shining 
it outside. 

If you wish to practice the Way, you should cultivate 
yourself and see your own faults. Then you will be in accord 
with the Way. 

The Sixth Patriarch’s verse is excellent. It is profound, deep, 
and of inexhaustible use. It is simple and clear: anyone can 
understand it. If you can understand the meaning, and memorize 
it as well, it will greatly aid your cultivation. 

Each kind of form has its own way 
Without hindering one another; 

Everything which has a shape and an appearance is a kind of 
form. While dwelling in forms, if you are able to wake up and 
understand, to cut off desire and cast out love and be unattached 
to the forms, then you will naturally possess the Way. You need 
not look for it anywhere else. 

Leaving the Way to seek another way 
To the end of life is not to see the Way. 

If you understand and are unconfused by forms, then there is 
no difficulty and no annoyance. But if you leave the Way, 

162 

Chapter II. Prajna 

saying, “This is not the Way. I am going to find another way,” 
you are just adding a head on top of a head. 

If you see what happens and understand, 
you can transcend the world. 

If you see what happens and are confused 
you fall beneath the wheel. 

If you become confused and give rise to view delusion, you fall 
into the dust of external states and objects and to the end of your 
life you will not see the Way. 

A frantic passage through a life, 

Will bring regret when it comes to its end. 
Wishing for a vision of the true Way, 

Right practice is the way. 

When you arrive at the Way, everything you do from 
morning to night is in accord with Dharma. You do right and 
proper things, not deviant things. If you leave your daily 
activities and look elsewhere for the Way, your whole life will 
be suffering and when you are old you will have regrets. “I have 
wasted my life!” you will say. “If only I hadn’t drunk so much 
wine, I wouldn’t be so stupid now. If only I hadn’t gambled, I 
wouldn’t be so poor. If someone had just told me, I could have 
cultivated. But I never met a Good Knowing Advisor.” 

You met a Good Knowing Advisor, but you didn’t recognize 
him. His teaching passed by like the wind—in one ear and out the 
other. You never reformed your own faults and you never 
corrected your bad habits and so, at the end, you have regrets. 

Cultivate properly. Do not criticize others and wash their 
clothes for them, saying, “This person’s clothes are filthy! I'd 
better wash them. And look at him! He’s jealous. He’s afraid 

163 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

others are going to be better than he is.” This is called, “washing 
other people’s clothes.” 

If you don’t have a mind for the Way, 
You walk in darkness, blind to the Way. 

If you only do things in darkness, if you only do things which 
you do not wish others to see, you are not practicing the Way. 

If you truly walk the Way, 
You are blind to the faults of the world. 

There are those who say, “The Dharma-ending age?® is really 
bad! There is no more Dharma. Cultivators do not give proof to 
the fruit.” Why don’t you give proof to the fruit? The Dharma 
itself has no “right,” “image” or “ending” age. If you cultivate 
the right Dharma, you live in the right Dharma age. If you do not 
see the faults of the world, but see all living beings as the 
Buddha, then you yourself are Buddha. If you see all living 

beings as demons, then you are a demon. 

If you attend to others’ faults, 
Your fault-finding itself is wrong: 

Does the Buddha look at other people’s faults? No. The 
Buddha sees all living beings as Buddhas. 

Others’ faults I do not treat as wrong; 
My faults are my own transgressions. 

38. After the Buddha’s Nirvana, the Dharma passes through the following historical 
periods: 
1) The first 500 years: the “right Dharma age;” 
2) The following 1000 years: the “Dharma image age.” 
3) The following 1000 years: the “Dharma-ending age.” 

164 

Chapter II. Prajna 

If he is wrong, do not follow his example. If he is wrong, do 
not join him and do not see his errors. Have great compassion for 
everyone. Be merciful. Say, “These living beings are indeed 
pitiful! I vow to take them all to Buddhahood.” 

Simply cast out the mind that finds fault, 
Once cast away, troubles are gone; 
When hate and love don’t block the mind, 
Stretch out both legs and lie down. 

“T really love him!” you say. “I would gladly give up my life 
for him.” This is all just emotion. If you truly had the 
compassionate heart to love and protect a// beings, you would 
say, “I vow to take him to Buddhahood. If he does not realize 
Buddhahood, I will not realize Buddhahood.” 

Today someone asked to formally become a Buddhist by 
taking refuge in the Triple Jewel, the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha. After taking refuge you must follow the rules. Those 
who believe in the Buddha should not be as they were before. If 
they are, others will say, “He is a Buddhist, but he still has his 
same old life-style. He hasn’t changed.” Therefore I have made 
this vow: if those who have taken refuge with me do not realize 
Buddhahood, I will just wait here for them. You must realize 
Buddhahood before I do. I have no other method. If you take 
refuge, you should cultivate a little faster. Don’t make me wait 
for you. I will wait a long time, but eventually I may dislike it 
and say, “I will wait no longer. I’m finished. This is it!” 

“Stretch out both legs and lie down.” This appeals to lazy 
people! However, this is not laziness or sleep. It represents 
freedom. Unchained, unshackled, unfettered, and free, you 
“leave upside-down dream-thinking far behind and attain 
ultimate Nirvana.” Do not interpret the Sixth Patriarch s Sutra as 
saying that you should stretch out both legs and go to sleep. 

165 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

If you hope and intend to transform others, 
You must perfect expedient means; 

To practice expedient means, one must know what Dharma 
should be spoken to what living being. For that one must be 
unattached. 

Don’t cause them to have doubts, and then 
Their self-nature will appear. 

Do not cause living beings who hear this Dharma to 
disbelieve, and you will then be able to use the brilliant wisdom 
of your own nature. 

The Buddhadharma is here in the world; 
Enlightenment is not apart from the world. 

The Buddhadharma includes both mundane and 
transcendental dharma. Buddhadharma is in the midst of the 
world and yet transcends the world. There is no awakening and 
no Prajna wisdom apart from the world. 

To search for Bodhi apart from the world 
Is like looking for a hare with horns. 

Do you think you can find a rabbit with horns? There is no 
such thing. If you separate yourself from worldly things to seek 
the transcendental dharma elsewhere, that is like looking for a 
rabbit with horns. 

Right views are transcendental: 
Deviant views are all mundane. 

Right views are enlightenment. To what is one enlightened? 
To the fact that sexual desire must be cut off-that is 

166 

Chapter II. Prajna 

transcendental dharma. Deviant views are mundane views. 
When you casually follow your desires, yielding to them instead 
of causing them to yield to you, you are holding to deviant and 
mundane views. 

Deviant and right completely destroyed: 
The Bodhi nature appears spontaneously. 

When neither the deviant nor the right remain, the Bodhi 
nature is spontaneously manifest. You need not look for the 
Bodhi nature anywhere else. 

This verse is the Sudden Teaching 
Also called the Great Dharma Boat. 

This verse is the verse of sudden enlightenment and the 
Dharma-door of realizing Buddhahood. It is called the Great 
Dharma Boat because it can ferry all living beings from the shore 
of birth and death across the current of affliction to the other 
shore of Nirvana. 

Hear in confusion, pass through ages, 
In an instant’s space, enlightenment. 

If you are deluded, many ages may pass before you become 
enlightened. If you are on the verge of enlightenment and can put 
down every one of your desires, you can suddenly become 
enlightened in the space of an instant. If you truly, truly 
understand, you can open enlightenment instantly. 

Sutra: 

The Master said further, “In the Ta Fan Temple I 
have just now spoken the Sudden Teaching, making the 
universal vow that all living beings of the Dharma-realm 

167 

The 

Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

will see their nature and realize Buddhahood as they hear 
these words.” 

Then among Magistrate Wei and the officials, Taoists 
and lay-people who heard what the Master said, there 
were none who did not awaken. Together they made 
obeisance and exclaimed with delight, “Good indeed! 
Who would have thought that in Ling Nan a Buddha 
would appear in the world?” 

Commentary: 

After they heard the markless verse, they said, “Ah! This is 

really fine! Who would have imagined that in Ling Nan a 
Buddha would appear in the world? 

168 

CHAPTER III 

DOUBTS AND QUESTIONS 

Sutra: 

One day, Magistrate Wei arranged a great vegetarian 
feast on behalf of the Master. 

Commentary: 

The doubts referred to in the title of this chapter were those 
of Magistrate Wei, who did not understand how the Patriarch 
Bodhidharma would have told the Emperor Wu of Liang that the 
Emperor had no merit. Therefore the Magistrate questioned the 
Sixth Patriarch about it. 

The Magistrate invited the Master to a great vegetarian feast. 
All the Bhikshus, laymen, Taoists, scholars, officials, and 
common people were invited to the meatless meal. Politicians 
like to eat meat, but because Magistrate Wei propagated the 
Buddhadharma, he invited them all to a vegetarian meal. 

“Great” means that many people attended. In China, the 
Thousand Monk Vegetarian Feast occurs when a thousand 
Bhikshus are invited to have a meal. Among a thousand monks, 
there is sure to be one Arhat, so making offerings to a thousand 
Bhikshus is making offerings to one Arhat. Which one is the 
Arhat? No one knows. If you knew, you would just make 
offerings to the Arhat and not to the thousand Bhikshus. This 
great feast, however, was an offering to not just a thousand 
Bhikshus; I believe it was to ten thousand. 

169 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The banquet was held on behalf of the Sixth Patriarch. As 
one who had left home, the Master himself could not invite 
people to lunch. Laymen made offerings to those who have left 
home; those who have left home do not make offerings to 
laymen. Recently, I said to a visitor from Hong Kong, 
“Remember, lay people make offerings to the Bodhimanda, 
protect and support the Triple Jewel. Do not be supported by the 
Triple Jewel.” 

She replied, “I have never in my life heard a Good Knowing 
Advisor speak such honest words to me! This certainly has 
changed me. When I return, I will be different from what I was 
before.” 

Magistrate Wei was the Sixth Patriarch’s disciple, and he 
wished to cause everyone to recognize and believe in his master. 
He invited them to eat vegetarian food, because it is said: 

If you want to lead them 
to the Buddha’s wisdom 
First you ought to give them 
something good to eat! 

In fact, one definition of the word “people” goes: 
People: when they eat, they’re happy. 

If you feed them well, they can’t forget it. “Ah!” they say, 
“T’ve got to go listen to some more Sutra lectures.” They come 
time after time to get what they want—not Dharma, but good 
food. They eat and eat and soon, when they hear the Dharma, 
they say, ““The Dharma tastes even better than these vegetables.” 
And then they don’t run away. 

Magistrate Wei understood human nature. He arranged this 
feast on behalf of his Master. He did not do it for himself, saying, 

170 

Chapter IIl. Doubts and Questions 

“Look at me, making great offerings to the Triple Jewel!” He 
was not seeking notoriety. He probably used the technique used 
at today’s $500-a-plate fund-raising dinners. “We are going to 
build Nan Hua Temple,” he probably said. “You should donate 
five thousand dollars, or perhaps fifty thousand dollars.” 

Because the assembly was held for the purpose of building a 
temple, the Magistrate asked the Master about the merit and 
virtue of Emperor Wu, the great Liang dynasty Emperor who 
built many temples and gave sanction to many monks who left 
home. 

Sutra: 

After the meal, the Magistrate asked the Master to 
take his seat. Together with officials, scholars, and the 
assembly, he bowed reverently and asked, “Your disciple 
has heard the High Master explain the Dharma. It is truly 
inconceivable. I now have a few doubts and hope you will 
be compassionate and resolve them for me.” 

The Master said, “If you have any doubts, please ask 
me and I will explain.” 

The Honorable Wei said, “Is not what the Master 
speaks the same as the doctrine of Bodhidharma?” 

The Master replied, “It is.” 

The Magistrate asked, “Your disciple has heard that 
when Bodhidharma first instructed the Emperor Wu of 
Liang, the Emperor asked him, ‘All my life I have built 
temples, given sanction to the Sangha, practiced giving, 
and arranged vegetarian feasts. What merit and virtue 
have I gained?’ 

“Bodhidharma said, ‘There was actually no merit and 
virtue.’ 

171 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“I, your disciple, have not yet understood this 
principle and hope that the High Master will explain it.” 

Commentary: 

Magistrate Wei represented the entire assembly in requesting 
the Dharma. He was extremely respectful, stern, and upright in 
his bearing. He didn’t dare laugh or cry. The Magistrate had 
some small doubts; not big problems. He asked the Master to 
bestow great compassion on him. “Please resolve my little 
problem, because there are a few things I simply do not 
understand.” 

“Honorable” is a term of great respect. The Magistrate was 
called “honorable” because he was a high-ranking official. 
When my disciples go to Taiwan to take the precepts, they 
should call the old cultivators, the Bhikshus, “Honorable.” 
“Honor” them once and they will be delighted. If you do not 
“Honor” them, they will say, “This newly-precepted one is 
extremely disrespectful!” 

The Magistrate asked, “Don’t you explain the same principle 
as Bodhidharma?” 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “Yes, I do. It is the mind-to-mind 
seal transmitted by Bodhidharma, the direct pointing to the mind 
to see the nature and realize Buddhahood.” 

The Magistrate said, “I have heard that when Bodhidharma 
went to Nan Ching to convert the Emperor Wu of the Liang 
dynasty, the Emperor told him, “I have built many temples.” 

The Emperor Wu of Liang spent his entire life building 
temples. He allowed many Bhikshus to leave home and he made 
offerings of food and shelter to them. He would bow to anyone 
who left home. Wasn’t this good? He gave the wealth of his 
country to the poor and arranged many vegetarian feasts. 

172 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

“What merit and virtue have I gained?” he asked. Emperor 
Wu had to be number one in everything. Therefore, when he met 
Patriarch Bodhidharma, he did not seek the Dharma, he sought 
Bodhidharma’s praise instead. He wanted Bodhidharma to give 
him a “high hat.” He was afraid that Bodhidharma might not 
know of his merit and so he introduced himself, saying, “Look 
at me. I have built hundreds of temples to house thousands of 
monks, all of whom left home under my official sanction. What 
kind of merit have I gained?” What he meant was, “Look at me! 
I am an emperor unlike all others! Everything I do is good and 
meritorious.” He didn’t seek the Dharma to end birth and death, 
he wanted to put himself on display instead. 

This is like a certain Dharma Protector who says, “Do you 
know me? I am the greatest, strongest Dharma Protector. I give 
all my money to the Triple Jewel.” In fact, the money he uses to 
play around with women is several thousand times greater than 
the money he gives to the Triple Jewel, but he says he gives it all 
to the Triple Jewel. Isn’t this perverse? He never speaks about 
the money he squanders all over heaven and earth, but when he 
gives a dollar to the Temple, he says, “I gave a dollar to the 
Temple! Do you know that?” He is certainly the Emperor Wu’s 
disciple. With his merit and virtue he too can be an emperor 
someday. 

Hearing the Emperor brag about “me, myself, and I,” 
boasting and advertising his merit and in general exalting 
himself, Bodhidharma thought, “How can a sage go around 
backslapping? How can I agree with him?” 

Ordinary people would have said to the Emperor, “Oh yes! 
Yes! Your merit is indeed great. No one in the world can match 
it!” Bodhidharma was a patriarch. He could not possibly have 
indulged in such behavior, and so he said, “No merit! Totally 
without merit!” 

173 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “There actually was no merit and 
virtue. Do not doubt the words of a sage. Emperor Wu of 
Liang’s mind was wrong; he did not know the right 
Dharma. Building temples and giving sanction to the 
Sangha, practicing giving and arranging vegetarian 
feasts is called ‘seeking blessings’. Do not mistake 
blessings for merit and virtue. Merit and virtue are in the 
Dharma body, not in the cultivation of blessings.” 

The Master said further, “Seeing your own nature is 
merit, and equanimity is virtue. To be unobstructed in 
every thought, constantly seeing the true, real, wonderful 
function of your original nature is called merit and 
virtue.” 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch replied, “Do not doubt the sage’s words. 
There really was no merit and virtue. Emperor Wu was seeking 
fame; he was not seeking the orthodox Dharma.” 

The Great Master said, “Merit and virtue are in the Dharma 
body, not in cultivating blessings.” What is merit then? Seeing 
your brilliant, wonderful, original nature is merit. With merit, 
you can see your own nature. 

What is merit? At first, it is difficult to sit in Dhyana 
meditation, but after a while it becomes natural. When you begin 
to sit, your legs and back hurt, but after a while you defeat your 
legs and they no longer hurt. When your legs do not hurt, you 
have merit. If your legs hurt, you have no merit. 

“Seeing your own nature is merit.” See your original face. 
You ask, “What does my original face look like?” You must find 
out for yourself. I cannot describe it to you, and even if I did, you 

174 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

wouldn’t know because your knowledge would have come from 
the outside. Enlighten yourself to your own nature. “Ah,” you 
will say, “My original face looks just like this!” 

Then you must have your vision of the self-nature certified 
by a Good Knowing Advisor. You cannot set yourself up as king 
and say, “I am the Emperor. I am a Bodhisattva!” like the hippie 
who had poisoned himself with drugs to the point that he claimed 
to be a Bodhisattva, when he actually was nothing but a demon. 

“Equanimity is virtue.” Without selfishness, everything is 
equal. There is no prejudice or partiality. If you are fair, just, and 
open-minded, you have virtue. 

“To be unobstructed in every thought:” If you are obstructed, 
your thoughts flow here, stop there, and become attached. 
Obstruction means attachment. If you are not obstructed, you 
can always see your original nature. As the Sixth Patriarch said 
when he was enlightened, “How surprising that the self-nature is 
originally pure in itself! How surprising that the self-nature is 
originally unmoving! How surprising that the self-nature is 
originally not produced or destroyed! How surprising that the 
self-nature is so inconceivable!” 

This is to “constantly see the true, real, wonderful function. 
It is called merit and virtue.” If you do not seek within yourself, 
but give sanction to Bhikshus, build temples, and give to the 
poor instead, you accumulate blessings. Blessings, however, are 
not merit and virtue. You should perfect your own merit and 
virtue just as the Buddhas have done. 

Sutra: 

“Inner humility is merit and the outer practice of 
reverence is virtue. Your self-nature establishing the ten 
thousand dharmas is merit and the mind-substance 
separate from thought is virtue. Not being separate from 

175 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the self-nature is merit, and the correct use of the 
undefiled (self-nature) is virtue. If you seek the merit and 
virtue of the Dharma body, simply act according to these 
principles, for this is true merit and virtue.” 

Commentary: 

You should not be arrogant. In all situations, you should be 
polite. Do not say, “Look at me! I am better than everyone else. 
I am so talented. I know more Buddhadharma than you.” If you 
show off like this, you are being proud, not humble, and you 
have no merit. When you speak to people you should be easy and 
polite, not like a wooden board which smashes their heads with 
a single sentence. You don’t have to hit people, all you have to 
do is say one sentence and you split their heads open, which is a 
fiercer thing than using an iron bar. But if you are humble, you 
are never impolite. 

Outwardly, you should see everyone as better than you. 
Don’t be self-satisfied. 

Arrogance causes harm. 
Humility brings benefit. 

If you fill your cup with tea until it overflows and then keep 
pouring, you are being wasteful. Do not be “full of self.” If you 
are polite, you will gain benefit. Do not say, “I am the greatest. I 
am number one. I am so intelligent that I understood long ago 
things which you still do not know!” In Buddhism you should 
not fear that you will not understand. Fear only that you will not 
practice. Whether or not you understand is not so important, but 
if you do not practice, you are useless. 

The mind-substance should be separate from false thought, 
but not separate from proper thought. That is virtue. Turn the 

176 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

light around and reverse the illumination to see your self-nature, 
which constantly gives rise to Prajna. This is merit. In 
unimpeded, limitless transformation, the correct use of the self- 
nature enables you to do whatever you wish while never doing 
unclean things. 

If you are seeking the Dharma body you should act in accord 
with these principles, because it is by means of such merit and 
virtue that the Dharma body is realized. 

Sutra: 

“Those who cultivate merit and virtue in their 
thoughts do not slight others, but always respect them. 
Those who slight others and do not cut off the ‘me and 
mine’ are without merit. The vain and unreal self-nature 
is without virtue, because of the ‘me and mine,’ because 
of the greatness of the ‘self,’ and because of the constant 
slighting of others.” 

Commentary: 

You should not slight people, animals, or any living beings. 
For example, whenever Sadaparibhuta Bodhisattva met 
someone, he immediately bowed and said, “I dare not slight you 
because you are going to be a Buddha.” Sadaparibhuta 
Bodhisattva, who was a previous incarnation of Shakyamuni 
Buddha, realized Buddhahood because of his practice of 
universal respect while walking the Bodhisattva path. 

“Those who slight others and do not cut off the ‘me and 
mine’ are without merit.” You have no merit if, whenever you 
meet someone, you immediately become jealous, terrified that 
they will be better than you are or more intelligent or will surpass 
you in some other respect. Your jealousy causes you to belittle 

177 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

them. You see yourself as great. “See how big I am?” you say. 
“No one can compare with me. In the present age there is no 
emperor, but if there were, it would certainly be me. None of you 
would have a share. Why? Because I am more intelligent than all 
of you. I can dominate you, but you can’t dominate me.” “I,” 
“myself,” “me and mine” are not cut off and not put down. There 
is no room for merit, because you are too full of self. 

You do not really cultivate, and so your self-nature is unreal. 
You are not basically genuine, you do not believe in yourself and 
you do not know whether you are true or false. I did not tell you 
to drink or smoke. Why are you drinking and smoking? I did not 
tell you to go gambling. Why did you go? You don’t know why 
you do these mixed-up things. The self nature in this way is 
“vain and unreal.” This happens because you have no virtue and 
you see yourself as too big. “Look at me!” you say, “I am a 
Buddha!” This is like a certain person who said, “This Dharma 
Master is enlightened and I am just like him!” He did not say that 
he himself was enlightened. He said that the Dharma Master was 
enlightened and that the two of them were just alike. He might 
as well have introduced himself by saying, “I am enlightened.” 
This “me, myself, and I’ is too big. There is no merit here. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, continuity of thought is 
merit, and the mind practicing equality and directness is 
virtue. Self-cultivation of one’s nature is merit, and self- 
cultivation of the body is virtue.” 

Commentary: 

In thought after thought, without interruption, every thought 
should be right. In thought after thought, without stopping, every 

178 

Chapter II]. Doubts and Questions 

thought should be cultivation. This is merit. At first it is forced, 
but after a time it becomes natural, and the naturalness is merit. 

Always be even-minded and impartial, direct and without 
deceit. That is virtue. 

If you have not seen your nature, you must cultivate it. How 
do you cultivate it? By not giving rise to affliction. When 
someone hits you, think of it as if you had run into a wall. When 
someone scolds you, pretend that they are singing a song, or 
speaking a foreign language. “Oh, he’s not scolding me. He’s 
speaking Japanese: ‘Chi, chi, cha, cha,’ or is it Spanish?” If you 
think of it that way, there is no trouble at all. 

If someone tries to spit at heaven, the spit just falls right back 
into his own face. If someone scolds you, but you take no notice, 
it is just as if he were scolding himself. When hit, you can think, 
“T have run into a wall. It certainly hurts.” Can you deny that it 
is your own karmic retribution returning to you? If you bump 
your head in the dark, do you hit the wall with your fist? If you 
do, your fist will hurt and there will be even more pain. Pay no 
attention: then nothing will have happened. Maitreya 
Bodhisattva said, 

The Old Fool wears second-hand clothes 
And fills his belly with tasteless food, 
Mends holes to make a cover against 

The cold, and thus the myriad affairs of life, 
According to what comes, are done. 
Scolded, the Old Fool merely says, “Fine.” 
Struck, the Old Fool falls down to sleep. 
“Spit on my face, I just let it dry; 

I save strength and energy and 

Give you no affliction.”’ Paramita is 

His style; he gains the jewel within 

179 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The wonderful. Know this news and then 
What worry is there of not perfecting the Way? 

This is wonderful, but not everyone can do it. The jewel within 
the wonderful is not easy to obtain. Cultivation of the nature is 
simply not getting angry. 

How does one cultivate the body? Do not do bad things. 
Have no lust, hatred, or delusion. If you do not kill, steal, or lust, 
you cultivate the body. That is virtue. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, merit and virtue should be 
seen within one’s own nature, not sought through giving 
and making offerings. That is the difference between 
blessings and merit and virtue. Emperor Wu did not 
know the true principle. Our Patriarch was not in error.” 

Commentary: 

You cannot say, “I make offerings to the Triple Jewel. I have 
merit.” It is not merit, just blessings. Therefore blessings and 
merit and virtue are different. If you perform acts of blessing, 
you will receive the karmic retribution of blessing in future lives. 
But you obtain the advantages of merit and virtue now, in this 
life. 

Bodhidharma wanted to take the Emperor across, but the 
Emperor’s ego was too big. Therefore, in order to break the 
Emperor’s attachment, Bodhidharma said that he had no merit 
and virtue. The Emperor was most displeased and from then on 
he ignored Bodhidharma. No matter what dharma Bodhidharma 
spoke, he wouldn’t listen. “Why should I listen to you?” he said. 
He would not respond to Bodhidharma’s compassionate efforts 
to save him and so Bodhidharma just went away. After a time, 

180 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

the Emperor died of starvation. Think it over: How could one 
with merit and virtue starve to death? He died of starvation 
because he had no merit and virtue. Bodhidharma had wanted to 
wake him up so that he would not have to die that way. What a 
pity that the Emperor’s view of himself was so big that 
Bodhidharma couldn’t help him. 

Sutra: 

The Magistrate asked further, “Your disciple has 
often seen the Sangha and laity reciting ‘Amitabha 
Buddha,’ vowing to be reborn in the West. Will the High 
Master please tell me if they will obtain rebirth there, and 
so dispel my doubts?” 

Commentary: 

The Magistrate said, “The clergy and laymen recite the name 
of Amitabha Buddha, the Buddha of Limitless Light. They all 
vow to be reborn in the Land of Ultimate Bliss*’. High Master, 
will they actually be born there?” 

The Magistrate himself understood the principle, but he 
knew that others present in the assembly did not understand and 
so he asked the Sixth Patriarch for an explanation. At that time, 
the reciters of the Buddha’s name slandered the Ch’an School”: 

39. For further reference see A General Explanation of the Buddha Speaks of 
Amitabha Sutra by Tripitaka Master Hua, The Buddhist Text Translation Society, 
San Francisco, 1974. 

40. The five Buddhist schools each take a different approach to cultivation. The five 
are: Ch’an, Secret, Vinaya, Teaching, and Pure Land. The Pure Land sect is 
associated with the recitation of the name of the Buddha Amitabha in order to 
obtain rebirth in the Western Paradise, the Pure Land of Amitabha according to the 
Teaching of the Amitabha Sutra. 

181 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Ch’an School people eat their fill, sit down, shut their eyes and 
go to sleep! What kind of work is that? Lazy work! They don’t 
compare with those who recite the Buddha’s name. Recitation is 
the best Dharma-door.” 

The Ch’an School fired back: “You recite the name of 
Amitabha Buddha to gain rebirth in the West. In the past, before 
Amitabha Buddha, what Buddha’s name did you recite?” 

And so they fought, saying, “You’re wrong! You’re wrong!” 
until, finally, nobody knew who was right. 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “Magistrate, listen well. Hui Neng 
will explain it for you. When the World Honored One was 
in Shravasti City, he spoke of being led to rebirth in the 
West. The Sutra text clearly states, ‘It is not far from 
here.” If we discuss its appearance, it is 108,000 miles 
away, but in immediate terms, it is just beyond the ten 
evils and the eight deviations within us. It is explained as 
far distant for those of inferior roots and as nearby for 
those of superior wisdom.” 

Commentary: 

Shravasti is a city in India. Translated, it means “abundance 
and virtue.” In Shravasti, the five desires were abundant: for 
fame, wealth, sex, food and sleep. The people of Shravasti had 
the virtue of much learning and liberation: they had studied a 
great deal and were not attached. 

In this city of abundance and virtue, the Buddha spoke of 
being led to rebirth in the Land of Ultimate Bliss. The Land of 
Ultimate Bliss appears to be 108,000 miles away, but if you 
discuss it in immediate terms, it is just beyond the ten evils and 

182 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

the eight deviations within us. Actually, The Amitabha Sutra 
says that the Western Paradise is 10,000,000,000 lands away, but 
the Great Master said 108,000 miles because he wanted to 
counter the prejudices of those in the assembly. In terms of its 
appearance, the Western Land is far away, but in terms of our 
own nature, it is just beyond the ten evils and the eight 
deviations. 

Of the ten evils, three are committed with the body: 
1) killing, 2) stealing, 3) sexual misconduct. Three are 
committed with the mind: 4) greed, 5) hatred, 6) delusion (or 
wrong views). Four are committed with the mouth, a most dirty 
thing: 7) foul language (talking about the affairs of men and 
women), 8) lying, 9) harsh speech, 10) slander. 

The eight deviations are the opposite of the Eight-Fold Path. 
Shakyamuni Buddha taught the Eight-Fold Path of 1) right 
views, 2) right thought, 3) right speech, 4) right action, 5) right 
livelihood, 6)right vigor, 7)right recollection, 8) right 
concentration. The eight deviations, then, would consist of 
deviant views, deviant thought, deviant speech, deviant action, 
deviant livelihood, deviant vigor, deviant recollection, and 
deviant concentration. 

The Buddha spoke of the Western Paradise as distant to those 
of common intelligence. To those of superior intelligence he 
spoke of the Western Paradise as being on the other side of the 
ten evils and the eight deviations—within their own self-nature. 

Sutra: 

“There are two kinds of people, not two kinds of 
Dharma. Enlightenment and confusion differ, and seeing 
can be quick or slow. The deluded person recites the 
Buddha’s name, seeking rebirth there, while the 
enlightened person purifies his own mind. Therefore the 

183 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Buddha said, ‘As the mind is purified, the Buddhaland is 
purified.’” 

Commentary: 

The two kinds of people are not white people and yellow 
people, but wise people and deluded ones. There is only one 
Dharma; deluded or wise, you cultivate the same Dharma. 

Confused people recite the Buddha’s name and expect to be 
reborn in the Western Paradise, while the wise recite the 
Buddha’s name in order to purify their own minds. The pure 
mind is the Western Paradise. If you understand that, then it is 
not 10,000,000,000 lands away; it is right here. If you don’t 
understand, you don’t know how many Buddhalands beyond 
even that number it is. It is said, 

Confused, a thousand books are few; 
Enlightened, one word is too much. 

When confused, you may study this Sutra, study that Sutra, 
investigate back and forth and still not understand. When truly 
awake, there is no need to study; one word is too much. But you 
must truly understand. Do not pretend and say, “I don’t have to 
recite the Buddha’s name.” That is just laziness. Once a man 
who was well-read said to me, “I have read many books, and 
now I find that they are all wrong, so I no longer read books.” He 
meant that he had realized Buddhahood and he no longer needed 
anything. This is extremely stupid behavior. Understanding 
nothing, he faked understanding. You may try to brew tea in cold 
water, forcing it to steep, but you will never get tea. How can you 
brew tea in cold water? There are many strange people in the 
world—an uncountable number. 

184 

Chapter IIl. Doubts and Questions 

Sutra: 

“Magistrate, if the person of the East merely purifies 
his mind, he is without offense. Even though one may be 
of the West, if his mind is impure he is at fault. The 
person of the East commits offenses and recites the 
Buddha’s name, seeking rebirth in the West. When the 
person of the West commits offenses and recites the 
Buddha’s name, in what country does he seek rebirth?” 

Commentary: 

Whether you are in the East or West, you must not commit 
offenses. If you do, you won’t be reborn in any direction except 
that of the hells, animals, or hungry ghosts. 

If you recite the Buddha’s name and hope to be reborn in the 
Western Paradise, you must also cultivate goodness. If you 
cultivate Dhyana meditation, you must also cultivate good 
deeds. Unless you nurture merit and virtue, you cannot become 
accomplished in your cultivation. 

“Magistrate, if the person of the East merely purifies his 
mind, he is without offense.” The pure mind has no confusion, 
no selfishness, and no profit-seeking. It is without jealousy, 
obstruction, greed, hatred and delusion. Purify your mind and 
get rid of all deviant thought. Then you will be without offense. 

“Even though one may be of the West, if his mind is impure, 
he is at fault.” This is an analogy. The Sixth Patriarch is not 
saying that Western people have impure minds, because those of 
the Western Paradise are completely different from people of 
this world. They do not need to purify their minds, since their 
minds are pure to begin with. They aren’t greedy, hateful, or 
stupid and the three evil paths do not exist for them. Do not use 
this passage to try to prove that the Sixth Patriarch said people of 

185 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the West have impure minds. The people of the West have 
neither purity nor impurity. 

“The person of the East commits offenses and recites the 
Buddha’s name to be reborn in the West. When the person of the 
West commits offenses and recites the Buddha’s name, in what 
country does he seek rebirth?” This is another analogy. Those of 
the West never commit offenses. The Sixth Patriarch wanted to 
break attachments and so he asked, “If people of the East recite 
in order to be born in the West, then when people of the West 
recite, where do they seek rebirth?” If you wish to be reborn in 
the West, you must first have no offenses. If you have offenses, 
you will go nowhere but to hell. 

If those of the East are reborn in the West, where are those of 
the West reborn? Is there some other “‘para”’-paradise for them? 
Don’t be so attached. 

Sutra: 

“Common, deluded people do not understand their 
self-nature and do not know that the Pure Land is within 
themselves. Therefore they make vows for the East and 
vows for the West. To enlightened people, all places are 
the same. As the Buddha said, ‘In whatever place one 
dwells, there is constant peace and happiness.’ 

“Magistrate, if the mind-ground is only without 
unwholesomeness, the West is not far from here. If one 
harbors unwholesome thoughts, one may recite the 
Buddha’s name, but it will be difficult to attain that 
rebirth. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, I now exhort you all to get 
rid of the ten evils first and you will have walked one 
hundred thousand miles. Next get rid of the eight 
deviations and you will have gone eight thousand miles. If 

186 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

in every thought you see your own nature and always 
practice impartiality and straightforwardness, you will 
arrive in a finger-snap and see Amitabha. 

“Magistrate, merely practice the ten wholesome acts; 
then what need will there be for you to vow to be reborn 
there? But if you do not rid the mind of the ten evils, what 
Buddha will come to welcome you?” 

Commentary: 

Deluded people do not know how to discipline their self- 
nature. They do not know that purification of their own mind is 
the Pure Land. Sometimes they vow to be reborn in the East, 
sometimes in the West. Those who are enlightened know that all 
places are the same. For them there is no north, east, south, or 
west. They are comfortable everywhere, because they make no 
discriminations. But if you continually think evil thoughts and 
do evil things, you will never arrive in the West. 

“Magistrate, merely practice the ten wholesome acts; then 
what need will there be for you to vow to be reborn there.” There 
are people who do not dare to practice the ten good deeds*!, 
They say, “If I do the ten good deeds, demonic obstacles may 
arise!” But they are not afraid of doing evil. They do not fear that 
demonic obstacles will arise when they do evil because in doing 
evil, they are demons themselves. People can certainly be 
mixed-up. They aren’t afraid of doing evil, but fear doing good! 

“But if you do not rid the mind of the ten evils, what Buddha 
will come to welcome you?” If all your life everything you do is 
evil and confused, if every pore from head to foot carries the 
monstrous karma of offensive acts, how can you be born in the 

41. ie., the opposite of the ten evils. 

187 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

West? Which Buddha will come to welcome you? If you do evil, 
you may seek it, but you will never be born there, because you 
are bound by your offensive acts. Although it is said, “You may 
go to rebirth carrying your offenses,” that is just a manner of 
speaking. You still must purify your own mind before you may 
go. What Buddha is going to welcome a criminal? 

Sutra: 

“If you become enlightened to the sudden dharma of 
the unproduced, you will see the West in an instant. 
Unenlightened, you may recite the Buddha’s name 
seeking rebirth, but since the road is so long, how can you 
traverse it? 

“Hui Neng will move the West here in the space of an 
instant so that you may see it right before your eyes. Do 
you wish to see it?” 

The entire assembly bowed and said, “If we could see 
it here, what need would there be to vow to be reborn 
there? Please, High Master, be compassionate and make 
the West appear so that we might see it.” 

Commentary: 

The assembly suddenly got greedy. They bowed and said, “If 
we can see it here, then we don’t need to vow to be reborn in the 
West! We all want you to be compassionate and let us see the 
Western Paradise.” 

During the next lecture the Western Paradise will be moved 
to the Buddhist Lecture Hall, but you will have to wait until then. 

188 

Chapter II|. Doubts and Questions 

Sutra: 

The Master said: “Great assembly, the worldly 
person’s own physical body is the city, and the eye, ear, 
nose, tongue, and body are the gates. Outside there are 
five gates and inside there is the gate of the mind. The 
mind is the ‘ground’ and one’s nature is the ‘king’. The 
‘king’ dwells on the mind ‘ground.’ When the nature is 
present, the king is present, but when the nature is 
absent, there is no king. When the nature is present, the 
body and mind remain, but when the nature is absent, the 
body and mind are destroyed. The Buddha is made 
within the self-nature. Do not seek outside the body. 
Confused, the self-nature is a living being: enlightened, it 
is a Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch said that he would move the Western 
Paradise to the assembly, and I agreed to move it to the Buddhist 
Lecture Hall. But if I were to move it, it would be a lot of work 
and trouble. So now we shall just change our own bodies into the 
Western Paradise instead. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the worldly person’s own 
physical body is the city...” Your very own body is the Western 
Paradise. When your mind is pure, the Buddhaland is pure. The 
pure Buddhaland is bliss. In the pure mind there are no defiled 
dharmas, for the dharmas are purified when one is no longer 
turned by their defilement. 

“Outside there are five gates and inside there is the gate of the 
mind.” The mind is called a “gate” because sometimes it thinks 
and sometimes it doesn’t. “The mind is the ‘ground’ and the 
nature is the ‘king.’”” The mind itself is the fine golden sand of 

189 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the Western Paradise and the nature is Amitabha Buddha. “The 
‘king’ dwells on the ‘mind-ground.’” Amitabha, your nature, 
dwells within your own mind. “When the nature is present the 
‘king’ is present, but when the nature is absent, there is no 
‘king.’” If you know that your own nature is constantly present, 
“such, such unmoving,” finally, completely, constantly bright, 
then the king is present. If you understand the mind and see the 
nature, Amitabha Buddha manifests. 

“The Buddha is made within the self-nature.” The Buddha is 
to be cultivated within your self-nature. Your mind is the 
Buddha. Your nature is the Buddha. If you work on your self- 
nature, you can realize Buddhahood. The self-nature and the 
Buddha-nature are not two, but one. Therefore, if you wish to be 
a Buddha, you must apply effort to realize your self-nature by 
the purification of your mind and will, your heart and nature. 

Break your bad habits and correct your faults. If you do not 
get rid of the ten evils, the eight deviations, and your own 
imperfections, you will never become a Buddha. Do not look 
outside! 

“Confused, the self-nature is a living being.” If, in confusion, 
you lose your self-nature, or perhaps forget about it, you are just 
a living being. “Enlightened, the self-nature is a Buddha.” If you 
wake up and understand that bad dharmas should never be 
practiced and all good dharmas must be practiced, then you cut 
off bad and practice good. Just that is the Buddha. 

Sutra: 

“Kindness and compassion’ are Avalokiteshvara‘” 

and ‘sympathetic joy and giving’ are 
Mahasthamaprapta. ‘Purification’ is Shakyamuni, and 
‘equanimity and directness’ are Amitabha. ‘Others and 
self? are Mount Sumeru and ‘deviant thoughts’ are ocean 

190 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

water. ‘Afflictions’ are the waves. ‘Cruelty’ is an evil 
dragon. ‘Empty falseness’ is ghosts and _ spirits. 
‘Defilement’ is fish and turtles, ‘greed and hatred’ are 
hell, and ‘delusion’ is animals. 

Commentary: 

“Kindness and compassion’ are Avalokiteshvara...” Do you 
wish to be like Gwan Yin Bodhisattva? It’s easy! Practice the 
compassionate way, practice the compassionate dharma, and be 
compassionate toward all living beings. One of my disciples 
once said to me, “Your compassion is something new. I never 
understood before what compassion was.” Not only that 
disciple, who is American, but many, many other Westerners are 
ignorant about compassion. They are not taught compassion and 
so they are unfamiliar with it. It is said, “Even when right in front 
of you, you do not recognize Avalokiteshvara.” Because you do 
not understand compassion, you do not know Avalokiteshvara. 
If you wish to know this Bodhisattva and be like him, then 
practice the compassionate dharma. With kindness, make people 
happy, and with compassion, relieve their sufferings. This is 
genuine happiness, not like worldly pleasures such as gambling, 
horse-racing, the movies, or dancing. Worldly pleasures are just 
a form of suffering. If you can lead others to true understanding 
and awakening, then you give them true happiness. To put an 
end to confusion, to cut off ignorance and manifest the Dharma 
nature, that is true happiness. 

42. Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva, more well-known by the Chinese, “Kuan Shih 
Yin,” “Contemplator of the World’s Sounds,” is the Bodhisattva of great 
compassion. He stands to the left of Amitabha Buddha. Mahasthamaprapta, “The 
Bodhisattva Who Has Attained Great Might,” stands on Amitabha Buddha’s right. 
The three are known as the Three Sages of the Western Paradise. 

191 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Sympathetic joy and giving are Mahasthamaprapta.’” To 
delight in giving is just Mahasthamaprapta. Kindness, 
compassion, sympathetic joy, and giving are the four unlimited 
thoughts of the Buddhas. If you can give with joy, you are just 
like Mahasthamaprapta Bodhisattva, who practices great giving 
and great sympathetic joy. 

“Purification” is Shakyamuni...” Your own purification of 
the mind and will and heart, your own return to the original 
source, to your originally wonderful, bright mind, perfectly 
bright enlightened Tathagata store—all of that is just Shakyamuni 
Buddha. Shakyamuni also means “able to be humane.” 

““Equanimity and directness’ are Amitabha...” If you can be 
perfectly impartial, without the slightest prejudice, 
compassionate and just towards all, this is just the behavior of 
Amitabha. This is an analogy. Do not say, “Equanimity and 
directness are Amitabha!” In listening to Sutras and hearing 
Dharma, avoid giving rise to such attachments. To say, “I heard 
the Dharma Master say that equanimity and directness are 
Amitabha,” is to slight Amitabha. If you are fair-minded, that is 
the conduct of Amitabha Buddha. 

“But the Sixth Patriarch said this!” you say. “Can’t we 
believe him?” 

Did he really say that? Why didn’t I hear him? 

“Others and self? are Mount Sumeru. This phrase is 
important. Nothing is higher than Mount Sumeru. You evaluate 
yourself and others. You have your status and they have theirs. 
Sumeru is a Sanskrit word which means “wonderfully high.” It 
is wonderful because no one knows just how high it is. 
Arrogance and pride, notions of self and other, are like Mount 
Sumeru. 

192 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

The analogies are to teach you to see Amitabha Buddha 
within your own self-nature and to recognize the imperfections 
there as well. 

“and ‘deviant thoughts’ are the ocean water.” Are you 
afflicted? Your deviant thoughts are the salty ocean water and 
your afflictions are the waves. Small waves do not cause much 
damage, but big waves may rise tens of feet high and sink ships. 
How many ships lie on the bottom of the sea? No one knows. 
The ships were invited as guests of the dragon king and escorted 
to the sea’s bottom by the big waves. Just so, big afflictions 
smother the brilliant wisdom of your self-nature. Take care not 
to have affliction-waves. 

““Cruelty’ is an evil dragon.” Cruelty: the wicked dragon 
king sends a wave to swamp your ship and bring you to his 
palace for a feast and some dragon wine. 

““Empty falseness’ is ghosts and spirits.” You say, “I don’t 
believe in ghosts and spirits. If they exist, why have I never seen 
one?” They are empty and false; how could you see one? If you 
try to catch a ghost, you cannot grab him. You may see what 
appears to be a physical shape, but when you reach out to grab 
it—he remains right where he was. He is just a shadow, empty and 
false. He is not actually there. 

I will tell you about ghosts and spirits: ghosts are black, 
because they belong to the yin. Spirits are white, because they 
belong to the yang. You may see them, but you cannot touch 
them. They are empty and false. 

““Defilement’ is fish and turtles.” Weariness of sense objects 
is represented by fish and turtles. 

I have explained Sutras for you for a long time and I have 
never told you that greed and hatred are hell. It is not that greed 
and hatred are hell, but thoughts of greed and hatred will 
certainly send you to hell. You plant the seeds of hell now with 

193 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

thoughts of greed and hatred and in the future you will descend 
into the hells. 

““Delusion’ is animals.” When I explain Sutras I sometimes 
say, “That person is as stupid as a pig.” Some people say, “Pigs 
are intelligent. They eat and sleep and they don’t do any work.” 
These people think that not doing anything is intelligent. Such 
people would like to be pigs. As soon as they eat they go to sleep 
and when they wake up they eat again. When the time comes, 
they are slaughtered for food. 

Animals are stupid and yet, as meaningless as their lives are, 
they still wish to live. When you kill a pig, he screams, “I don’t 
want to die! I don’t want to die!” He begs for his life, but you 
don’t understand his language. What a pity. If you understood, 
you might be merciful and spare him. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, always practice the ten 
good practices and the heavens can easily be reached. Get 
rid of others and self, and Mount Sumeru topples. Do 
away with deviant thought, and the ocean waters dry up. 
Without defilements, the waves cease. End cruelty, and 
there are no fish or dragons. The Tathagata of the 
enlightened nature is on your own mind-ground, emitting 
a great bright light which outwardly illuminates and 
purifies the six gates and breaks through the six desire- 
heavens. Inwardly, it illuminates the self-nature and casts 
out the three poisons. The hells and all such offenses are 
destroyed at once. Inwardly and outwardly there is 
bright penetration. This is no different from the West. 
But if you do not cultivate, how can you go there?” 

194 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

Commentary: 

Previously, I spoke about the small waves which represent 
the subtle thought process which takes place in the mind. You 
are unaware of these thought-waves, but they are present 
nonetheless. The big waves represent big afflictions and the 
small waves the extremely subtle ignorance within your mind 
which runs in a current like waves on water. Are you ignorant or 
not? With ignorance comes greed, hatred, and stupidity. You are 
greedy because ignorance tyrannizes you. It says, “I want that 
thing. Go get it for me!” and the greedy mind goes and gets it. 
Beauty and wealth—if he doesn’t get them, he flies into a rage, 
like one of my disciples who says, “I must have my way! Why 
isn’t everything just the way I want it!” Ignorance, anger, 
waves... Small waves are not important, but big waves may get 
you an invitation to the dragon’s party. 

Don’t be cruel; don’t hurt people; don’t be a venomous 
dragon. If you end cruelty, the fish and turtles and dragons 
disappear. 

Your enlightened nature is the Tathagata. When you give rise 
to the light of great wisdom, it outwardly illuminates and purifies 
the six gates, so that: the eye sees forms, but is not turned by 
them; the ear hears sounds, but is not turned by them; the nose 
smells scents, but is not turned by them; the tongue tastes, but is 
not turned by tastes; the body feels, but is not turned by feeling; 
and the mind perceives dharmas, but makes them disappear. 

The bright light of wisdom breaks through the six desire- 
heavens: 1) The Heaven of the Four Kings, 2) The Heaven of the 
Thirty-three, 3) the Suyama Heaven, 4) the Tushita Heaven, 
5) the Nirmanarati Heaven and 6) Paranirmitavashavartin 
Heaven. 

When the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind are purified, 
you have broken through the six desire heavens. 

195 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The causes, the seeds, of the six desire heavens are planted 
within your six organs. If you are fond of beauty, you may be 
reborn in a heaven of beautiful goddesses. Turned by sounds, 
you may be born in a heaven where you listen to music all day 
long, much finer music than what is made by your guitars and 
mandolins. 

“The smells in this world are so nice,” you say. “Certainly 
the smells in the heavens are even nicer,” and so you are reborn 
in a heaven full of good smells. When your nose is not turned by 
smells, you smash that desire heaven, and so forth for the 
remaining five organs. 

You ask, “When the desire heavens are destroyed, is the earth 
destroyed as well?” Empty space itself disappears, how much 
the more so the earth. 

“But where will I live?” 

You can live in emptiness, and you need not return. That is 
the very best way. 

When you turn the light around and reverse the illumination, 
when you investigate and awaken to the Tathagata of the 
enlightened nature, then the three poisons are wiped away and 
the offenses of the hells are destroyed. At this moment you are 
enlightened and understand that the nature of offenses is 
fundamentally empty. But unless you destroy ignorance, your 
offenses are not removed. 

“Inwardly and outwardly there is bright penetration. This is 
no different from the West.” Inside and out, there is bright light. 
Inside and out, there are no obstacles. The three evil destinies 
and the three obstacles exist no longer, and their absence is the 
Western Paradise. For this reason we do not need to move the 
Western Paradise to the Buddhist Lecture Hall, and we do not 
need to consult a travel agent for passports and visas. The 
Western Paradise is right here. “But if you do not cultivate, how 

196 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

can you go there?” Then it is very far away. It takes several days 
just to go to the moon. The Western Paradise is ten billion 
Buddhalands away, millions of times farther than the moon. 
Then how do you go there? You purify your mind. 

Sutra: 

On hearing this speech, the members of the great 
assembly clearly saw their own natures. They bowed 
together and exclaimed, “This is indeed good! May all 
living beings of the Dharma Realm who have heard this 
awaken at once and understand!” 

The Master said, “Good Knowing Advisors, if you 
wish to cultivate, you may do so at home. You need not be 
in a monastery. If you live at home and practice, you are 
like the person of the East whose mind is good. If you 
dwell in a monastery but do not cultivate, you are like the 
person of the West whose mind is evil. Merely purify your 
mind; that is the ‘West’ of your self-nature.” 

Commentary: 

“Fundamentally, our own bodies are the Western Paradise,” 
the assembly exclaimed, “But we did not understand because we 
did not know how to use them.” Those present in the assembly 
saw their nature: “Really good!” they exclaimed. “We have 
never before heard such wonderful Buddhadharma. 
Inconceivable! May all who hear it become enlightened 
immediately and certify to the fruit.” 

The Sixth Patriarch had made himself manifest in a layman’s 
body in order to speak the Dharma. After his enlightenment, he 
did not leave home, but went to live with hunters for fifteen years 
instead. During that time he cultivated and worked hard. So he 

197 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

said that it is not necessary to be in a monastery to cultivate the 
Way. 

Sutra: 

The Honorable Wei asked further: “How should 
those at home cultivate? Please instruct us.” 

The Master said, “I have composed a markless verse 
for the great assembly. Merely rely on it to cultivate and 
you will be as if always by my side. If you cut your hair 
and leave home, but do not cultivate, it will be of no 
benefit in pursuing the Way. The verse runs: 

The mind made straight, why toil following rules? 
The practice sure, of what use 
is Dhyana meditation? 
Filial deeds support the father and mother. 
Right conduct is in harmony with those above 
and below. 
Deference: the honored and the lowly in accord 
with each other. 
Patience: no rumors of the evils of the crowd. 
If drilling wood can spin smoke into fire, 
A red-petalled lotus can surely spring from mud. 
Good medicine is bitter to the taste. 
Words hard against the ear must be good advice. 
Correcting failings gives birth to wisdom. 
Guarded errors expose a petty mind. 
Persist daily in just, benevolent deeds. 
Charity is not the means to attain the Way. 
Search out Bodhi only in the mind. 

198 

Chapter II]. Doubts and Questions 

Why toil outside in search of the profound? 
Just as you hear these words, so practice: 
Heaven then appears, right before your eyes. 

Commentary: 

The Way must be walked. 
If you do not walk it, 
How is it the Way? 
Virtue must be cultivated. 
If you do not cultivate it, 
How is it virtue? 

The straight mind is without greed, hatred and stupidity. 
Precepts are designed to protect you from these three poisons, 
but if your mind is straight, what function do the precepts serve? 
The straight mind has no waves, no ignorance, and does not need 
to toil at holding the precepts. 

The straight mind is Ch’an. Ch’an is used to rid you of your 
faults. Someone says, “The Sutra says, “Why toil at following 
rules?’ so I won’t hold the precepts.” Is that person’s mind 
straight or not? He doesn’t care whether or not his mind is 
straight and his “conduct sure,” he just cares about not having to 
follow any rules. If his mind is not straight, how can he not hold 
precepts? If he continues to be selfish, greedy, habit-ridden, 
envious, and obstructive, how can his mind be straight? 

Your parents gave birth to you. You should repay their 
kindness by being filial and good to them. 

The honored and the lowly, the master and the servant, 
should be courteous and polite to each other. 

What is patience? Refusing to speak of the shortcomings of 
others, not slandering, not being jealous or obstructive: all that is 

199 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

patience. Do not say, “This man is evil. I saw him shoplifting!” 
The incident never occurred, but the rumor spreads. “He took the 
precepts and then went out drinking!” It never happened, but 
someone started talking... 

Do not discuss people’s bad points. Bring up their good 
points. The impatient person never speaks of the good, only of 
the bad. If you have no bad points, the impatient person will 
create them for you. 

In China, about four thousand years ago, wood drills were 
used to make fire. Wood was drilled and drilled until fire flared 
up. 

If wood can make fire and the mud can grow a red lotus, then 
it is not absolutely necessary to leave home in order to cultivate. 
If you cut off your desire while still at home, you can have 
success. 

One who criticizes you is your Good Knowing Advisor. Just 
as “bitter medicine” cures your disease, the critic’s words may 
be unpleasant, but they are sound advice. “Do not be lazy,” says 
the teacher. “Do not go to sleep!” The student says, “All you ever 
do is watch over me!” Americans in particular respond that way, 
because they are so remarkably independent. They don’t listen to 
anyone’s advice. They want to be unsurpassed and supremely 
honored. “Right or wrong,” they say, “I listen only to myself. I 
don’t care what anybody says. I may turn into a senseless block 
of wood, but nonetheless I am going to stand on my own 
principles.” I understand Americans. They don’t like to hear 
words which are hard against the ear. 

Correcting failings gives rise to wisdom. If you do not 
change your faults, you are stupid. That need not be discussed in 
detail. 

Guarded errors expose a petty mind. If you indulgently 
cherish your problems and make excuses, saying, “No! You 

200 

Chapter III. Doubts and Questions 

don’t understand. There were extenuating circumstances. It 
wasn’t that way at all! I had to do it, you see...” you become your 
own lawyer and argue your defense with flashy rhetoric. I have 
many such disciples. They think that I am stupid and that they 
can deceive me. 

Do what you are supposed to do every day. Be just and 
benevolent, always benefiting others. But do not say, “I gave 
$100,000. I have bought Buddhahood!” “Charity is not the 
means to attain the Way.” You have to cultivate by searching out 
Bodhi only in the mind, not outside. 

Although we have been discussing the Western Paradise, the 
verse refers to the Christian heaven as well. Heaven is not just in 
heaven. Heaven is right before your eyes. 

Sutra: 

The Master continued, “Good Knowing Advisors, you 
in this assembly should cultivate according to this verse 
to see and make contact with your self-nature and to 
realize the Buddha Way directly. The Dharma does not 
wait. The assembly may now disperse. I shall now return 
to Ts’ao Hsi. If you have questions come quickly and 
ask.” 

At that time, Magistrate Wei, the officials, and the 
good men and faithful women of the assembly all attained 
understanding, faithfully accepted, honored the teaching 
and practiced it. 

Commentary: 

How did the people in the assembly attain understanding? 
Don’t pay attention to them! You must find a way to understand 
for yourself and leave it at that. 

201 

CHAPTER IV 

CONCENTRATION AND WISDOM 

Sutra: 

The Master instructed the assembly: “Good Knowing 
Advisors, this Dharma-door of mine has concentration 
and wisdom as its foundation. Great assembly, do not be 
confused and say that concentration and wisdom are 
different. Concentration and wisdom are one substance, 
not two. Concentration is the substance of wisdom, and 
wisdom is the function of concentration. Where there is 
wisdom, concentration is in the wisdom. Where there is 
concentration, wisdom is in the concentration. If you 
understand this principle, you understand the balanced 
study of concentration and wisdom. 

“Students of the Way, do not say that first there is 
concentration, which produces wisdom, or that first there 
is wisdom, which produces concentration: do not say that 
the two are different. To hold this view implies a duality 
of dharma. If your speech is good, but your mind is not, 
then concentration and wisdom are useless because they 
are not equal. If mind and speech are both good, the inner 
and outer are alike, and concentration and wisdom are 
equal. 

“Self-enlightenment, cultivation, and practice are not 
a matter for debate. If you debate which comes first, then 
you are like a confused man who does not cut off ideas of 
victory and defeat, but magnifies the notion of self and 

203 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

dharmas, and does not disassociate himself from the four 
marks.” 

“Good Knowing Advisors, what are concentration 
and wisdom like? They are like a lamp and its light. With 
the lamp, there is light. Without the lamp, there is 
darkness. The lamp is the substance of the light and the 
light is the function of the lamp. Although there are two 
names, there is one fundamental substance. The dharma 
of concentration and wisdom is also thus.” 

Commentary: 

Concentration comes from holding precepts. With 
concentration, one can bring forth wisdom. Precepts, 
concentration, and wisdom are the three studies which have no 
outflows. If you wish to obtain concentration, you must begin by 
holding precepts. That is: 

All evil not done. 
All good respectfully practiced. 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “Although you are Good Knowing 
Advisors, don’t be attached and say that concentration and 
wisdom differ. In this Sudden Teaching Dharma-door of mine, 
concentration is wisdom and wisdom is concentration; although 
there are two names, there is only one substance. 

What is the function of concentration? Concentration 
produces wisdom. When wisdom is produced, concentration is 
certainly within it. If you understand that concentration and 
wisdom are one substance with two different functions, then you 
understand “the balanced study of concentration and wisdom.” 

“Tf the speech is good, but the mind is not:” If your mind is 
full of jealousy, obstruction, insolence, conceit, deviant views, 

204 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

greed, hatred, and stupidity, “concentration and wisdom are 
useless,” they are not present, “because they are not equal.” But 
if your “mind and speech both are good,” then your mouth says 
what is in your mind, and “concentration and wisdom are equal.” 

You should understand and cultivate on your own. Do not 
argue with people in order to show off your cultivation and 
advertise yourself. To debate whether concentration or wisdom 
comes first is to be “like a confused person who does not cut off 
ideas of victory and defeat:” 

In debate, thoughts of victory and defeat 
Stand in contradiction to the Way; 
Giving rise to the mind of four marks. 
How can one obtain samadhi? 

Attached to the mark of self, others, living beings, and a life, 
how can you obtain samadhi? As soon as you argue, you have no 
concentration and, consequently, no wisdom. This is extremely 
stupid. When you argue, you give rise to the attachment to self 
and dharmas and then the four marks arise. With attachment to 
self comes attachment to others; with attachment to others comes 
attachment to living beings; with attachment to living beings 
comes attachment to life. 

The analogy of the lamp and light illustrates the identical 
substance of concentration and wisdom. As a lamp produces 
light, so concentration produces wisdom. As light is the function 
of a lamp, so wisdom is the function of concentration. But 
despite the discrimination, concentration and wisdom are 
fundamentally one. 

205 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

The Master instructed the assembly: “Good Knowing 
Advisors, the Single Conduct Samadhi is the constant 
practice of maintaining a direct, straightforward mind in 
all places, whether one is walking, standing, sitting, or 
lying down. As the Vimalakirti Sutra says, ‘The straight 
mind is the Bodhimandala; the straight mind is the Pure 
Land.’ 

“Do not speak of straightness with the mouth only, 
while the mind and practice are crooked, nor speak of the 
Single Conduct Samadhi without maintaining a straight 
mind. Simply practice keeping a straight mind and have 
no attachment to any dharma. 

“The confused person is attached to the marks of 
dharmas, while holding to the Single Conduct Samadhi 
and saying, ‘I sit unmoving and falseness does not arise in 
my mind. That is the Single Conduct Samadhi.’ Such an 
interpretation serves to make him insensate and 
obstructs the causes and conditions for attaining the 
Way. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the Way must penetrate 
and flow. How can it be impeded? If the mind does not 
dwell in dharmas, the Way will penetrate and flow. The 
mind that dwells in dharmas is in self-bondage. To say 
that sitting unmoving is correct is to be like Shariputra 
who sat quietly in the forest but was scolded by 
Vimalakirti.” 

Commentary: 

You should not speak of directness, and act dishonestly. If 
you greet rich people with smiles and compliments, saying, 

206 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

“Welcome, welcome!” when in fact it is not the person you 
welcome, but their money and power instead, that is flattery. 

If you speak about the Single Conduct Samadhi, but you act 
improperly, such hypocrisy betrays a crooked mind. But if you 
practice keeping a direct mind, then your mind is the 
Bodhimanda. You should manage all your affairs with a direct 
mind and have no attachments. 

A stupid person gives rise to a dharma-attachment. “T sit here 
unmoving and I have no false thinking. This is the Single 
Conduct Samadhi.” He is completely wrong. One who thinks 
this way turns into a vegetable. The Way should flow without 
obstruction. If you stop your thought, you turn into dead ashes 
and rotten wood and become useless. You should “produce that 
thought which is nowhere supported,” by attaching yourself 
neither to emptiness, to existence, nor to dharmas. Attachment to 
dharmas results in attachment to existence, and attachment to 
existence results in perishing in emptiness. But when you are 
unsupported, the Way will circulate freely. 

“The mind that dwells in dharmas is in self-bondage.” If you 
get attached to the meditation-dharma and sit without moving, 
you tie yourself up and become a prisoner. Shariputra, the 
foremost of Shakyamuni Buddha’s disciples in wisdom, sat in 
the forest, quietly meditating, but the layman Vimalakirti 
reprimanded him, saying, “What are you doing? What use are 
you, sitting there like a corpse!” 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, there are those who teach 
people to sit looking at the mind and contemplating 
stillness, without moving or arising. They claim that it 
has merit. Confused men, not understanding, easily 
become attached and go insane. There are many such 

207 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

people. Therefore you should know that teaching of this 
kind is a great error.” 

Commentary: 

The deluded person does not understand the principle. They 
think, “Ill just sit here and not get up. This is the way to attain 
skill in Ch’an.” They get attached to what they are doing, and 
they go insane. For example, many people have come here 
saying that they are enlightened. That is insanity. 

There are many such people. Teachers from their number 
say, “If you certify my enlightenment, I will certify yours.” That 
is a big mistake. In China in the T’ang dynasty, there were false 
Buddhist Patriarchs who practiced “intellectual zen’—they had 
clever answers but no foundation in actual cultivation. It is not 
surprising that we find such people in America today. But these 
imposters who falsely claim to be enlightened pave the way for 
those of true enlightenment. No one knew about enlightenment, 
so the impostors said, “We are enlightened!” 

Everyone then said, “So this is enlightenment!” and they 
examined them closely to see what enlightenment is like. 
Suddenly a truly enlightened person comes and no one believes 
in him. They think that the truly enlightened one is the same as 
the impostors. You who now cultivate to become enlightened 
will be forced to deal with the widespread influence of such 
pretenders. That leads me to advise you that when you become 
enlightened, you should not say that you are. That is the best 
method. 

This is the way of the world: true, true, false; false, false, true. 
If you are true, they say you are false. If you are false, they say 
you are true. Therefore you should not speak of true and false. 
Tell people to go and see for themselves. 

208 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

Unenlightened people will say that they are enlightened. If 
you who have already become enlightened claim to be 
enlightened, then you are just like those who are not. Why? 
People who actually are enlightened do not introduce themselves 
saying, “Don’t you know me? I am enlightened! I am the same 
as so and so, and he is enlightened. He is enlightened and I am 
just like him.” Enlightenment and non-enlightenment are the 
same, not different. Do not hang out a false name. Enlightened, 
you are a human being. Unenlightened, you are still a human 
being. The enlightened and the unenlightened both can realize 
Buddhahood. It’s a question of time. 

Do not advertise yourself. If no one knows you, that is the 
very best! Then your straight mind is the Bodhimandala. 

Sutra: 

The Master instructed the assembly: “Good Knowing 
Advisors, the right teaching is basically without a division 
into ‘sudden’ and ‘gradual.’ People’s natures themselves 
are sharp or dull. When the confused person who 
gradually cultivates and the enlightened person who 
suddenly connects each recognize the original mind and 
see the original nature, they are no different. 

“Therefore, the terms sudden and gradual are shown 
to be false names. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, this Dharma-door of mine, 
from the past onwards, has been established from the 
first with no-thought as its doctrine, no-mark as its 
substance, and no-dwelling as its basis. No-mark means 
to be apart from marks while in the midst of marks. No- 
thought means to be without thought while in the midst 
of thought. No-dwelling is the basic nature of human 
beings. 

209 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“In the world of good and evil, attractiveness and 
ugliness, friendliness and hostility, when faced with 
language which is offensive, critical, or argumentative, 
you should treat it all as empty and have no thought of 
revenge. In every thought, do not think of former states. 
If past, present, and future thoughts succeed one another 
without interruption, it is bondage. Not to dwell in 
dharmas from thought to thought is to be free from 
bondage. That is to take no-dwelling as the basis. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, to be separate from all 
outward marks is called ‘no-mark.’ The ability to be 
separate from marks is the purity of the Dharma’s 
substance. It is to take no-mark as the substance. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the non-defilement of the 
mind in all states is called ‘no-thought.’ In your thoughts 
you should always be separate from states; do not give 
rise to thought about them.” 

Commentary: 

Basically, real Buddhism has no sudden or gradual Dharma. 
Stupid people cultivate it bit by bit, whereas enlightened people 
immediately cut off false thinking, bad habits, and involvement 
with external objects and so understand the mind and see their 
own nature. 

From the time of Shakyamuni Buddha right up until the 
present, the Sudden Teaching Dharma-door which the Sixth 
Patriarch transmitted established no-thought, no-mark, and no- 
dwelling as its doctrine, its substance, and its basis. 

Thoughts of the past, present, and future are continuous like 
waves on water. To be attached to such thoughts is to tie yourself 
up, to lock yourself up so that you cannot be free. You should not 
be attached to any dharmas. 

210 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

In your own clear, pure thoughts, keep constantly separate 
from states and do not think about the external environment. 

Sutra: 

“If you merely do not think of the hundred things, and 
so completely rid yourself of thought, then as the last 
thought ceases, you die and undergo rebirth in another 
place. That is a great mistake, of which students of the 
Way should take heed. 

Commentary: 

While you should not produce thoughts with regard to 
external states, that does not mean that you should completely 
rid yourself of thought. 

Attached to marks, 

whatever you do is wrong; 
But in non-activity 

you fall into emptiness. 

“What should I do?” you ask. It is just at this point that the 
greatest difficulty arises, but if you handle it, just that is no- 
thought. 

If you want to have no-thought, then die. That is to have no- 
thought. But if you die here, you will be reborn somewhere else. 
That is really wrong! If you want to cultivate the Way, you 
should pay special attention and take heed! 

Sutra: 

“To misinterpret the Dharma and make a mistake 
yourself might be acceptable, but to exhort others to do 
the same is unacceptable. In your own confusion you do 

211 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

not see, and, moreover you slander the Buddha’s Sutras. 
Therefore no-thought is established as the doctrine. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, why is no-thought 
established as the doctrine? Because there are confused 
people who speak of seeing their own nature, and yet they 
produce thought with regard to states. Their thoughts 
cause deviant views to arise, and from that all defilement 
and false thinking are created. Originally, not one single 
dharma can be obtained in the self-nature. If there is 
something to attain, or false talk of misfortune and 
blessing, that is just defilement and deviant views. 
Therefore, this Dharma-door establishes no-thought as 
its doctrine. 

Commentary: 

You may be stupid yourself and not understand your mind 
and nature. What is more you may slander the Buddha’s Sutras 
and say that they are incorrect. For that reason, no-thought is set 
up as the doctrine. 

Some people say that they have seen the nature. They say 
they are enlightened, but they have all kinds of thoughts about 
externals, deviant views, and defilements. 

But your own clear, pure origin, the wondrous, bright 
enlightenment nature has not one single dharma within it. It is 
the clear, pure, source, the wondrous, bright, true nature. 
Originally, there is not one single thing. 

Some people speak of misfortune and blessing, saying, 
“Tomorrow you are going to die, unless, of course, you buy great 
merit today by giving me a million dollars.” Hearing such talk, 
the victim immediately buys some merit and, naturally, he does 
not die. He claims that the prediction was certainly efficacious, 

212 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

but does not mention the fact that he was cheated out ofa million 
dollars. 

Or someone says, “You have great blessings, but you are off 
by just a little bit. If you create a million dollars worth of merit, 
next term you can be president.” 

“The presidency is certainly cheap. If I buy it for a million, 
Ill still have several billion left,” says the victim, and he buys 
the presidency. That is false talk of misfortune and blessings. It 
is defilement and deviant views. 

I will speak to you more about no-thought, no mark, and no- 
dwelling. Without a mark, where do you dwell? Without 
thought, what mark do you have? Isn’t that right? No-thought, 
no mark, and no-dwelling: no-thought is no production, no mark 
is no extinction, and no-dwelling is the fundamental absence of 
production and extinction, of right and wrong. 

No-thought, no-mark, and no-dwelling are the same as no 
right and no wrong, no good and no evil, no male and no female. 
Without deviant thought, how could there be male and female? 
This is truly marvelous. If you master this dharma there is no 
mark. Without the mark of self, who has sexual desire? Sexual 
desire is just a thought; without thought there is no sexual desire 
and no mark ofa self and no attachment. Is this anything but true 
freedom and true liberation? 

No-thought, no-mark, and no-dwelling; no movement, no 
stillness; no right, no wrong; no male, no female; no good, no 
evil: this is extremely miraculous. You need only use no- 
thought, no-mark, and no-dwelling. Without a body, where do 
you dwell? Right? This is wonderful. You should investigate it 
in detail. 

213 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, ‘No’ means no what? 
‘Thought’ means thought of what? ‘No’ means no two 
marks, no thought of defilement. ‘Thought’ means 
thought of the original nature of True Suchness. True 
Suchness is the substance of thought and thought is the 
function of True Suchness. 

“The True Suchness self-nature gives rise to thought. 
It is not the eye, ear, nose, or tongue which can think. The 
True Suchness possesses a nature and therefore gives rise 
to thought. Without True Suchness, the eye, ear, forms, 
and sounds immediately go bad. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the True Suchness self- 
nature gives rise to thought, and the six faculties, 
although they see, hear, feel, and know, are not defiled by 
the ten thousand states. Your true nature is eternally 
independent. Therefore, the Vimalakirti Sutra says, ‘If 
one is well able to discriminate all dharma marks, then, 
in the primary meaning, one does not move.’” 

Commentary: 

The Patriarch addressed the assembly saying, “Good 
Knowing Advisors, all of you with wisdom, when I say ‘no,’ 
what is not? When I say ‘thought,’ what is the thought of? ‘No’ 
means no two marks; further, not even one mark. “No thought’ 
means no thoughts of defilement; no defiled, improper, deviant 
thoughts of sexual desire. 

““Thought’ means the thought of the True Suchness inherent 
in each of us. This is the Tathagata Store nature, the Buddha 
nature.” 

214 

Chapter IV. Concentration and Wisdom 

You ask, “Then if there is no thought, is there no True 
Suchness?” 

‘No’ means no two marks; ‘thought’ means thought of the 
Truly Such original nature. 

Thought arising from the Truly Such self-nature is true 
thought. The eye, ear, nose, and tongue cannot think. True 
Suchness is the kind spoken of in Chapter II: “When your nature 
is present, the king is present; when your nature goes, there is no 
king.” 

Although thought does arise and seeing, hearing, feeling and 
knowing do occur at the gates of the six organs, there is no 
attachment when you use your True Suchness nature because 
there are no deviant thoughts. The true nature is eternally 
independent. Because of the function of True Suchness, you are 
well able to discriminate all dharma marks. Even so, you are not 
attached to any state and so in the final analysis you do not move. 

215 

CHAPTER V 

SITTING IN CH’AN 

Sutra: 

The Master instructed the assembly: “The door of sitting 
in Ch’an consists fundamentally of attaching oneself 
neither to the mind nor to purity; it is not non-movement. 
One might speak of becoming attached to the mind, and 
yet the mind is fundamentally false. You should know 
that the mind is like an illusion, and therefore there is 
nothing to which you can become attached.” 

Commentary: 

Ch’an is not necessarily just sitting in meditation. One may 
practice Ch’an while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. 
In his “Song of Enlightenment,” the Great Master Yung Chia 
wrote: 

In Ch’an while walking and while sitting, 
Speaking, silent, moving, still, 
His body is at peace. 

If you know how, you can practice Ch’an at all times, not just 
while sitting in meditation. But do not become attached to the 
mind or to purity. Becoming attached to the mind, you have two 
minds, and becoming attached to purity, you have two purities. 
Do not think, “I will sit here and not move.” 

217 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Becoming attached to the mind, you have two false minds, 
neither of which is the true mind. The mind is an illusion. Why 
attach yourself to it? 

Sutra: 

“One might say that to practice Ch’an is to attach 
oneself to purity, yet the nature of people is basically 
pure. It is because of false thinking that the True 
Suchness is obscured. Simply have no false thinking, and 
the nature will be pure of itself. 

“If an attachment to purity arises in your mind, a 
deluded idea of purity will result. What is delusory does 
not exist, and the attachment is false. Purity has no form 
or mark and yet there are those who set up the mark of 
purity as an achievement. Those with this view obstruct 
their own original nature and become bound by purity. 

Commentary: 

Everyone’s self-nature is basically pure of itself, but when 
you cling to purity, you add a head on top of a head and create 
two purities, a true purity and a false purity. And so you stray 
from the original pure substance. 

Though purity has no form or mark, you postulate a mark to 
it and in so doing add a head on top of a head. When you consider 
that to be skill, you obstruct your original mind and nature. 
Cultivation is for the purpose of breaking attachments. You 
should not be attached. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, one who cultivates non- 
movement does not notice whether other people are right 

218 

Chapter V. Sitting in Ch’an 

or wrong, good or bad, or whether they have other faults. 
That is the non-movement of the self-nature. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, although the body of the 
confused person may not move, as soon as he opens his 
mouth he speaks of what is right and wrong about others, 
of their good points and shortcomings, and so he turns his 
back on the Way. Attachment to the mind and 
attachment to purity are obstructions to the Way.” 

Commentary: 

You cultivate non-movement? Non-movement of what? You 
shouldn’t just sit there and not move. You should cultivate non- 
movement in the midst of movement; in the midst of your daily 
activities, do not move. Do not insist on criticizing others and 
pointing out their faults. If you do nothing but censure and 
browbeat others, it is not non-movement. 

Sutra: 

The Master instructed the assembly, “Good Knowing 
Advisors, what is meant by ‘sitting in Ch’an?’ In this 
unobstructed and unimpeded Dharma-door, the mind’s 
thoughts do not arise with respect to any good or evil 
external state. That is what ‘sitting’ is. To see the 
unmoving self-nature inwardly is Ch’an. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, what is meant by ‘Ch’an 
concentration?’ Being separate from external marks is 
‘Ch’an.’ Not being confused inwardly is ‘concentration.’ 

“If you become attached to external marks, your 
mind will be confused inwardly. If you are separate from 
external marks, inwardly your mind will be unconfused. 
The original nature is naturally pure, in a natural state of 

219 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

concentration. Confusion arises merely because states 
are seen and attended to. If the mind remains unconfused 
when any state is encountered, that is true 
concentration.” 

Commentary: 

Sitting in one place is not necessarily “sitting.” You are said 
to be “sitting” when your mind is no longer disturbed by external 
conditions, be they good or bad. When you view the unmoving 
self-nature inwardly, you are practicing Ch’an. 

When you are not attached to external marks, you have 
attained Ch’an. When inwardly you have no illusions or 
scattered thoughts, you have attained concentration. 

Detach yourself from external marks, and your efficacious, 
bright, enlightened nature will be pure of itself. In that way you 
will attain concentration. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, being separate from all 
external marks is Ch’an and being inwardly unconfused 
is concentration. External Ch’an and_= inward 
concentration are Ch’an concentration. The Vimalakirti 
Sutra says, ‘Just then, suddenly return and regain the 
original mind.’ The Bodhisattva-shila Sutra says, ‘Our 
basic nature is pure of itself.” Good Knowing Advisors, in 
every thought, see your own clear and pure original 
nature. Cultivate, practice, realize the Buddha Way!” 

220 

CHAPTER VI 

REPENTANCE AND REFORM 

Sutra: 

Seeing the scholars and common people of Kuang Chou 
and Shao Kuan and the four directions assembled on the 
mountain to hear the Dharma, the Great Master took his 
seat and spoke to the assembly, saying: 

“Come, each of you Good Knowing Advisors! This 
work must begin within your self-nature. At all times, in 
every thought, purify your own mind, cultivate your own 
conduct, see your own Dharma-body and the Buddha of 
your own mind. Take yourself across; discipline yourself. 
Only then will your coming here have not been in vain. 
You have come from afar to attend this gathering 
because we have karmic affinities in common. Now all of 
you kneel and I will first transmit to you the five-fold 
Dharma-body refuge of the self-nature, and then the 
markless repentance and reform.” 

Commentary: 

Shao Kuan is the present day Ch’ti Chiang. Students and 
common people from north, east, south, and west went to Nan 
Hua Temple on Pao Lin Mountain to hear the Great Master 
explain the Dharma. 

The Master said, “The work of sitting in Ch’an meditation, 
the mind-ground Dharma-door, must arise from within your self- 
nature. Every thought must be correct, not deviant. Proper 

221 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

thoughts purify the mind; improper thoughts defile it. You 
personally must cultivate this dharma-door; no one else can do it 
for you. Your own Dharma body is simply your self-nature, and 
the Buddha is within your own mind. If you take yourself across 
by receiving and keeping moral precepts, you will not have 
wasted your life. We meet here because conditions from former 
lives have ripened. Now, put your right knee on the ground and 
I will transmit to you the five-fold Dharma-body refuge and the 
markless repentance and reform.” 

Sutra: 

The assembly knelt and the Master said, “The first is 
the morality-refuge, which is simply your own mind 
when free from error, evil, jealousy, greed, hatred and 
hostility. 

“The second is the concentration-refuge, which is just 
your own mind which does not become confused when 
seeing the marks of all good and evil conditions. 

“The third is the wisdom-refuge, which is simply your 
own mind when it is unobstructed and when it constantly 
uses wisdom to contemplate and illuminate the self- 
nature, when it does no evil, does good without becoming 
attached, and is respectful of superiors, considerate of 
inferiors, and sympathetic towards orphans and 
widows.” 

Commentary: 

Pay attention! The morality-refuge is simply to have no 
thoughts of right and wrong, good and evil. In order to keep the 
precepts you absolutely must not be jealous: neither should you 
be aggressive, like a bandit. 

222 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

If the mind remains unperturbed in all states, good and bad, 
that is the concentration-refuge. 

Do not obstruct yourself with feelings of inferiority, but use 
wisdom to destroy ignorance so that you may view the self- 
nature. Refrain from evil and practice good, but do not become 
attached to the idea of merit as the Emperor Wu of Liang did. 

If you do good, forget about it. Don’t run up to the Heaven of 
the Thirty-Three and shout, “I gave $500.00! I gave $1,000.00! 
My merit is higher than the heavens!” This is to be stupid like 
Emperor Wu; it is not wisdom. 

Respect your father, mother, teacher, and elders and never 
speak of their faults. Do not be like the boy who testified against 
his own father. The police asked the father if he had stolen a 
sheep: 

“No,” said the father. 

“What do you mean “no?’” cried his son. “I saw you kill the 
sheep, eat it, and sell its wool. How can you deny that you stole 
it?” 

This is wrong. If you know that your father is guilty, when 
the police come you should run. Refuse to testify! This is called 
“respecting your superiors.” 

Be considerate to those beneath you. Don’t be mean to little 
children and unsympathetic to widows. Mencius said, “A child 
without a father is an orphan and an old woman without a 
husband is a widow.” Orphans and widows deserve pity and 
support. 

Sutra: 

“The fourth is the liberation-refuge, which is simply 
your own mind independent of conditions, not thinking of 
good or evil, and free and unobstructed. 

223 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“The fifth is the refuge of knowledge and views, which 
is simply your own mind when it is independent of good 
and evil conditions and when it does not dwell in 
emptiness or cling to stillness. You should then study this 
in detail, listen a great deal, recognize your original mind, 
and penetrate the true principle of all the Buddhas. You 
should welcome and be in harmony with living creatures; 
and, without the idea of self or other, arrive directly at 
Bodhi, the unchanging true nature.” 

Commentary: 

Is this clear? The absence of self-seeking is liberation. If you 
are self-seeking, you can’t put everything down and so 
continually scheme and plot. To be liberated, do not grasp at 
good or evil. 

If you say, “I will sit here and not study anything. I am 
empty!” your state is useless like the emptiness inside a rubber 
ball. It is not the emptiness of the void. These people sit all day 
thinking of nothing and doing nothing. At mealtime they eat, and 
at bedtime they sleep and do not even dream. This is a pitiful 
waste of time. 

What should you do then? 

You should study the Sutras in detail and listen to Sutra 
lectures. Those who dwell in emptiness and cling to stillness 
claim to study Buddhism. They do not listen to lectures or study 
the Dharma, but if you ask them about it, they say they know it 
all. 

You should welcome living creatures and be in harmony 
with them. In the Chinese “to be in harmony with” is expressed 
by the phrase “to unite the light.” What does that mean? All 
lamps give off light, but have you ever known lamplight to fight 
with lamplight? Has a lamplight ever said, “You are brighter 

224 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

than I am! That is no good. I am going to put out your light!”, 
upon which it hits the other lamplight? Or the other lamp says, 
“Your light is too small. Either make it bigger or move out!” 
None of that goes on between lights. Do you understand? It 
applies to everyone in the world. You practice your way and I 
will practice mine, “without hindering one another.” You cannot 
decide that someone’s reputation is too dazzling and try to ruin 
him so that your own name will shine. 

It is permissible for others to be jealous of me, but I am not 
jealous of anyone. The better you are, the better I like it. The 
more success you have, the happier I am. Not to be jealous is to 
unite the light. 

You might say, “I am uniting the light with him, but he is not 
uniting the light with me.” If you were truly uniting the light with 
him, you wouldn’t know that he wasn’t uniting the light with 
you. Do you understand? If you unite the light with him, how can 
you know that he is not uniting the light with you? He won’t 
unite the light? That’s no problem. Just continue to unite the 
light with him. 

Welcome living creatures. If you like Great Vehicle 
Buddhism, I will explain the Great Vehicle. If you like the Small 
Vehicle, I will explain the Four Noble Truths of suffering, 
origination, stopping, and the Way. If you like the Bodhisattva 
Way, I will explain the Six Paramitas: giving, morality, patience, 
vigor, concentration, and wisdom, and the Ten Thousand 
Conducts which lead to realization of the Bodhisattva Way. If 
you like the dharmas of the Pratyeka Buddhas, I will explain the 
Twelve Conditioned Causes: ignorance conditions activity; 
activity conditions consciousness; consciousness conditions 
name and form; name and form conditions the six senses; the six 
senses condition contact; contact conditions feeling; feeling 
conditions love; love conditions grasping; grasping conditions 

225 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

becoming; becoming conditions birth; birth conditions old age 
and death. 

This is called uniting the light and welcoming living 
creatures, responding to the needs of the individual. One of my 
disciples looked in the dictionary and found that in Chinese to 
“welcome living creatures” means to help other people. 
However, it is not just to help them, it is to induce them to leave 
suffering and obtain bliss. 

“Lacking the idea of self or other, arrive directly at Bodhi, 
the unchanging true nature.” Having helped one person, you 
cannot say, “I have taken a bhikshu across! How great is my 
merit?” If one thinks like that, he hasn’t a dust mote of merit. 
Once you have done something, it should be forgotten. If you 
lead people to Buddhahood you should not be attached to the 
merit gained from it. Therefore the Diamond Sutra says “I must 
take all beings across to Nirvana... and yet not a single living 
being has been taken to Nirvana.” 

You recite the Diamond Sutra from morning to night, but do 
not understand its meaning in the least. “Look at ME!” you say. 
There is still “me,” and “me” comes before everything else. 
What Diamond Sutra do you recite anyway? The Diamond Sutra 
speaks of having no mark of self, no mark of people, of others, 
of living beings or a life, because all dharmas are empty 
appearances. Is there anything more wonderful? If you truly 
understand, you arrive directly at Bodhi, the unchanging true 
nature. This is called the refuge of proper knowledge and views. 
You have been liberated from knowledge, views, and 
attachments. 

No self, no other— 
Contemplate independence, 

226 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

No emptiness, no form— 
View the One Come Thus. 

Without the mark of self: just that is the Bodhisattva 
Avalokiteshvara. If you do not fall either into emptiness or 
existence, you can see the Buddha. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the incense of these refuges 
perfumes each of you within. Do not seek outside. I will 
now transmit to you the markless repentance and reform 
to destroy the offensive actions done within the three 
periods of time and to purify the three karmas.” 

Commentary: 

Repentance is to repent of past misdeeds and reform is to 
refrain from error in the future. If you receive it with a sincere 
mind, this repentance and reform can wipe away the offenses of 
the past and prevent them from being committed in the future. 
Purify your mind, and the transmission will purify the karma of 
your body, mouth and mind. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, repeat after me: ‘May this 
disciple be, in past, present, and future thought, in every 
thought, unstained by stupidity and confusion. May it be 
wiped away at once and never arise again.’” 

227 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

Defiled by stupidity, turned by stupidity, you soon become 
quite stupid. It is most important, in every thought, not to go 
down the road of stupidity but bring forth wisdom instead. 

Bad karma is created out of ignorance. Completely repent 
and reform of all offenses: killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, 
greed, hatred, stupidity, filthy language, lying, harsh speech, and 
slander, and in an instant they will be wiped away. Do not 
commit offenses out of stupidity and confusion. 

Sutra: 

“*May this disciple be, in past, present, and future 
thought, in every thought, unstained by arrogance and 
deceit. Now I completely repent of and reform all bad 
actions done in the past out of arrogance and deceit and 
other such offenses. May their effects be wiped away at 
once and may they never be perpetrated again!’” 

Commentary: 
Arrogance: 

Only knowing there is you; 
Unaware that there are others. 

Looking down on everything: “In the heavens and below, I alone 
am honored.” “Deceit” is lying; it is also the self-deceit of 
thinking that you are indispensable number one in the entire 
world. “I am the highest. The President, the King, and the 
Chairman cannot compare with me.” Do not be stained by 
arrogance or turned by deceit. 

228 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

Sutra: 

“*May this disciple be in past, present, and future 
thought, in every thought unstained by jealousy. Now I 
completely repent of and reform all bad actions done in 
the past out of jealousy and other such offenses. May they 
be wiped away at once and never arise again.’” 

Commentary: 

Jealousy is the very worst thing! Cultivators see someone 
who is more intelligent than they are and become jealous; they 
see someone who learns faster and become jealous; they see 
someone sitting “thus, thus unmoving” and become jealous; they 
see someone eating more food and become jealous; they see 
someone sleeping more and become jealous; they see someone 
drinking more tea and become jealous; even to the point that 
when someone has been sick for a long time they think, “Why 
can’t J get sick, too?” Do not be defiled or turned by jealousy. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the above has been the 
markless repentance and reform. What is repentance 
and what is reform? Repentance is to repent of past 
errors, to repent so completely of all bad actions done in 
the past out of stupidity, confusion, arrogance, deceit, 
jealousy, and other such offenses, that they never arise 
again. Reform is to refrain from such transgressions in 
the future. Awakening and cutting off such offenses 
completely and never committing them again is called 
repentance and reform. 

“Common people, stupid and confused, know only 
how to repent of former errors and do not know how to 

229 

The 

Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

230 

reform and refrain from transgressions in the future. 
Because they do not reform, their former errors are not 
wiped away, and they will occur in the future. If former 
errors are not wiped away and transgressions are again 
committed, how can that be called repentance and 
reform? 

“Good Knowing Advisors, as you have repented and 
reformed, I will now teach you to make the four all- 
encompassing vows. 

I vow to take across the limitless living beings 
of my own mind. 

I vow to cut off the inexhaustible afflictions 
of my own mind. 

I vow to study the immeasurable Dharma-doors 
of my own nature. 

I vow to realize the supreme Buddha Way 
of my own nature. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, did all of you not just say, 
‘I vow to take across the limitless living beings’? What 
does it mean? You should remember that it is not Hui 
Neng who takes them across. Good Knowing Advisors, 
the ‘living beings’ within your mind are deviant and 
confused thoughts, deceitful and false thoughts, 
unwholesome thoughts, jealous thoughts, vicious 
thoughts: all these thoughts are ‘living beings.’ The self- 
nature of each one of them must take itself across. That is 
true crossing over.” 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

Commentary: 

You must vow to take across the beings within your own 
heart, to cut off the afflictions, and to study the Dharma-doors. 
There is nothing higher than Buddhahood: vow to realize it. 

Living beings are incalculably numerous, but you yourself 
must vow to save them, for it is not the Sixth Patriarch who takes 
them across. These good and bad living beings exist within your 
own mind. The good ones seek unsurpassed Bodhi and produce 
the Bodhi mind, while the bad ones must still be saved. Think it 
over and ask yourself, “Have I saved the living beings within my 
own mind? Am I proper in attitude and honorable in conduct or 
am I jealous, obstructive, and otherwise ignorant?” 

The living beings within the mind are limitless, but our first 
concerns are the deviant and confused living beings, which 
should be taken across by means of proper wisdom; the deceitful 
and false living beings, which should be taken across by means 
of humility, and the unwholesome living beings, which should 
be taken across by means of goodness. If you find that you have 
these faults, vow to correct them, for if you do not they will drag 
you into the inescapable and endless misery of hell. 

Respect takes jealous living beings across. Although 
Bodhiruci was a Dharma Master, he envied other Dharma 
Masters and viciously tried to poison Bodhidharma. Such 
thoughts are living beings and you are making a serious mistake 
if you do not take them across. 

Sutra: 

“What is meant by ‘the self nature taking itself 
across’? It is to take across by means of right views the 
living beings of deviant views, affliction, and delusion 
within your own mind. Once you have right views, use 

231 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Prajna Wisdom to destroy the living beings of delusion, 
confusion, and falsehood. Each one takes itself across. 
Enlightenment takes confusion across, wisdom takes 
delusion across, goodness takes evil across. Such crossing 
over is a true crossing. 

“Further, ‘I vow to cut off the inexhaustible 
afflictions.’ That is to use the Prajna Wisdom of your own 
self-nature to cast out the vain and false thoughts in your 
mind. 

“Further, ‘I vow to study the immeasurable Dharma- 
doors.” You must see your own nature and always 
practice the right Dharma. That is true study. 

“Further, ‘I vow to realize the supreme Buddha way,’ 
and with humble mind to always practice the true and the 
proper. Separate yourself from both confusion and 
enlightenment, and always give rise to Prajna. When you 
cast out the true and the false, you see your nature and 
realize the Buddha-way at the very moment it is spoken 
of. Always be mindful; cultivate the Dharma that 
possesses the power of this vow.” 

Commentary: 

Use Prajna wisdom to destroy the living beings of delusion, 
confusion, and falsehood. Beat them to death! You ask, “But 
isn’t that a violation of the precept against killing?” Here you 
may violate the precept, just a bit. You are indeed hard to teach! 
When you break precepts, you don’t worry about breaking them, 
but when you do not break precepts you worry about breaking 
them. 

Transform the bad beings within your nature so that the good 
ones may dwell undisturbed and at peace. You may kill them; 

232 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

you may beat them to death. Such crossing over is true crossing 
over. 

Afflictions never end, but you must cut them off. Actually, 
“cut off’ means “change.” Change your afflictions into Bodhi. 
Afflictions are actually Bodhi, and if you cut off all afflictions 
you cut off Bodhi. If you cut off all afflictions you would 
become a Buddha, and you don’t want to do that just yet, do you? 
So leave just a hair’s worth of afflictions and transform the rest 
into Bodhi. Use genuine Prajna wisdom to get rid of affliction 
and cast out all vain, false, deviant, and ignorant thoughts. 

Recognize your mind, see your original nature, and always 
practice the right Dharma, not the wrong. You may study the 
Buddhadharma in detail, but if you do not practice it, it is not true 
study. True Buddhist studies includes both study and practice. 
For example, people who used to smoke, drink, and take drugs 
no longer do so once they have studied the Buddhadharma. They 
do not even eat meat! Those who were lazy and did nothing but 
sleep from morning to night and from night to morning, now 
read and translate Sutras, listen to lectures, and meditate 
vigorously without a thought of sleeping. If this were not true 
study, why would they choose to work so hard? 

All living beings can cross themselves over. No one needs to 
take them across. 

The four vows in the text above are the basic vows which all 
Bodhisattvas should make. 

As to the humble mind, the Earth Store Sutra says, 

“The Buddha told Earth Store Bodhisattva, ‘Perhaps 
there are kings of countries in Jambudvipa, or 
noblemen, great ministers, great elders, great 
Kshatriyas, great Brahmans, and the rest who 
encounter the tired, the poor, and those who are 

233 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

hunchbacked, crippled, dumb, mute, deaf, retarded, 
eyeless, as well as all others who are handicapped. 
Perhaps these kings and great men will wish to give and 
will be able to do so with great compassion, a humble 
heart, and a smile. Perhaps they will give personally 
with their own hands or arrange for others to give, 
speaking gentle and sympathetic words. Such kings and 
others will obtain blessings comparable to the 
meritorious virtue they would gain by giving to 
Buddhas as numerous as the sand-grains in one 
hundred Ganges Rivers.’” 

Vow to realize the unsurpassed path! 

A ten-thousand-story building 
Is built from the ground up: 

Once a person told an illogical tale. “In New York,” he said, 
“the skyscrapers are not built from the ground up. They are built 
in empty space. They build the roof first.” Everyone racked their 
brains and grew very upset, but no one could figure out how a 
building could be built in empty space. When I was in New 
York, I saw that the buildings were, in fact, built from the ground 
up. His story was nothing but a false rumor. 

Another person said, “America is indeed beautiful! The 
American clouds are not like clouds in other countries. They are 
multicolored and entwined like garlands! The American moon is 
triangular and the American sun is square!” Do you believe this? 

To realize Buddhahood, one must begin from the ground up, 
with a humble mind. Do not brag, “Look at me!” Practice the 
true and proper Dharma with a contrite heart and modest 
manner. 

234 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

“Separate yourself from confusion and enlightenment.” You 
say, “Separating oneself from confusion is all right, but how can 
one possibly separate oneself from enlightenment?” This refers 
to deviant enlightenment, not right enlightenment. Those with 
deviant enlightenment are slow to understand the 
Buddhadharma, but they don’t need to be taught how to gamble 
or take drugs. They can do that on their own. You should keep 
away from such evil enlightenment. The text here does not say 
that you should avoid right enlightenment. 

“You always give rise to Prajna.” When you separate from 
deviant enlightenment, you give rise to wisdom, understanding, 
and right enlightenment and constantly generate Prajna. 

“When you cast out the true and the false, you see the 
Buddha-nature and realize the Buddha-way at the very moment 
of speaking of it.” The truth that you cast aside is relative, not 
actual. Once rid of the true and the false, the original True 
Suchness-nature is manifest. You cannot say that this nature is 
either true or false. Truth exists because there is falsehood and 
falsehood because there is truth. The true nature, however, is 
neither true nor false. The Shurangama Sutra says, 

Falseness itself manifests all truth; 
The false and true are both false. 

The Great Master Yung Chia in his “Song of 
Enlightenment,” said: 

When truth is not postulated, 
falseness is basically empty. 

Existence and non-existence both rejected: 
what is not empty, make empty. 

Real truth has no opposite. 

235 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Always be mindful; cultivate the Dharma that possesses the 
power of this vow.” Having made these vows, you may practice. 
Cultivate them in every thought. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, now that you have made 
the four all-encompassing vows, I will transmit the 
precepts of the triple refuge that has no mark. Good 
Knowing Advisors, take refuge with the enlightened, the 
honored, the doubly complete. Take refuge with the 
right, the honored that is apart from desire. Take refuge 
with the pure, the honored among the multitudes.” 

Commentary: 

Take refuge with the Buddha; the Buddha is enlightened. 
Enlightenment is simply the Buddha. The Buddha is nothing but 
enlightenment. The Buddha is “doubly complete” because he 
has perfected both blessings and wisdom. 

Take refuge with the Dharma which is “right” and proper. Do 
not take refuge with deviant teachings, heavenly demons, or 
heterodox religions. Take refuge with the genuine 
Buddhadharma which is the “honored that is apart from desire.” 

Everyone has sexual desire and it actually kills people. Why 
don’t we realize Buddhahood? It is because of desire, and the 
greed, hate, and stupidity which accompany it. We study the 
Buddhadharma in order to get rid of desire and cut off love. The 
absence of lust is the honored that is apart from desire. 

Take refuge with the Sangha; the Sangha is pure and its 
members are called “pure fields of merit.” True, genuine 
cultivators should maintain the precept against handling money. 
Without money, you are pure; with money you are dirty. 

236 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

Members of the Sangha who truly wish to cultivate should stay 
away from money. 

On the other hand, without money you cannot nourish the 
Way, you cannot cultivate. Although you need money, you 
should not be attached to it and depend on its source, thinking all 
day, “Who has several million in the bank? I'll go and beg from 
him. Then I can build a temple or a school or perhaps print an 
edition of the Tripitaka as a meritorious activity.” That’s just 
profit seeking. 

While in Manchuria there was a short period during which 
money and I parted company. I never touched money and for a 
good reason. Living in the temple where I lived when I left home 
were forty or fifty bhikshus, but sometimes as few as ten. When 
I first arrived at the temple, the abbot was out begging and none 
of the bhikshus knew me. “I know the abbot,” I said, and they 
welcomed me. 

After leaving home, I practiced austerities, but not the ones 
you practice. You type, translate Sutras, and meditate, but in the 
big rural temple where I lived, there was a lot of outside work to 
be done. Sweeping the courtyard alone took an hour. My first job 
was to clean the toilets, which weren’t flush toilets, but pit 
toilets, and every day the waste had to be removed because the 
cultivators did not want to smell the odor. They gave this work 
to me because I had just left home and had not yet cut off my 
attachment to smells. I did it every day and didn’t mind too 
much. 

I got up at two in the morning to prepare the hall for services. 
When it snowed I swept the walkways so that they were clear at 
four when everyone else got up. When the abbot returned and 
saw me he said, “So you have come!” 

“Yes,” I said, “I have.” 

237 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

After I had formally left home, he called a meeting, wishing 
to elect me as manager, a position second only to the abbot. 
When the abbot retires, the manager becomes the new abbot. 
Everyone objected. “He has just left home,” they said. “How can 
he possibly be manager!” 

“Very well,” said the abbot. “Let’s go before the image of 
Wei T’ou Bodhisattva and draw names.” Oddly enough, they 
drew three times and my name came up each time. No one said 
a word because I had been elected by Wei T’ou Bodhisattva 
himself. Later, when the abbot wanted to make me an 
administrator, I said, “All right, but I will not touch money. 
Other people must handle and count it. That is my condition.” 

Unusual things happened while I held this precept. 
Whenever I went to the train station I would sit and wait for 
someone who knew me to come and offer to buy me a ticket. If 
no one came I just waited, but strangely enough whenever I went 
to the station someone came to buy me a ticket. 

If you don’t handle money, you are pure. If you keep even 
one cent, you are unclean. Take refuge with the Sangha, which 
occupies the purest, highest, and most venerable position—“the 
honored among the multitudes.” 

Sutra: 

“*From this day forward, we call enlightenment our 
master and will never again take refuge with deviant 
demons or outside religions. We constantly enlighten 
ourselves by means of the Triple Jewel of our own self- 
nature.’ 

“Good Knowing Advisors, I exhort you all to take 
refuge with the Triple Jewel of your own nature: the 
Buddha, which is enlightenment, the Dharma, which is 
right, and the Sangha, which is pure. 

238 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

“When your mind takes refuge with enlightenment, 
deviant confusion does not arise. Desire decreases, so that 
you know contentment and are able to keep away from 
wealth and from the opposite sex. That is called the 
honored, the doubly complete. 

“When your own mind takes refuge with what is 
right, there are no deviant views in any of your thoughts. 
Because there are no deviant views, there is no self, other, 
arrogance, greed, love, or attachment. That is called the 
honored that is apart from desire. 

“When your own mind takes refuge with the pure, 
your self-nature is not stained by attachment to any state 
of defilement, desire or love. That is called the honored 
among the multitudes.” 

Commentary: 

To lessen desire, it is not enough to be a vegetarian and to 
read Sutras. You must cut off all sexual desire: 

If one does not cast out thoughts of lust, 
One never will escape the dust. 

Unless you rid yourself of sexual desire you will never get 
out of the Triple World: the world of desire, the world of form, 
and the formless world. “Contentment” means not being greedy. 
Dying of poverty, dying of starvation, no matter what the 
difficulty, you are never greedy. 

“Separate from wealth and beauty.” Do you see how clearly 
it says that you should not covet wealth, or the opposite sex, or 
fame? That is to be doubly complete, perfect in blessings and 
wisdom. 

239 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“States of defilement” here refers to all social and political 
situations. You should not be molded by the society, but rather 
transform it. Teach living beings; do not be taught by them. 
Once, when I noticed that one of my students had been talking 
on the phone for over an hour, I asked her what she was doing. 
“T’m trying to convert my boyfriend to Buddhism,” she said. 

“Really?” I said. “What is he now?” 

“He’s a Catholic,” she said. 

“Be careful he doesn’t convert you.” I said. “His belief in 
Catholicism is firm. Take care that he doesn’t take you across!” 

Sure enough, not long afterward she ran off. Now what she 
believes, whether she saved others or was saved by them, is 
unknown. 

The non-defilement of the self-nature is called “the honored 
among the multitudes.” Living beings are all defiled. If you wish 
to be an exceptional individual, you must leave desire behind. To 
separate yourself from desire is to be a great hero and true 
student of the Buddhadharma. Unless you correct your faults, 
what little Buddhadharma you do know is useless. 

Sutra: 

“If you cultivate this practice, you take refuge with 
yourself. 

“Common people do not understand that, and so, 
from morning to night, they take the triple-refuge 
precepts. They say they take refuge with the Buddha, but 
where is the Buddha? If they cannot see the Buddha, how 
can they return to him? Their talk is absurd. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, each of you examine 
yourselves. Do not make wrong use of the mind. The 
Avatamsaka Sutra clearly states that you should take 
refuge with your own Buddha, not with some other 

240 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

Buddha. If you do not take refuge with the Buddha in 
yourself, there is no one you can rely on. 
“Now that you are self-awakened, you should each 
take refuge with the Triple Jewel of your own mind. 
“Within yourself, regulate your mind and nature; 
outside yourself, respect others. That is to take refuge 
with yourself.” 

Commentary: 

Ordinary people do not understand the principle of taking 
refuge. If you constantly say, “I take refuge with the Buddha,” 
just where is the Buddha? If you have never seen the Buddha, 
then how can you take refuge with him? If you say, “I have seen 
him!” you are lying. 

The Sutra tells you to take refuge with your own Buddha, not 
with some other Buddha. The Buddha of your self-nature is 
always present, but you didn’t know this because until now you 
never had the instruction of a Good Knowing Advisor. Now that 
you have taken refuge, you should be clear about the Buddha of 
your self-nature. 

Take refuge with enlightenment. 
Take refuge with what is right. 
Take refuge with the pure. 
Take refuge with enlightenment 
and don’t do stupid things. 
Take refuge with what is right 
and don’t do what is wrong. 
Take refuge with the pure 
and don’t do unclean things. 

241 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Take refuge with the Triple Jewel 
within your own mind. 

If you really understand the Buddhadharma, you will respect 
not just your relatives and friends, but everyone, even people 
you don’t know. Instead of slapping someone when you see him 
and then throwing mud in his face, you must be the most 
respectful toward those who act the worst toward you. This is a 
fundamental responsibility of students of Buddhism. You say, 
“You haven’t really been bad to me, so how could I be bad to 
you?” Isn’t this extraordinary? It’s just to take refuge with the 
Triple Jewel of your self-nature. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, now that you have taken 
refuge with the Triple Jewel, you should listen carefully 
while I explain to you the three bodies of a single 
substance, the self-nature of the Buddha, so that you may 
see the three bodies and become completely enlightened 
to your own self-nature. 

“Repeat after me, 

I take refuge with the clear, pure Dharma-body 
of the Buddha within my own body. 

I take refuge with the hundred thousand myriad 
Transformation-bodies of the Buddha 
within my own body. 

I take refuge with the complete and full Reward body 
of the Buddha within my own body. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the form-body is an inn; it 
cannot be returned to. The three bodies of the Buddha 

242 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

exist within the self-nature of worldly people, but because 
they are confused, they do not see the nature within them 
and so seek the three bodies of the Tathagata outside 
themselves. They do not see that the three bodies of the 
Buddha are within their own bodies. 

“Listen to what I say, for it can cause you to see the 
three bodies of your own self-nature within your own 
body. The three bodies of the Buddha arise from your 
own self-nature and are not obtained from outside. 

“What is the clear, pure Dharma-body Buddha? The 
worldly person’s nature is basically clear and pure, and 
the ten thousand dharmas are produced from it. The 
thought of evil produces evil actions and the thought of 
good produces good actions. Thus all dharmas exist 
within the self-nature. This is like the sky which is always 
clear, and the sun and moon which are always bright, so 
that if they are obscured by floating clouds it is bright 
above the clouds and dark below them. But if the wind 
suddenly blows and scatters the clouds, there is 
brightness above and below, and the myriad forms 
appear. The worldly person’s nature constantly drifts 
like those clouds in the sky. 

“Good Knowing Advisors, intelligence is like the sun 
and wisdom is like the moon. Intelligence and wisdom are 
constantly bright, but if you are attached to external 
states, the floating clouds of false thought cover the self- 
nature so that it cannot shine. 

“If you meet a Good Knowing Advisor, if you listen to 
the true and right Dharma and cast out your own 
confusion and falseness, then inside and out there will be 
penetrating brightness, and within the self-nature all the 
ten thousand dharmas will appear. That is how it is with 

243 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

those who see their own nature. It is called the clear, pure 
Dharma-body of the Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

Your physical body is like a house. You must not take refuge 
in it, but rather take refuge with your own self-nature. Everyone 
has the three Buddha-bodies within themselves, but because of 
their delusion they don’t know it. 

Break through the clouds of illusion! It is just because you 
have not broken through them that you are deluded and have no 
wisdom. But if you do away with troubles and ignorance and 
listen to a Clear-eyed Advisor’s explanation of the orthodox 
Teaching, your own nature will reflect all the dharmas, like a 
luminous crystal. 

Those who see their nature and know their original mind are 
like a clear sky: 

The heart calm— 

All worries go away; 
The mind still- 

Heaven has no clouds. 

When your heart is upset there is chaos, but when your mind 
is calm and resolved, everything is auspicious. 

The pure heart 
like the moon in water; 
The quiet mind 
like a cloudless sky; 
True wealth: the mind stopped, 
thought cut off; 

244 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

True field of blessing: all passions 
put to an end. 

You must end your delusion and greed, still the mind and cut 
off thought. That is true wealth. Truly wealthy people are not 
greedy. Those who are greedy are thereby poor. They may have 
a little money, but they are never satisfied. 

The passions are just selfish desires and without them you are 
a true field of merit. 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, when your own mind takes 
refuge with your self-nature, it takes refuge with the true 
Buddha. To take refuge is to rid your self-nature of 
egotism and unwholesome thoughts as well as of jealousy, 
obsequiousness, deceitfulness, contempt, pride, conceit, 
and deviant views, and all other unwholesome tendencies 
whenever they arise. 

“To take refuge is to be always aware of your own 
transgressions and never to speak of other people’s good 
or bad traits. Always to be humble and polite is to have 
penetrated to the self-nature without any obstacle. That 
is taking refuge. 

Commentary: 

If you turn the light around and reverse the illumination, you 
take refuge with the true Buddha. Be careful not to envy others. 
Would you like to know why you are so deluded? It is because 
in past lives, life after life, you envied others. You envied their 
intelligence and so now you are stupid; you envied their talent 
and so now you have none. You were jealous then and now you 
are inferior. 

245 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

You should not be devious and indirect. Get rid of egotism: 

“T, I, me, myself, everything revolves around me!” You should 
not be deceitful, full of self-importance, and contemptuous of 
others. 

To have deviant views is to misjudge every situation you 

encounter and then go off in the wrong direction. Deviant views 

are 

easy to come by. If you wish to take refuge, see your own 

faults and quit talking about other people. Criticism is yin and 
praise is yang. You should find the Middle Way. 

Sutra: 

246 

“What is the perfect, full Reward-body of the 
Buddha? Just as one lamp can disperse the darkness of a 
thousand years, one thought of wisdom can destroy ten 
thousand years of delusion. 

“Do not think of the past; it is gone and can never be 
recovered. Instead think always of the future and in every 
thought, perfect and clear, see your own original nature. 
Although good and evil differ, the original nature is non- 
dual. That non-dual nature is the real nature. Undefiled 
by either good or evil, it is the perfect, full Reward-body 
of the Buddha. 

“One evil thought arising from the self-nature 
destroys ten thousand eons’ worth of good karma. One 
good thought arising from the self-nature ends evils as 
numerous as the sand-grains in the Ganges River. To 
reach the unsurpassed Bodhi directly, see it for yourself 
in every thought and do not lose the original thought. 
That is the Reward-body of the Buddha.” 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

Commentary: 

When you bring forth wisdom, not just ten thousand years, 
but ten thousand eons of delusion are wiped away. 

Do not regret the past or be anxious about the future. “What 
am I going to do next?” you ask. If you plant good causes, you 
will reap good results; if you plant bad causes, you will reap bad 
results. So do good things and good things will happen; do bad 
and bad things will happen. Your thoughts should be proper, 
perfectly lucid, and full of light, not deviant, selfish, and self- 
seeking, obstructive or jealous. If you are not afraid that others 
will be better than you, it may be that you are a little better than 
they are. But if you fear that they will surpass you, then they are 
all better than you. 

The good and evil natures within the self-nature differ, but 
the self-nature is not dual. The non-dual suchness self-nature is 
the real nature. Yung Chia wrote in his “Song of 
Enlightenment”: 

Ignorance and the real nature 
are just the Buddha nature; 
The illusory empty body 
is just the Dharma body. 

In the original, real nature, there is no good or evil. It is entirely 
perfect and wonderful in itself, far reaching in its penetration, 
and broad in understanding. 

One vicious thought, such as Bodhiruci’s desire to poison 
Bodhidharma, destroys ten thousand eons of good karma, 
whereas one good thought melts away evil karma as immense as 
the number of sandgrains in the Ganges. One good thought can 
cause the realization of Buddhahood, and one bad thought is 
cause enough for going to hell. If you would like to know 

247 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

whether you are going to become a Buddha or go to hell, take a 
look at what kind of thoughts you have. 

To arrive at Buddhahood directly, see it for yourself in every 
thought. Understand your own mind and see your own original 
nature. Do not lose the original thought, the true thought, the true 
nature. 

Sutra: 

“What are the hundred thousand’ myriad 
Transformation bodies of the Buddha? If you are free of 
any thought of the ten thousand dharmas, then your 
nature is basically like emptiness, but in one thought of 
calculation, transformation occurs. Evil thoughts are 
transformed into hell-beings and good thoughts into 
heavenly beings. Viciousness is transformed into dragons 
and snakes, and compassion into Bodhisattvas. Wisdom 
is transformed into the upper realms, and delusion into 
the lower realms. The transformations of the self-nature 
are extremely many, and yet the confused person, 
unawakened to that truth, continually gives rise to evil 
and walks evil paths. Turn a single thought back to 
goodness, and wisdom is produced. That is the 
Transformation-body of the Buddha within your self- 
nature.” 

Commentary: 

Having discussed the perfect full Reward-body which lacks 
nothing and has nothing in excess, which obtains nothing and 
loses nothing and is neither defiled nor immaculate, increasing 
nor decreasing, male nor female, good nor evil—but which is 
perfect Bodhi that returns to non-attainment-the Sixth Patriarch 

248 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

asks, “What are the hundred-thousand myriad Transformation 
bodies?” 

“We have one body,” you say. “How can we have a hundred 
thousand myriad bodies? What do the Buddha’s transformation- 
bodies have to do with me?” 

These transformation-bodies are simply a hundred thousand 
myriad thoughts and calculations. Shakyamuni Buddha can 
transform himself to appear in any one of the ten Dharma 
Realms. That is, he can become a Buddha, a Bodhisattva, a 
Pratyekabuddha, an Arhat, a god, asura, human, hell-being, 
hungry ghost, or animal. 

You might also say that you and I have a hundred thousand 
myriad transformation-bodies. I have taken a hundred thousand 
myriad disciples and all of them imitate their teacher in 
cultivation. They see their teacher eating only one meal a day, 
before noon, and say, “I’m going to do that too.” I tell them, “I 
never stick out my hand and beg. I don’t depend on external 
situations and neither should you. If no one makes offerings to 
me and I die, that’s just fine. Those who leave the home life 
under me must follow my Three Conditions, as I do: 

Freezing, I don’t beg, 
Starving, I don’t scheme, and 
Dying of poverty, I ask for nothing. 

The disciples say, “All right! Even if we starve to death, we 
won’t beg or scheme.” 

Because they copy me, they are my transformation bodies. In 
the future you will have transformation bodies, too. If you have 
a good way of doing things, you will have a hundred thousand 
myriad good transformation bodies. If you have an evil, ghostly 
way, you will have that many ghostly transformation bodies. 

249 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Tf you are free of any thought of the ten thousand Dharmas, 
then your nature is basically like emptiness...” 

One thought not produced, 
The entire substance manifests. 

If you do not give rise to a single thought, your original 
Buddha nature appears. But aren’t you producing a thought? Are 
you without false thinking? Are you not thinking, “What will I 
eat tomorrow? What time will I get to bed tonight?” or, “I’m 
thirsty. I think I'll have a cup of tea?” 

Without false thinking, you are a Buddha. But if you can’t 
cut off your false thinking, you must not claim to be a Buddha; 
you must cultivate the Way. If you haven’t cultivated and say, 
“Hey! I’m a Buddha!” you are just a dog of a Buddha. You can’t 
simply say that everyone is Buddha, you have to cultivate and 
realize Buddhahood. Without cultivation, people are people, 
animals are animals, and dogs are dogs. But do not be offended. 
Dogs also have the Buddha nature. They have to cultivate, that’s 
all. 

Six roots suddenly move: 
A covering of clouds. 

When you see something and think it beautiful or hear 
something and think, “Music!” you are being influenced by 
externals. Using the six sense organs, the six sense objects and 
the six consciousnesses in this way, you cover yourself with 
clouds. 

“Evil thoughts are transformed into hell-beings...”” Suppose 
you think, “How can I get famous? How can I succeed? I'll start 
a riot, murder people, set fires, and loot the streets.” 

250 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

“..and good thoughts into heavenly beings.” “Oh,” you say, 
“T want to help people. You have no money? Here is a million to 
help you get by.” Or you think, “No one makes offerings to the 
Americans who have left home. I’ll make an offering.” Don’t 
wait for America, such an affluent nation, to allow its new 
Buddhist Sangha to starve to death: transform into the heavens. 

“Wisdom is transformed into the upper realms, and delusion 
into the lower realms.” With intelligence, you go up, but if you 
are deluded, you fall. 

The Superior one mounts on high. 
The petty person travels a lower road. 

“The transformations of the self-nature are extremely many, 
and yet the confused person, unawakened to that truth, 
continually gives rise to evil, and walks evil paths.” The 
confused person’s every thought is evil: “That person mistreats 
me! I’m going to ruin him.” The Great Master Shen Hsiu was 
one who walked evil paths by repeatedly sending hired killers 
after the Sixth Patriarch. 

“Turn a single thought back to goodness, and wisdom is 
produced. That is the Transformation-body of the Buddha within 
your self-nature.” Do you understand? If you do, you are a Good 
Knowing Advisor; if you don’t, you’re an evil knowing advisor. 
Wouldn’t you rather be a Good Knowing Advisor? 

Sutra: 

“Good Knowing Advisors, the Dharma body of the 
Buddha is basically complete. To see your own nature in 
every thought is the Reward body of the Buddha. When 
the Reward body thinks and calculates, it is the 
Transformation body of the Buddha. Awaken and 

251 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

cultivate by your own efforts the merit and virtue of your 
self-nature. That is truly taking refuge. 

“The skin and flesh of the physical body are like an 
inn to which you cannot return. Simply awaken to the 
three bodies of your self-nature and you will understand 
the self-nature Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

You yourself must wake up and cultivate on your own. Do 
not babble intellectual zen all day, “Yak, yak, yak!” talking but 
never practicing. Talking a yard is not as good as practicing an 
inch. If you do nothing but talk, you are cheating people. So pay 
no attention to whether my lectures are good or bad. Look 
instead to see if I have ever cheated you. 

The Sixth Patriarch tells you to awaken to the three bodies of 
your self-nature, so you say, “Then taking refuge with myself is 
to take refuge with my body.” No. If you take refuge with your 
body you are just adding a head on top of a head, like Yajnadatta 
in the Shurangama Sutra who ran everywhere looking for his 
head. Your physical body is an inn where your self-nature 
temporarily dwells. Therefore you cannot say, “My body is me.” 
Your body is not you. Then is it someone else’s? No your body 
is yours, it is not mine or his. It is yours, but it is not you. Don’t 
I always say that if you live in a house, you can say the house is 
yours but you certainly cannot say the house is you? If you say 
that it is you, everyone will say, “He doesn’t even know who he 
is! He thinks his house is him, but it’s just a thing.” Your body 
is like a house; don’t mistake it for being you. Understand? 

Don’t take refuge with the physical body, take refuge with 
your self-nature. Awaken to the clear, pure Dharma-body 
Buddha, the perfect, full Reward-body Buddha, and the hundred 
thousand myriad Transformation-body Buddhas within your 

252 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

own nature. By understanding the Buddha of your self-nature 
you may perfect the three bodies. 

Sutra: 

“T have a verse without marks. If you can recite and 
memorize it, it will wipe away-accumulated eons of 
confusion and offenses as soon as the words are spoken. 
The verse runs: 

A confused person will foster blessings, 
but not cultivate the Way, 

And say, “To practice for the blessings 
is practice of the Way.” 

While giving and making offerings 
brings blessings without limit, 

It is in the mind that the three evils 
have their origin. 

By seeking blessings you may wish 
to obliterate offenses; 

But in the future, though you are blessed, 
offenses still remain. 

You ought to simply strike the evil 
conditions from your mind; 

By true repentance and reform 
within your own self-nature. 

A sudden awakening: the true repentance and 
reform of the Great Vehicle; 

253 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

You must cast out the deviant, and practice 
the right, to be without offense. 

To study the Way, always look 
within your own self-nature; 

You are then the same in kind 
and lineage as all Buddhas. 

Our Patriarch passed along only 
this Sudden Teaching; 

Wishing that all might see the nature 
and be of one substance. 

In the future if you wish 
to find the Dharma body; 

Detach yourself from Dharma marks 
and inwardly wash the mind. 

Strive to see it for yourself 
and do not waste your time, 

For when the final thought has stopped 
your life comes to an end. 

Enlightened to the Great Vehicle 
you can See your nature; 

So reverently join your palms 
and seek it with all your heart. 

Commentary: 

“Don’t be nervous,” continued the Great Master, “I have 
some good news! Don’t you know? I have a verse without 

254 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

marks. Do you want to hear it? If you do, I'll recite; if not, Pll 
just put it away.” 

“Yes!” everyone exclaimed, “we definitely do want to hear 
it. Please be compassionate and recite it.” 

“Tf you can learn this verse by heart,” the Master said, “it will 
cause the confusions and crimes accumulated from 
beginningless time, passing through limitless ages, life after life, 
to be eradicated immediately. Where will they go? Do you mean 
you still want to look for them? What a waste of effort!” 

A confused person will foster blessing, but if you tell him to 
cultivate with vigor, he won’t do it. Although there are not many 
students here, those present are extremely sincere. They do not 
fear leg-pain, back-pain, any pain whatever. “I will endure this 
pain and cultivate the Way, even if it means giving up my life!” 
they say. Such rare determination makes me happy, but I don’t 
show my happiness by joking with you all day. It’s not that kind 
of happiness; it’s true happiness. 

Deluded people say, “To practice for the blessings is practice 
of the Way.” This is like the Emperor Wu of Liang who said, “TI 
have taken Bhikshus across and have built many temples. I have 
made offerings and practiced charity and arranged vegetarian 
banquets. What great merit I must have! It’s probably even 
greater than Shakyamuni Buddha’s!” 

Giving and making offerings brings limitless blessings, but 
the origin of the three evils is within the mind. What are the three 
evils? Greed, hate, and delusion. 

Greed: “I think I’Il eat a few more peanuts and then I won’t 
be hungry today.” Hate: “Hey! Who ate all the peanuts?” 
Delusion: Hating the one who ate the peanuts which makes you 
unreasonable and stupid. Cultivating blessings while neglecting 
wisdom has made you so stupid that you can’t quit over-eating 
and even have the gall to speak of it as a bitter practice. 

255 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

You cannot get rid of offenses by cultivating blessings, 
because although you obtain the blessings, the offenses still 
remain. What you should do is rid the mind of all evil conditions, 
i.e. thoughts of greed, hate, delusion, jealousy, obstructiveness, 
conceit, obsequiousness, viciousness and deceitfulness. 

“But they’re my old friends,” you say. “We’ve been together 
for millions of years. How can I part with them?” Fine. If you 
can’t part with them, then there’s nothing to do but follow them 
down to hell. 

To practice true repentance and reform is to understand the 
Great Vehicle and immediately get rid of all evil thoughts. It is 
very clear; no analogies are needed. You truly repent when you 
“get rid of the deviant and practice the right,” as the Sixth 
Patriarch’s verse says. Then you may walk down the straight, 
great bright road and be without offense. 

“To study the Way, always look within the self-nature.” Ask 
yourself, “What am I doing? Am I acting like a person or a ghost, 
an animal, a horse or a cow?” You are what you do. If you act 
like a Buddha, you are a Buddha. The Buddha practices 
friendliness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and giving. His 
compassion is genuine, not false and greedy. He never thinks, “If 
I am a little compassionate to you, you will be greatly 
compassionate to me.” 

There are no ulterior motives in the compassion I have for 
you. I would not give you a brick and expect a piece of jade in 
return. 

Cultivators, turn the light around, reverse its illumination, 
and ask yourself, “Am I thinking like a demon or a Buddha? Am 
I selfish or generous, self-seeking or charitable?” If you are 
charitable you are the “same in kind as all the Buddhas.” If you 
act like a Buddha, you are a Buddha, but if you act like a ghost, 
how can you be a Buddha? 

256 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

By “our Patriarch” the Sixth Patriarch means Bodhidharma, 
who transmitted only the Sudden Teaching Dharma-door 
because he wanted everyone to see the Buddha nature and 
realize the Buddha Way together. 

“If you wish to find the Dharma-body,” then separate 
yourself from all marks. Do not be attached, jealous, obstructive, 
ignorant, afflicted, or snobbish. You cannot think, as the Buddha 
did, “In the heavens and below, I alone am honored.” The 
Diamond Sutra says, “One who has left all marks is called a 
Buddha.” Apart from marks and unattached to self and to 
dharmas, the mind-ground is cleansed. 

“Strive to see it for yourself’ and go forward with heroic 
vigor. You'll never succeed if you’re lazy and waste your time, 
saying “Wait, Pll cultivate tomorrow. Wait, Ill translate 
tomorrow.” Even at lunchtime you say, “Wait, I'll eat later.” 
Wait, wait, until it’s time to die and King Yama won’t listen to 
you when you say, “Wait! Ill die later.” If you are truly free, you 
come and go in birth and death and yet are not subject to birth 
and death. King Yama has no control over you. This is like the 
Third Patriarch, Seng Ts’an, who said, “You see others sit in 
lotus posture to die and think it special. Watch this!” and 
grabbed a tree branch with one hand and went to Nirvana, just 
hanging there. Wasn’t he free? 

If you wait until your dying breath to cultivate, it will be too 
late, “for when the final thought has stopped, your life comes to 
an end. Earlier, in Chapter IV, didn’t the Sutra say that you 
should not cut off your thought, because when the last thought is 
cut off you die and then undergo rebirth in some other place? At 
the time of death there is nothing—no fame, no riches. Both your 
hands will be empty and you’ll be forced to put down what you 
can’t put down. No matter how dear your loved ones are, you'll 
have to part with them. 

257 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Enlightened to the Great Vehicle 
you can see the nature; 

So reverently join your palms and 
seek it with all your heart. 

See the nature and humbly seek to follow the unsurpassed 
Way. 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “Good Knowing Advisors, all of you 
should take up this verse and cultivate according to it. If 
you see your nature at the moment these words are 
spoken, even if we are a thousand miles apart you will 
always be by my side. If you do not awaken at the 
moment of speaking, then, face to face we are a thousand 
miles apart, so why did you bother to come from so far? 
Take care of yourselves and go well.” 

The united assembly heard this Dharma and there 
were none who did not awaken. They received it with 
delight and practiced in accord with it. 

Commentary: 

I think the Sixth Patriarch liked to talk and so he delivered 
this Platform Sutra. If he hadn’t liked to speak, he wouldn’t have 
taught any Sutra at all. 

Now [| am teaching it to all of you: 

“You are quite intelligent,” the Master said, “and you have 
good roots. We have an affinity which goes back for many 
lifetimes and many ages, and therefore we have met here today.” 
Of course, there were no foreigners in the Master’s Dharma- 
assembly; they were all Chinese. That I have met with so many 
Americans must be a case of even greater affinity. 

258 

Chapter VI. Repentance and Reform 

“Tf you understand the verse I have recited,” said the Master, 
“you will ‘get rid of the deviant, practice the right, and be 
without offense,’ and although we are a thousand miles apart, 
you will be right beside me.” 

If my disciples understand and remember the Sutras I have 
explained, they will be right beside me. But if instead they take 
advantage of external circumstances or get jealous and angry, 
they will have studied the Way in vain. If they don’t understand 
this verse, then even if we should stand face to face, we would 
still be a thousand miles apart. 

If they believe in me, although we are a thousand miles apart, 
we are face to face. “Are you trying to make people believe in 
you?” you ask. No! Why should I want you to believe in me? 
You’re better off believing in yourself, because if you cultivate, 
you do it for yourself. You don’t eat to make me full. All I do is 
teach you the methods. If you have come all this way just to be 
a thousand miles from me, why did you bother to come at all? 

“Take care of yourselves.” Don’t look down on yourself and 
say, “I’m not going to cultivate. I’m nothing but a dog anyway.” 
See yourself as a person, not a dog, and go to a good place, not 
a bad one. 

259 

CHAPTER VII 

OPPORTUNITIES AND CONDITIONS 

Sutra: 

The Master obtained the Dharma at Huang Mei and 
returned to Ts’ao Hou Village in Shao Chou where no 
one knew him. But Liu Chih Liao, a scholar, received him 
with great courtesy. Chih Liao’s aunt, Bhikshuni Wu 
Chin Tsang, constantly recited the Mahaparinirvana 
Sutra. When the Master heard it, he instantly grasped its 
wonderful principle and explained it to her. The 
Bhikshuni then held out a scroll and asked about some 
characters. 

The Master said, “I cannot read; please ask about the 
meaning.” 

“If you cannot even read, how can you understand the 
meaning?” asked the Bhikshuni. 

The Master replied, “The subtle meaning of all 
Buddhas is not based on language.” 

The Bhikshuni was startled and she announced to all 
the elders and virtuous ones in the village: “Here is a 
gentleman who possesses the Way. We should ask him to 
stay and receive our offerings.” Ts’ao Shu Liang, great- 
grandson of the Marquis Wu of the Wei dynasty, came 
rushing to pay homage, along with the people of the 
village. 

261 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

At that time the pure dwellings of the ancient Pao Lin 
Temple, which had been destroyed by war and fire at the 
end of the Sui dynasty, were rebuilt on their old 
foundation. The Master was invited to stay and soon the 
temple became a revered place. He dwelt there a little 
over nine months when he was once again pursued by evil 
men. The Master hid in the mountain in the front of the 
temple, and when they set fire to the brush and trees, he 
escaped by crawling into a rock to hide. The rock still 
bears the imprints of the Master’s knees and of his robe 
where he sat in lotus posture. Because of this it is called 
“The Rock of Refuge.” Remembering the Fifth 
Patriarch’s instructions to stop at Huai and hide at Hui, 
he went to conceal himself in those two cities. 

Commentary: 

After receiving the mind-seal Dharma from the Fifth 
Patriarch Hung Jen, the Sixth Patriarch returned to Shao Chou. 
He thereupon went to Ts’ao Hou Village, the present day Shao 
Kuan in Chii Chiang District. When he arrived in the vicinity of 
Nan Hua Temple, which before had been Pao Lin Temple, no 
one knew that he was the one who held the robe and bowl. 

Liu Chih Liao was a wealthy retired official who enjoyed 
studying the Buddhadharma. He welcomed the Master 
reverently and made offerings to him. Chih Liao and his aunt, 
Bhikshuni Wu Chin Tsang, “limitless treasury,” were the Sixth 
Patriarch’s great Dharma protectors. Wu Chin Tsang liked to 
recite the Mahaparinirvana Sutra. This Sutra, in ten volumes, 
was spoken by the Buddha just before he went to Nirvana. 
Hearing the recitation, the Sixth Patriarch understood the subtle 
principle and explained it to the Bhikshuni. Probably she 

262 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions 

couldn’t read very well, because she asked the Master, “What is 
this word?” 

“Do you mean you can’t read it?” said the Master. 

“No, I can’t,” she said. 

“Well, I can’t either!” said the Master, “But if you ask about 
the meaning I can explain it for you.” 

“If you can’t even read it, how can you know what it means?” 
she asked. 

The Master said, “The Buddha’s heart, the mind-Dharma, the 
wonderful principle of Sudden Enlightenment, has nothing to do 
with words. Instead, it points directly to the mind so that we can 
see our own nature and become Buddhas. Since it is not based on 
language it doesn’t matter whether you can read.” 

Bhikshuni Wu Chin Tsang thought that was very strange 
indeed. She told everyone in the village, “Here is a gentleman 
who has the Way! He is a virtuous Dharma Master. He may not 
be able to read, but he’s enlightened, so we should make 
offerings to him.” 

Although she didn’t know a lot of characters, Wu Chin Tsang 
was nevertheless an incredible Bhikshuni. She ate one meal a 
day and never lay down to sleep, because she knew that the 
Fourth Patriarch recommended these practices. Although her 
family was wealthy, she kept the precept of never holding 
money. She studied and recited Sutras industriously, and when 
the time came, she died sitting up in meditation. Many days, 
many years have passed and her body still has not decayed. 
Because she was vigorous and worked hard at cultivation and 
had no sexual desire, her flesh transformed into indestructible 
vajra. I saw the body in a temple in Chii Chiang. It is truly 
awesome. 

Among the villagers who paid homage to the Great Master 
was the great-grandson of Marquis Wu. Marquis Wu was very 

263 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

intelligent. He was, in fact, as clever as a fox. He was a genius, 
but he had a tendency to be jealous. 

Bhikshuni Wu Chin Tsang promoted the Sixth Patriarch: 
“Do you know who he is?” she would say, “He’s the rightful 
successor to the Fifth Patriarch! He holds the robe and bowl.” 

One flower may be beautiful, but it looks much better 
surrounded by greenery. If no one had protected him, the Sixth 
Patriarch would surely have been murdered by Shen Hsiu’s 
gang, or those of other religions. His Dharma assembly 
flourished because his disciples and laypeople such as Bhikshuni 
Wu Chin Tsang and her nephew, Liu Chih Liao, the scholar, 
guarded and protected him. Vinaya Master T’ung Ying also 
brought several hundred of his students to study with the Master, 
and each student told his friends to come. So every day for lunch 
there were between 1,500 and 2,000 people, seven or eight 
hundred of whom were members of the Sangha. 

Everyone made heartfelt offerings to help rebuild Nan Hua 
Temple. Some gave ten thousand ounces of silver, some gave a 
million. They asked the Master to live there and before long it 
was a great Bodhimanda, big enough for several thousand 
people. 

A little over nine months later, several hundred of Shen 
Hsiu’s men left Huang Mei, passing through the Ta Yu mountain 
range on their way to Nan Hua Temple. They traveled for over 
two months. If they hadn’t been intent on killing the Master and 
stealing the robe and bowl, they would have given up after a 
couple of days. Think it over: Sixteen or seventeen years had 
passed since the transmission, and the Master had only been 
staying at Nan Hua for nine months when the evil men returned. 
It’s not easy to be a Patriarch, unless you are a phony. Real 
Patriarchs live in great danger. 

264 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions 

The Sixth Patriarch had spiritual powers and he knew that not 
just one or two, but several hundred men were after him. He hid 
in the “Rock of Refuge” which is just big enough to hold one 
person sitting in meditation. The evil men mingled in with the 
large crowd and stealthily set fire to the mountain. They burned 
off the entire area, but never found the Master. While hiding, the 
Master probably meditated with great intensity because the 
texture of his robe and the marks of his knees can still be seen 
imprinted in the rock. When I was at Nan Hua Temple I sat in the 
rock for a time, but I wasn’t seeking refuge, I was just trying it 
out. When you sit inside it, no one can see you. 

265 

Bhikshu Fa Hai 

Sutra: 

When Bhikshu Fa Hai of Chii Chiang city in Shao Chou 
first called on the Patriarch, he asked, “Will you please 
instruct me on the sentence, ‘Mind is Buddha’?” 

The Master said, “When one’s preceding thoughts are 
not produced this is mind and when one’s subsequent 
thoughts are not extinguished this is Buddha. The setting 
up of marks is mind, and separation from them is 
Buddha. Were I to explain it fully, I would not finish 
before the end of the present age. 

“Listen to my verse: 

When the mind is called wisdom, 

Then the Buddha is called concentration. 
When concentration and wisdom are equal. 
The intellect is pure. 

Understand this Dharma teaching 

By practicing within your own nature. 
The function is basically unproduced; 
It is right to cultivate both.” 

At these words, Fa Hai was greatly enlightened and 
spoke a verse in praise: 

266 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Hai 

This mind is basically Buddha; 
By not understanding I disgrace myself. 
I know the cause of concentration and wisdom 
Is to cultivate both and separate myself 
from all things. 

Commentary: 

Bhikshu Fa Hai, also called Wen Yiin, compiled and edited 
the Platform Sutra from the Sixth Patriarch’s lectures. Although 
I dare not say that he liked to be first, when he wrote this chapter 
he certainly thought, “I am the Master’s number one great 
disciple!” and consequently wrote about himself first. 

“Great Master,” said Fa Hai, “I don’t understand the sentence 
‘This mind is Buddha.’ Please explain it.” 

“Do not produce the former thought,” said the Master, “and 
just that is mind. Do not extinguish the latter thought and just 
that is Buddha. With neither production nor extinction, the mind 
itself is Buddha. All appearances are set up by the mind, and if 
you can set up all appearances and be separate from them, that is 
Buddha.” 

The mind is called wisdom and the Buddha is called 
concentration. When concentration and wisdom are equal, the 
mind is Buddha and Buddha is the mind. They are one substance. 
When thought is pure, then wisdom and concentration, mind and 
Buddha, are equal. If you understand the Sudden Teaching you 
know that the Buddha is not separate from the mind and the mind 
is not separate from the Buddha; concentration is not separate 
from wisdom and wisdom is not separate from concentration. 

You don’t understand because you have accumulated bad 
habits for many ages. The wonderful function of the self-nature 
is basically unproduced and undestroyed, so when you cultivate 

267 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the mind, you cultivate the Buddha; when you cultivate the 
Buddha, you cultivate the mind. The same applies to 
concentration and wisdom. You should cultivate them equally. 

When you don’t understand, there are two: mind and 
Buddha, When you understand you know that they are originally 
one. In cultivating concentration and wisdom, you should 
separate yourself from all marks. 

268 

Bhikshu Fa Ta 

Sutra: 

Bhikshu Fa Ta of Hung Chou left home at age seven and 
constantly recited the Dharma Flower Sutra, but when he 
came to bow before the Patriarch, his head did not touch 
the ground. The Master scolded him, saying, “If you do 
not touch the ground, isn’t it better not to bow? There 
must be something on your mind. What do you 
practice?” 

“T have recited the Dharma Flower Sutra over three 
thousand times,” he replied. 

The Master said, “I don’t care if you have recited it 
ten thousand times. If you understood the Sutra’s 
meaning, you would not be so overbearing, and you could 
walk along with me. You have failed in your work and do 
not even recognize your error. 

Listen to my verse: 

As bowing is basically to cut off arrogance, 
Why don’t you touch your head to the ground? 
When you possess a self, offenses arise, 

But forgetting merit brings supreme blessings.” 

The Master asked further, “What is your name?” 
“Fa Ta,” he replied. 

269 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The Master said, “Your name means ‘Dharma 
Penetration,’ but what Dharma have you penetrated?” 
He then spoke a verse: 

Your name means Dharma Penetration, 
And you earnestly recite without pause to rest. 
Recitation is mere sound, 
But one who understands his mind is called 
a Bodhisattva. 
Now, because of your karmic conditions, 
I will explain it to you: 
Believe only that the Buddha is without words 
And the lotus blossom will bloom from your mouth. 

Commentary: 

Dharma Masters Fa Hai (Dharma Sea) and Fa Ta (Dharma 
Penetration) both received the Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma. Fa Ta 
left home at age seven and constantly recited the Lotus Sutra, but 
when he met the Patriarch he didn’t bow properly, he just 
pretended. He had to make some sort of show of it since 
everybody knew that the Great Master held Huang Mei’s robe 
and bowl. But the most respect he could muster was to throw 
himself hastily on the ground, without even touching his head to 
the floor, and in his heart he felt that his own merit certainly was 
greater than the Master’s. “After all,” he thought, “I’ve recited 
the Sutra over three thousand times.” When Fa Ta saw ordinary 
people, he couldn’t even manage a half bow. He was like a rich 
snob who only sees other rich snobs and looks down on everyone 
else. The Sixth Patriarch took one look and knew that Fa Ta had 
something on his mind. 

270 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

The Lotus Sutra is seven volumes long and, reciting quickly, 
you could read through it once in a day, or three hundred and 
sixty-five times a year. Therefore Fa Ta had been reciting it for 
over ten years. 

“T don’t care if you’ ve recited it ten thousand times!” said the 
Master. “If you really understood it you wouldn’t revel in your 
own merit and could study with me. Not everyone can study with 
a Patriarch, you know. If you have obstructions and afflictions, 
he may not want you.” 

Therefore, if you come to study here but break the rules, you 
are not welcome. In order to cultivate with me you must offer up 
your conduct in accord with the teaching. 

“So many recitations,” said the Master, “and you still don’t 
know how conceited you are! No doubt you think your merit is 
even greater than mine. Such pride is an offense. But if you could 
forget your merit and consider your three thousand recitations as 
no recitations, then your merit would be limitless and 
boundless.” 

“Speak up, Dharma Penetration 
“What Dharma have you penetrated?” 

Fa Ta was speechless. 

“Not bad,” the Master said, “You work hard. However, your 
recitation is of no benefit because you don’t understand what the 
Sutra means. If you could only understand your mind and see 
your nature, you would be a Bodhisattva. You have come all this 
way from Hung Chou because we have an affinity from 
circumstances in former lives. Now just believe that the Buddha 
is without words, and the lotus blossom will bloom from your 
mouth. Believe! The Buddha never said a thing, and if you recite 
without understanding the principle, you are wasting your time.” 

The Diamond Sutra says, 

(>? 

the Master continued, 

271 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

One who sees me by form 
Or seeks me in sound, 
Walks a deviant path 

Not seeing the Tathagata. 

The Buddha taught for forty-nine years in over three hundred 
Dharma assemblies, but when he was about to enter Nirvana and 
his disciples asked him about the Sutras, he said, “I never said a 
word.” Was he lying? 

The Sixth Patriarch also taught that the Buddha said nothing, 
and if you believe this the Lotus will bloom from your mouth. 
But how does one obtain such rare faith? 

The Sutra’s principles exist in the minds of people; they can 
be spoken by you; they can be spoken by me. Everyone has this 
wisdom and everyone can speak the Sutras. The Buddha spoke 
the Sutras for living beings and the Sutras flow from the minds 
of living beings. Therefore the Buddha spoke without speaking. 
This means that you should not be attached to Dharma or to 
emptiness. Nevertheless, you cannot say, “I don’t know any 
Dharma. I’m empty!” 

To understand that the Buddha spoke and yet did not speak 
is the most difficult and yet the easiest thing one can do. Can you 
do it? If you can, the Buddha has not spoken. If you cannot, then 
the Buddha has said too much. 

Sutra: 

Hearing the verse, Fa Ta was remorseful and he said, 
“From now on I will respect everyone. Your disciple 
recites the Dharma Flower Sutra but has not yet 
understood its meaning. His mind often has doubts. High 
Master, your wisdom is vast and great. Will you please 
explain the general meaning of the Sutra for me?” 

272 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

The Master said, “Dharma Penetration, the Dharma 
is extremely penetrating, but your mind does not 
penetrate it. There is basically nothing doubtful in the 
Sutra. The doubts are in your own mind. You recite this 
Sutra, but what do you think its teaching is?” 

Fa Ta said, “This student’s faculties are dull and dim. 
Since I have only recited it by rote, how could I 
understand its doctrine?” 

The Master said, “I cannot read, but if you take the 
Sutra and read it once, I will explain it to you.” 

Fa Ta recited loudly until he came to the “Analogies 
Chapter.” The Master said, “Stop! This Sutra 
fundamentally is based on the principles underlying the 
causes and conditions of the Buddha’s appearance in the 
world. None of the analogies spoken go beyond that. 
What are the causes and conditions? The Sutra says, ‘All 
Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones, appear in the world 
for the causes and conditions of the One Important 
Matter.’ The One Important Matter is the knowledge 
and vision of the Buddha. Worldly people, deluded by the 
external world, attach themselves to marks, and deluded 
by the inner world, they attach themselves to emptiness. 
If you can live among marks and yet be separate from it, 
then you will be confused by neither the internal nor the 
external. If you awaken to this Dharma, in one moment 
your mind will open to enlightenment. The knowledge 
and vision of the Buddha is simply that. 

The Buddha is enlightenment. There are four 
divisions: 

1. Opening to the enlightened knowledge and vision; 
2. Demonstrating the enlightened knowledge and vision; 

273 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

274 

3. Awakening to the enlightened knowledge and vision; 
and 

4. Entering the enlightened knowledge and vision. 

If you listen to the opening and demonstrating (of the 
Dharma), you can easily awaken and enter. That is the 
enlightened knowledge and vision, the original true 
nature becoming manifest. Be careful not to misinterpret 
the Sutra by thinking that the opening, demonstrating, 
awakening, and entering of which it speaks is the 
Buddha’s knowledge and vision and that we have no 
share in it. To explain it that way would be to slander the 
Sutra and defame the Buddha. Since he is already a 
Buddha, perfect in knowledge and vision, what is the use 
of his opening to it again? You should now believe that 
the Buddha’s knowledge and vision is simply your own 
mind, for there is no other Buddha. 

“But, because living beings cover their brilliance with 
greed and with the love of states of defilement, external 
conditions and inner disturbance make slaves of them. 
That troubles the World-Honored One to rise from 
Samadhi, and with various reproaches and expedients, he 
exhorts living beings to stop and rest, not to seek outside 
themselves, and to make themselves the same as he is. 
That is called ‘opening the knowledge and vision of the 
Buddha.’ I, too, am always exhorting all people to open to 
the knowledge and vision of the Buddha within their own 
minds. 

“The minds of worldly people are deviant. Confused 
and deluded, they commit offenses. Their speech may be 
good, but their minds are evil. They are greedy, hateful, 
envious, given over to flattery, deceit, and arrogance. 
They oppress one another and harm living creatures, 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

thus they open not the knowledge and vision of Buddhas 
but that of living beings. If you can with an upright mind 
constantly bring forth wisdom, contemplating and 
illumining your own mind, and if you can practice the 
good and refrain from evil, you, yourself will open to the 
knowledge and vision of the Buddha. In every thought 
you should open up to the knowledge and vision of the 
Buddha; do not open up to the knowledge and vision of 
living beings. To be open to the knowledge and vision of 
the Buddha is transcendental; to be open to the 
knowledge and vision of living beings is mundane. If you 
exert yourself in recitation, clinging to it as a meritorious 
exercise, how does that make you different from a yak 
who loves his own tail?” 

Commentary: 

To be unconfused, be unattached. Do not get attached to 

emptiness or fall into existence. If you suddenly awaken to this 
dharma your heart will open to the knowledge and vision of the 
Buddha. 

If you listen to opening and demonstrating, that is, to 

instruction on the principles of the Sutras, you can easily wake 
up and understand the enlightened knowledge and vision. The 
Buddha’s knowledge and vision is simply that of your own 
mind, because your mind fundamentally is the Buddha. 

What darkens your light? 

Thoughts of greed 
Create thoughts of love. 
Greed is dirt, 

And love defiled. 

The impurities 

275 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Of greed and love 

Cause self-seeking 

And make you a slave. 

By now you should 

Have become enlightened. 
Stop depending on 

Outer conditions 

Which only make trouble within. 
Without them there is 

No trouble: there is 
Peace and purity. 

There are many varieties of external conditions: eyes, ears, 
noses, tongues, bodies, and minds; forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
tangible objects, and objects of the mind; and the six 
consciousnesses where sense-organs and sense-objects meet. 
When you seek outside yourself, your mind is not at peace; you 
are upset and anxious, and your mind, originally the master, 
becomes the body’s slave. The Buddhas trouble themselves to 
arise from Samadhi just to tell you not to seek outside yourself. 
When you quit seeking outside, you are one with the Buddhas; 
you open up to their knowledge and vision and become Just like 
them. 

The deviant views and delusion of ordinary people causes 
them to perform offensive acts. While their speech may be as 
compassionate as the Buddha, their minds are as poisonous as a 
snake. Of the offenses they commit, greed, hate, and jealousy are 
the worst. But when they shine the light within and straighten out 
their own minds, they naturally are open to the knowledge and 
vision of the Buddha. 

276 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

Sutra: 

Fa Ta said, “If this is so, then I need only understand 
the meaning and need not exert myself in reciting the 
Sutra. Isn’t that correct?” 

The Master replied, “What fault does the Sutra have 
that would stop you from reciting it? Confusion and 
enlightenment are in you. Loss or gain comes from 
yourself. If your mouth recites and your mind practices, 
you ‘turn’ the Sutra, but if your mouth recites and your 
mind does not practice, the Sutra ‘turns’ you. Listen to 
my verse: 

When the mind is confused, 

the Dharma Flower turns it. 
The enlightened mind 

will turn the Dharma Flower. 

Reciting the Sutra so long 
without understanding 

Has made you an enemy 
of its meaning. 

Without a thought 

your recitation is right. 
With thought, 

your recitation is wrong. 

With no “with” 

and no “without” 
You may ride forever 

in the White Ox Cart. 

277 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Fa Ta heard this verse and wept without knowing it. 
At the moment the words were spoken, he achieved a 
great enlightenment and said to the Master, “Until today 
I have never actually turned the Dharma Flower; instead 
it has turned me.” 

Commentary: 

If you are confused, your recitation is of no benefit, but if you 
are enlightened, there is merit. What does this have to do with the 
Sutra? If you recite the Sutra and put it into practice as well, you 
are truly reciting the Sutra and turning the Dharma wheel. You 
set the Dharma Flower spinning. But if you recite the Sutra with 
a confused mind, the reciting turns you around so that, the more 
recitation you do, the less you understand. After more than ten 
years of work, Fa Ta was still unclear; he was a stranger to the 
Sutra. Without false thoughts, recitation is a correct thing, but 
with arrogant thoughts and conceit about your merit and virtue, 
your recitation becomes deviant. You should pay no attention to 
having or not having merit, and recite as if not reciting. Do not 
be attached, and you will always ride in the White Ox Cart. The 
White Ox Cart is an analogy for The One Buddha Vehicle. 

You ask, “If recite as if not reciting, then may I not recite as 
if reciting?” If you don’t recite it, you cannot understand the 
Sutra’s principles, and it is not as if you were reciting it. The 
phrase: 

Reciting as if not reciting, 
Not reciting as if reciting, 

is to instruct you to be unattached. But you cannot say, “I'll be 
unattached and forget about reciting the Sutra.” 

278 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

After listening to the Master, Fa Ta wept without even 
knowing it, but it wasn’t because he had been bullied or tricked. 
Before, he had stupidly wasted his time reciting the Sutra 
without obtaining the slightest benefit. Now, at the Master’s 
explanation, he was so overcome with joy that he burst into tears, 
just like friends or relatives do when they meet after a long 
separation He cried because of his great enlightenment. 

Sutra: 

Fa Ta asked further, “The Lotus Sutra says, ‘If 
everyone from Shravakas up to the Bodhisattvas were to 
exhaust all their thought in order to measure the 
Buddha’s wisdom, they still could not fathom it.’ Now, 
you cause common people merely to understand their 
own minds, and you call that the knowledge and vision of 
the Buddha. Because of this, I am afraid that those 
without superior faculties will not be able to avoid 
doubting and slandering the Sutra. The Sutra also speaks 
of three carts. How do the sheep, deer, and ox carts differ 
from the White Ox Cart? I pray the High Master will 
once again instruct me.” 

The Master said, “The Sutra’s meaning is clear. You 
yourself are confused. Disciples of all three vehicles are 
unable to fathom the Buddha’s wisdom; the fault is in 
their thinking and measuring. The more they think, the 
further away they go. From the start the Buddha speaks 
for the sake of common people, not for the sake of other 
Buddhas. Those who chose not to believe were free to 
leave the assembly. Not knowing that they were sitting in 
the White Ox Cart, they sought three vehicles outside the 
gate. What is more, the Sutra text clearly tells you ‘There 
is only the One Buddha Vehicle, no other vehicle, 

279 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

whether two or three, and the same is true for countless 
expedients, for various causes and conditions, and for 
analogies and rhetoric. All these Dharmas are for the 
sake of the One Buddha Vehicle.’” 

Commentary: 

The Lotus Sutra says, 

If the world were filled 

With those like Shariputra 

Exhausting their thought to measure the 
Buddha's wisdom, 

They couldn't fathom it. 

Fa Ta questioned the Master: “Shariputra was the wisest of 
the Buddha’s disciples. Now, if you filled the entire universe 
with Shariputras, and they all tried to fathom the Buddha’s 
wisdom, they wouldn’t be able to do it. Great Master, how can 
you say that when common people merely understand their own 
minds, they are open to the knowledge and vision of the 
Buddhas? I am afraid that unless one had supreme wisdom and 
good roots, one couldn’t avoid slandering the Sutra. Please be 
compassionate and tell me how the sheep and deer carts differ 
from the White Ox Cart.” 

The Master said, “The Sutra is perfectly clear on this point. 
The Shravakas, Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas cannot know 
the Buddha’s wisdom simply because they do try to measure it. 
If their minds did not have such calculating thoughts, they could 
understand it. The Buddha spoke Sutras for common people, not 
for other Buddhas. If you don’t believe the Sutras, you can get 
up and walk out as you please. What is more, there is only One 
Buddha Vehicle; there are no other vehicles, whether two 

280 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

(Shravakas and Pratyeka Buddhas) or three (Shravakas, 
Pratyeka Buddhas, and Bodhisattvas) or any number of parables, 
causes and conditions, and uncountable expedient devices: all 
are spoken for the sake of the One Buddha Vehicle.” 

Sutra: 

“Why don’t you wake up? The three carts are false, 
because they are preliminary. The one vehicle is real 
because it is the immediate present. You are merely 
taught to go from the false and return to the real. Once 
you have returned to reality, the real is also nameless. 
You should know that all the treasure and wealth is 
ultimately your own, for your own use. Do not think 
further of the father, nor of the son, nor of the use. That 
is called maintaining the Dharma Flower Sutra. Then 
from eon to eon your hands will never let go of the scrolls; 
from morning to night you will recite it unceasingly.” 

Fa Ta received this instruction and, overwhelmed 
with joy, he spoke a verse: 

Three thousand Sutra recitations: 

At Ts’ao Hsi not one single word. 

Before I knew why he appeared in the world, 

How could I stop the madness of 
accumulated births? 

Sheep, deer, and ox provisionally set up; 

Beginning, middle, end, well set forth. 

Who would have thought that within the 
burning house 

Originally the king of Dharma dwelt? 

281 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The Master said, “From now on you may be called the 
monk mindful of the Sutra.” From then on, although he 
understood the profound meaning, Fa Ta continued to 
recite the Sutra unceasingly. 

Commentary: 

Once you have returned to the real vehicle, even the real is 
nameless; you should discard the notion of reality. All the 
treasure and wealth of the Buddhadharma is yours, originally. It 
is the wind and light of your homeland; use it as you wish. But 
do not think, “These were given to me by my father. I have 
received them as an inheritance.” You shouldn’t think of the 
father, the son, or the use: just use them, that’s all. That is 
genuine recitation of the Sutra. From the first to the last eon, your 
hands won’t set the text down and you will recite it from 
morning to night. 

“Before I knew why the Buddha appeared in the world,” said 
Fa Ta, “I had no way to stop the karmic process of this mad 
mind. But now I know that the beginning Shravaka vehicle, the 
middle Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Mahayana Bodhisattva 
vehicle are nothing but expedient devices. They are not real. 
Who would have guessed? Who would have guessed! Nobody! 
Why, it’s just right here in the flaming house of the triple world, 
the realm of desire, the realm of form, and the formless realm, 
that one can cultivate, realize Buddhahood and be a Great 
Dharma King!” 

“Yes,” said the Master, “I see that you understand, and so 
now you have the right to be called a Sutra-reciting monk.” 

Fa Ta understood the doctrine, but he did not make the 
mistake some people might have and think, “I understand it, so I 
don’t have to recite it. I have reached the level where I: 

282 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fa Ta 

Recite and yet do not recite; 
Do not recite and yet recite. 

If this is the case, then can you: 

Eat as if not eating, and 
Not eat as if eating; 

or 

Steal as if not stealing, and 
Not steal as if stealing; 

or even 

Kill as if not killing, and 
Not kill as if killing? 

Can you get away with this? Of course not! If you truly 
understand and are unattached to what you do, you will not 
babble intellectual zen and say that you recite without reciting. 
Before you can make that claim, you must first have reached that 
level of accomplishment. 

283 

Bhikshu Chih T’ung 

Sutra: 

284 

Bhikshu Chih T’ung, a native of An Feng in Shao Chou, 
had read the Lankavatara Sutra over a thousand times 
but still did not understand the three bodies and the four 
wisdoms. He made obeisance to the Master, seeking an 
explanation of the meaning. The Master said, “The three 
bodies are: the clear, pure Dharma-body, which is your 
nature; the perfect, full Reward-body, which is your 
wisdom; and the hundred thousand myriad 
Transformation bodies, which are your conduct. To 
speak of the three bodies as separate from your original 
nature is to have the bodies but not the wisdoms. To 
remember that the three bodies have no self-nature is to 
understand the four wisdoms of Bodhi. Listen to my 
verse: 

Three bodies complete in your own self-nature 
When understood become four wisdoms. 

While not apart from seeing and hearing 
Transcend them and ascend to the Buddha realm. 

I will now explain it for you. 
If you are attentive and faithful, you will never 
be deluded. 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih T’ung 

Don’t run outside in search of them, 
By saying ‘Bodhi’ to the end of your days. 

Chih T’ung asked further, “May I hear about the 
meaning of the four wisdoms?” 

The Master said, “Since you understand the three 
bodies, you should also understand the four wisdoms. 
Why do you ask again? To speak of the four wisdoms as 
separate from the three bodies is to have the wisdoms but 
not the bodies, in which case the wisdoms become non- 
wisdoms.” He then spoke this verse: 

The wisdom of the great, perfect mirror 
Ts your clear, pure nature. 

The wisdom of equal nature 

Is the mind without disease. 
Wonderfully observing wisdom 

Is seeing without effort. 

Perfecting wisdom is 

The same as the perfect mirror. 

Five, eight, six, seven— 
Effect and cause both turn; 
Merely useful names: 

They are without real nature. 
If, in the place of turning, 
Emotion is not kept, 

You always and forever dwell 
In Naga concentration. 

285 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

Bhikshu Chih T’ung studied the Lankavatara Sutra because 
Bodhidharma recommended it above all other texts for the Ch’an 
School. Although he had read it over a thousand times, he still 
had to ask the Master about the three bodies and the four 
wisdoms. The Master always teaches Dharma of and from self- 
nature. “The clear, pure Dharma-body is your own original 
nature,” he said, “and the Reward-body is your wisdom. The 
transformation-bodies are your conduct, because you are what 
you do; you are transformed according to what you practice. If 
you try to explain the three bodies as something apart from your 
self-nature, you have the bodies, but not the wisdoms. But when 
you understand that the three bodies are devoid of self-nature, 
you possess the four wisdoms of Bodhi. 

“When you understand that the three bodies are immanent in 
the self-nature, you realize the four wisdoms. Without being 
separated from the conditions of sight and hearing, you ascend 
directly to the Buddha-realm. Now, I have spoken this verse,” 
the Sixth Patriarch said, “and you must truly believe it. Then you 
will never again be confused like those people who go around 
saying ‘Bodhi, Bodhi, Bodhi’ all day long, but who never 
practice or understand Bodhi. Don’t chatter ‘head-mouth’ zen! 
You must truly understand the three bodies for it to count. 

The Master continued, “Since you understand the three 
bodies, you should understand the four wisdoms as well. If you 
try to explain the four wisdoms as something apart from the three 
bodies, then although you know the name ‘four wisdoms’ you do 
not possess their actual substance or know their function. Your 
wisdoms are non-wisdoms.” 

The Buddha has four wisdoms. The wisdom of the great, 
perfect mirror is the eighth consciousness (alayavijnana) when it 
has been transformed from consciousness into wisdom. The 

286 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih T’ung 

eighth consciousness is also called the “store” consciousness, 
because it stores up all the good and bad seeds you have planted 
in the past, all the good and bad things you have done in this and 
past lives. If you have planted good causes, you reap good 
effects; if you have planted bad causes, you reap bad effects. As 
the potential of all good and bad karma is stored in the eighth 
consciousness, it also comes to be called the “field of the eighth- 
consciousness,” because whatever you plant in it eventually 
sprouts. 

When you are unable to use it, it is merely consciousness, but 
when you return to the root and go back to the source, the eighth 
consciousness is transmuted into the great perfect mirror 
wisdom, which in its essence is pure and undefiled. 

The wisdom of equal nature is the seventh consciousness 
when it has been transformed from consciousness into wisdom. 
Before you understand, it is the seventh consciousness, but once 
you are enlightened, it is the wisdom of equal nature. The 
seventh consciousness is also called the “transmitting 
consciousness” because it acts as a transmitter between the sixth 
and eighth consciousness. It is called “the wisdom of equal 
nature” because the minds of all Buddhas and living beings are 
equal when the latter’s consciousness have been transformed 
into wisdom. “The mind without disease” means that there is no 
obstruction, no jealousy, no greed, hate, or stupidity. Without 
these defilements the seventh consciousness is transmuted into 
the wisdom of equal nature. 

The wonderful observing wisdom is the sixth consciousness 
when it has been transformed into wisdom. It is the wisdom of 
subtle observation. The sixth consciousness, what we think of as 
the ordinary mind, is the consciousness of discrimination; it 
discriminates good and evil, right and wrong, male and female. 
Such discrimination is not actually the work of intelligence, as it 

287 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

seems to be, but is merely a kind of consciousness. When you 
turn it into wisdom, it becomes wonderfully observing wisdom, 
which sees all realms without having to go through the process 
of discrimination. This wonderful observation is quite different 
from mere discriminative thoughts. 

When certified Arhats wish to use the wonderful observing 
wisdom to know something, they must first sit quietly in 
meditation and intentionally observe, for unless they 
intentionally observe, their minds are no different from those of 
ordinary people. By intentionally observing, they can know the 
events of the past eighty thousand eons. 

Perfecting wisdom comes from the transformation of the first 
five consciousnesses—eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body-—into 
wisdom. 

“Five, eight, six, seven—effect and cause both turn.” The five 
consciousnesses and the eighth consciousness are transformed in 
the period of reaping effects and the sixth and seventh are 
transformed in the period of planting causes. In transforming the 
consciousnesses into the four wisdoms, first turn the sixth and 
seventh in the period of planting causes, and next the eighth and 
five in the period of reaping effects. 

“Merely useful names: they are without real nature.” 
Although they are said to be changed in the realms of causes and 
effects, there is nothing in reality which corresponds to them; 
they are merely names and nothing more. 

“Tf, in the place of ‘turning,’ emotion isn’t kept;” if, in the 
place where your emotional feelings are being ‘turned’ you do 
not use your common mind and become caught up in the 
‘turning...’ 

“You always and forever dwell in Naga concentration.” At 
all times you are in Naga samadhi. Naga means “dragon.” 
Dragons can magically appear in big or small bodies because 

288 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih T’ung 

they have a great deal of concentration. As Fa Hai tells us in his 
introduction to the Sutra, the Sixth Patriarch defeated a dragon 
by saying, “If you are really a magic dragon, you should be able 
to appear in a small body as well as a large one.” Then, when the 
dragon turned up in a small body the Master dared him to climb 
into his bowl. As the little dragon had a big temper and much 
ignorance, he jumped at the dare; but when he tried to jump out 
again, he couldn’t do it. The Master explained the Dharma to the 
dragon and the dragon then went to rebirth. 

The dragon may have been constantly in samadhi, but he had 
not destroyed his ignorance and therefore lost his temper. “I'll 
show you!” he said, “Ill change my body into a little one right 
now!” If he had really been in samadhi he would have said, “You 
say I can’t appear in a small body? O.K. So what? I'll just appear 
in this large one.” But he lost his concentration and was ‘turned,’ 
caught, and defeated by the Great Master. 

Still, Naga samadhi is an inconceivable state. How do 
dragons get to be dragons? They study the Buddhadharma with 
mighty effort, morning to night, but they do not keep the 
precepts. “Precepts are for common people,” they say. “I’m 
extraordinary. I’m not in the same category as they are, and I do 
not have to keep precepts!” That’s how they turn into dragons. 

Sutra: 

Note: The transformation of consciousness into 
wisdom has been described. The teaching says, “The first 
five consciousnesses turned become the _ perfecting 
wisdom; the sixth consciousness turned becomes the 
wonderfully observing wisdom; the _ seventh 
consciousness turned becomes the wisdom of equal 
nature, the eighth consciousness turned becomes the 
wisdom of the great perfect mirror.” 

289 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Although the sixth and seventh are turned in the cause 
and the first five and the eighth in the effect, it is merely 
the names which turn. Their substance does not turn. 

Commentary: 

The above passage was not part of the original text, but was 
added later. 

Sutra: 

Instantly enlightened to the nature of wisdom, Chih 
T’ung submitted the following verse: 

Three bodies are my basic substance, 

Four wisdoms my original bright mind. 

Body and wisdom in unobstructed fusion: 

In response to beings I accordingly take form. 
Arising to cultivate them is false movement. 
Holding to or pondering over them a waste of effort. 
Through the Master I know the wonderful principle, 
And in the end I lose the stain of names. 

Commentary: 

Chih T’ung understood the function of the three bodies and 
the four wisdoms. “The three bodies are not to be found outside 
of my own body,” he said, “and the four wisdoms, too, are 
produced from my own bright, understanding mind. When the 
bodies and wisdoms interpenetrate, then I may dispense the 
Dharma in accord with the needs of living beings—in accord with 
external conditions and yet not changing; unchanging, and yet in 
accord with conditions. If you wonder, “How can I cultivate the 

290 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih T’ung 

three bodies and four wisdoms?” that is nothing but false 
thinking, false movement. The same is true of holding to them 
and being attached to them. 

From beginning to end there is no stain of names. What is 
unstained by names is the original self-nature, which is 
untouched by worldly emotion. Unless you have no defilement, 

you cannot return to the root and go back to the source, which is 
undefiled. 

291 

Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang 

Sutra: 

292 

Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang, a native of Kuei Hsi in Hsin Chou, 
left home when he was a child and resolutely sought to see 
his own nature. One day he called on the Master, who 
asked him, “Where are you from and what do you 
want?” 

Chih Ch’ ang replied, “Your student has recently been 
to Pai Feng Mountain in Hung Chou to call on the High 
Master Ta T’ung and receive his instruction on the 
principle of seeing one’s nature and_ realizing 
Buddhahood. As I have not yet resolved my doubts, I 
have come from a great distance to bow reverently and 
request the Master’s compassionate instruction.” 

The Master said, “What instruction did he give you? 
Try to repeat it to me.” 

Chih Ch’ang said, “After arriving there, three 
months passed and still I had received no instruction. 
Being eager for the Dharma, one evening I went alone 
into the Abbot’s room and asked him, ‘What is my 
original mind and original substance?’” 

“Ta T’ung then said to me, ‘Do you see empty space?’ 

““Ves,’ I said, ‘I see it.’ 

“Ta T’ung said, ‘Do you know what appearance it 
has?’ 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang 

“T replied, ‘Empty space has no form. How could it 
have an appearance?’ 

“Ta T’ung said, ‘Your original mind is just like empty 
space. To understand that nothing can be seen is called 
right seeing; to know that nothing can be known is called 
true knowing. There is nothing blue or yellow, long or 
short. Simply seeing the clear, pure original source, the 
perfect, bright enlightened substance, this is what is 
called ‘seeing one’s nature and realizing Buddhahood.’ It 
is also called ‘the knowledge and vision of the Tathagata.’ 

“Although I heard his instruction, I still do not 
understand and beg you, O Master to instruct me.” 

The Master said, “Your former master’s explanation 
still retains the concepts of knowing and seeing; and that 
is why you have not understood. Now, I will teach you 
with a verse: 

Not to see a single dharma 
still retains no-seeing, 
Greatly resembling floating clouds 
covering the sun. 
Not to know a single dharma 
holds to empty knowing, 
Even as a lightning flash 
comes out of empty space. 
This knowing and seeing 
arise in an instant. 
When seen wrongly, 
can expedients be understood? 
If, in the space of a thought, 
you can know your own error, 

293 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Your own spiritual light 
will always be manifest. 

Commentary: 

Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang left home at the early age of seven or 
eight. When he called on the Sixth Patriarch, the Master 
remembered his first meeting with the Fifth Patriarch, who had 
asked him, “Where are you from and what do you seek?” 

“I’m from Hsin Chou,” the Master had said, “and I seek 
nothing but Buddhahood.” 

“Hsin Chou people are barbarians,” the Fifth Patriarch had 
said. “How can you become a Buddha?” 

“The Barbarian’s body and the High Master’s body are not 
the same,” countered the Sixth Patriarch, “but in the Buddha 
nature where is the distinction?” 

Remembering this, the Sixth Patriarch asked Chih Ch’ang, 
“Where are you from? Just what do you think you’re doing?” 

Chih Ch’ang had received instruction on seeing the nature 
and realizing Buddhahood, but he still had doubts. The Chinese 
word for doubts is literally “fox doubt” because foxes are wary 
of everything. When a fox walks across the ice, he takes a step, 
cocks his head, and listens: if the ice crackles he runs back to 
shore; if it does not, he keeps on walking and listening, walking 
and listening. Although foxes are extremely intelligent, they are 
full of doubts. 

In his verse the Sixth Patriarch explains, “If you do not see a 
single dharma and the ten thousand dharmas all are empty, you 
still have the view of not seeing any dharmas; you still hold that 
view. This is just like floating clouds covering the sun, because 
if you truly do not see anything, you are free of the idea of not 
seeing. 

294 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang 

“In the same way, if you don’t establish a single dharma and 
don’t know a single dharma, but still have the knowledge that 
you neither establish nor know dharmas, you still hold on to an 
empty, false kind of knowing. Your principles seem coherent, 
but knowing and seeing still remain. This is like the great void: 
originally there is nothing there, but suddenly there is a flash of 
lightning. Now, do you see, or not? 

“This ‘knowing and seeing’ arise in an instant.” Your seeing 
nothing and your empty knowing, your view of not seeing and 
your knowledge of knowing nothing, are there before your eyes. 

You should understand right this instant that you are wrong 
in holding to the idea of seeing nothing and knowing emptiness. 
Then your original wisdom, your original intelligence, your 
inherent Buddha nature which is the Tathagata’s Treasury will 
always be manifest. 

Sutra: 

Hearing the verse, Chih Ch’ ang understood it with his 
heart and mind, and he composed this verse: 

Without beginning, 

knowing and seeing arise. 
When one is attached to marks 

bodhi is sought out. 
Clinging to a 

thought of enlightenment, 
Do I rise above my former confusion? 
The inherently enlightened 

substance of my nature 
Mluminates the turning 

twisting flow. 

295 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

But had I not entered 
the Patriarch’s room, 

I'd still be running, lost 
between the two extremes. 

Commentary: 

When Chih Ch’ang heard this verse, he put it all down. 
Having put it all down he didn’t say, “I put it all down!” If you 
put it down, put it down; don’t keep saying, “I put it down!” If 
you keep on saying that you’ve put it down, you haven’t really 
done it. If you truly have no knowledge or view and have 
returned to the root and gone back to the source, why do you 
keep a ‘knowing’ and a ‘viewing’? 

Chih Ch’ang understood and spoke a wonderful verse: 
“Without beginning, knowing and seeing arise.” Without a head, 
without a tail, the idea of seeing nothing and the knowledge of 
emptiness arise from no beginning, without a causal basis or 
foundation. Though one is attached to marks, Bodhi is sought 
out. You should not be attached to marks, but now you have 
become attached to seeing nothing and knowing emptiness. 
Previously, when I explained “no-thought,” I said that if you 
think, “I have no thought,” just that is a thought. Isn’t it? 

If you really are without thought, you are also without no- 
thought. The concept of no-thought is just another thought. 

In Ch’an (Dhyana) meditation, when we reflect on the 
question, “Who is reciting the Buddha’s name?” we search for 
the “who” but don’t find it, because basically there is no “who.” 
But people can’t understand, and keep looking for a “self,” 
saying “Who?” In your search, do not be attached to marks; do 
not be attached to the mark of self when you seek Bodhi. 

296 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Ch’ang 

When you think, “I’m seeing emptiness and there is nothing 
at all!” you still have the thought of knowing; you still have the 
thought of seeing, and you don’t overcome your confusion. This 
is certainly not enlightenment. 

“The inherently enlightened substance of my nature 
illuminates the turning, twisting flow.” The basic substance of 
the self-nature, which is enlightened from the beginning, is in 
accord with the shift and flow of external conditions, and yet it 
does not change. Understanding this, Chih Ch’ang finds the 
middle way between the “two extremes” of ‘seeing’ nothing and 
‘knowing’ emptiness. 

Sutra: 

One day Chih Ch’ang asked the Master, “The 
Buddha taught the dharma of the three vehicles and also 
the Supreme Vehicle. Your disciple has not yet 
understood that and would like to be instructed.” 

The Master said, “Contemplate only your own 
original mind and do not be attached to the marks of 
external dharmas. The Dharma doesn’t have four 
vehicles; it is people’s minds that differ. Seeing, hearing, 
and reciting is the small vehicle. Awakening to the 
Dharma and understanding the meaning is the middle 
vehicle. Cultivating in accord with Dharma is the great 
vehicle. To penetrate the ten thousand dharmas entirely 
and completely while remaining without defilement, and 
to sever attachment to the marks of all the dharmas with 
nothing whatsoever gained in return: that is the Supreme 
Vehicle. Vehicles are methods of practice, not subjects for 
debate. Cultivate on your own and do not ask me, for at 
all times your own self-nature is itself ‘thus.’” 

297 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Chih Ch’ang bowed and thanked the Master and 
served him to the end of the Master’s life. 

Commentary: 

The Master said, “Chih Ch’ang, the Dharma doesn’t even 
have one vehicle, much less four! People’s minds are what 
differ. If you see, hear, and recite, you belong to the small 
vehicle; if you understand and awaken, you belong to the middle 
vehicle; if you practice in accord with the Dharma, you belong 
to the great vehicle. When you understand all dharmas, when 
they are perfected in your own mind without any obstruction, 
and when you know that the ten thousand dharmas are the mind 
and the mind is the ten thousand dharmas, and further when you 
are not defiled by any state, then you belong to the Supreme 
Vehicle. But you must cultivate on your own; I can’t do it for 
you. 

Eat your own food and fill yourself; 
End your own birth and death. 

From that time on, Chih Ch’ang served the Master. When he 
wanted a cup of tea, Chih Ch’ang brought it for him; when he 
was hungry, Chih Ch’ang brought him food. He served the 
Master right up until the Master’s death, at which time he left 
Nan Hua Temple. 

298 

Bhikshu Chih Tao 

Sutra: 

Bhikshu Chih Tao, a native of Nan Hai in Kuang Chou, 
asked a favor: “Since leaving home, your student has 
studied the Nirvana Sutra for over ten years and has still 
not understood its great purport. I hope that the High 
Master will bestow his instruction.” 

The Master said, “What point haven’t you 
understood?” 

Chih Tao replied, 

“All activities are impermanent, 
Characterized by production and extinction; 
When production and extinction are extinguished, 
That still extinction is bliss. 

My doubts are with respect to this passage.” 

Commentary: 

Once in the past, during the period when Shakyamuni 
Buddha was cultivating to plant causes for the attainment of 
Buddhahood, he was a Brahman. Deep in the mountains he 
cultivated many Dharma doors so heroically that the god Shakra 
was moved and said, “He works so hard! I wonder if I can break 
him?” and he transformed himself into a rakshasa ghost to test 

299 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

the Brahman. He told him, “The Buddha known as ‘Free from 
Fear’ said, ‘All activities are impermanent, characterized by 
production and extinction.”” 

“Who said that?” said the Brahman. 

The rakshasa ghost, who was hideously ugly, appeared and 
said, “I was just quoting a verse spoken by the Buddha who is 
free from fear.” 

“But you didn’t recite the entire verse, only the first half. 
Please complete it,” said the Brahman. 

“T don’t have the energy because I haven’t eaten for several 
days. Find me something to eat and I will speak it for you,” the 
ghost said. 

“What would you like?” asked the Brahman. 

“T don’t eat anything but fresh, warm, human meat,” said the 
ghost. 

“In that case,” replied the Brahman, “you may speak the 
verse and then I will give you my own body to eat.” 

The ghost stared at him. “Can you really do such an awesome 
deed? Can you really give up your body for half a verse?” 

“T speak the truth; I do not lie,” said the Brahman, “and if you 
don’t believe me I can ask the Buddhas of the ten directions to 
bear testimony to the fact. Now, recite the verse and then I will 
feed you.” 

The ghost quickly recited, “All activities are impermanent, 
characterized by production and extinction; When production 
and extinction are extinguished, that still extinction is bliss.’ 
Now give me your body!” 

“Wait a minute,” said the Brahman. “Once you have eaten 
me there will be nothing left of the verse unless I write it down. 
Let me carve it on this tree so that future generations may 
cultivate according to it.” Then he stripped the bark from a tree 
and carved the verse on its trunk. 

300 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Tao 

The ghost said, “Can I eat you now?” 

“Just a minute...” said the Brahman. 

“So you’re backing out, are you?” the ghost said. 

“No, I’m not,” said the Brahman, “but what I have written on 
the tree will eventually be worn away by the wind and rain. I 
want to carve the verse in stone so that it will last forever. Pll 
gladly give you my body, but I must also leave the 
Buddhadharma for those of the future.” 

“Not a bad idea,” said the ghost. 

The Brahman carved the words in stone and said, “All right, 
I’ve done what I had to do. I give my body to you as an offering. 
You may eat me now,” and he shut his eyes and waited for the 
ghost to devour him. But just then the ghost flew up into empty 
space, transformed himself back into Shakra and said, “Very 
good! Very good! You are a true cultivator, one who gives up his 
own body for the sake of the Buddha Way. In the future you are 
sure to become a Buddha!” 

This is an event in a former life of Shakyamuni Buddha, 
when, as a Brahman, he offered his life for half a verse. 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “What are your doubts?” 

“All living beings have two bodies,” Chih Tao replied, 
“the physical body and the Dharma-body. The physical 
body is impermanent and is produced and destroyed. The 
Dharma-body is permanent and is without knowing or 
awareness. The Sutra says that the extinction of 
production and extinction is bliss, but I do not know 
which body is in tranquil extinction and which receives 
the bliss. 

“How could it be the physical body which receives the 
bliss? When this physical body is extinguished, the four 

301 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

elements scatter. That is total suffering and suffering 
cannot be called bliss. If the Dharma-body were 
extinguished it would become like grass, trees, tiles, or 
stones; then what would receive the bliss? 

“Moreover, the Dharma-nature is the substance of 
production and extinction and the five heaps are the 
function of production and extinction. With one body 
having five functions, production and extinction are 
permanent; at the time of production, the functions arise 
from the substance, and at the time of extinction, the 
functions return to the substance. If there were rebirth 
then sentient beings would not cease to exist or be 
extinguished. If there were not rebirth, they would return 
to tranquil extinction and be just like insentient objects. 
Thus all dharmas would be suppressed by Nirvana and 
there would not even be production. How could there be 
bliss?” 

The Master said, “You are a son of Shakya! How can 
you hold the deviant views of annihilationism and 
permanence which belongs to other religions and criticise 
the Supreme Vehicle Dharma! According to what you 
say, there is a Dharma-body that exists apart from 
physical form and a tranquil extinction to be sought 
apart from production and extinction. Moreover you 
propose that there is a body which enjoys the 
permanence and bliss of Nirvana. But that is to grasp 
tightly onto birth and death and indulge in worldly bliss.” 

Commentary: 

“Ts it the physical body which is extinct and the Dharma body 
which receives the bliss?” Chih Tao wanted to know, “or is it the 

302 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Tao 

Dharma body which is extinct and the physical body which 
receives the bliss? 

“How could it be the physical body which receives the bliss? 
The body is composed of the elements earth, air, fire, and water. 
At death, the elements scatter and that is a state of unspeakable 
suffering. You can’t call suffering happiness.” 

“Hey!” said the Great Master, “you are a disciple of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. You have left home and are a member of 
the Sangha. How can you harbor the deviant views and deviant 
knowledge of non-Buddhist religions? You say that there is a 
Dharma-body apart from the physical body and its extinction 
and that there is a tranquil extinction apart from the process of 
production and extinction. Isn’t this what you’re saying? You 
also say that there is a body which enjoys the four virtues of 
Nirvana: permanence, bliss, true self, and purity. In fact, your 
theories are nothing but niggardly attachment to birth and death 
and worldly pleasure. Stuck in the mundane world, you cannot 
possibly know transcendental bliss.” 

Sutra: 

“You should now know that deluded people mistook 
the union of five heaps for their own bodies and 
discriminated dharmas as external to themselves. They 
loved life, dreaded death, and drifted from thought to 
thought, not knowing that this illusory dream is empty 
and false. They turned vainly around on the wheel of 
birth and death and mistook the permanence and bliss of 
Nirvana for a form of suffering. All day long they sought 
after something else. Taking pity on them, the Buddha 
made manifest in the space of an instant the true bliss of 
Nirvana, which has no mark of production or extinction; 
it has no production or extinction to be extinguished. 

303 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

That, then, is the manifestation of tranquil extinction. Its 
manifestation cannot be reckoned; it is permanent and 
blissful. The bliss has neither an enjoyer nor a non- 
enjoyer. How can you call it ‘one substance with five 
functions?’ Worse, how can you say that Nirvana 
suppresses all dharmas, causing them to be forever 
unproduced? That is to slander the Buddha and defame 
the Dharma.” 

Commentary: 

The Buddha spoke for those who thought that their bodies 
were actually made up of a union of the five heaps, and who 
thought dharmas were something external to themselves. They 
were attached to life and death because they didn’t know that 
everything is like a dream, a bubble, a lightning flash, or a dew 
drop—illusory. They underwent birth and death over and over 
again, uselessly and pitifully spinning on the wheel of the six 
paths of rebirth. 

Some people thought that the wonderful virtues of Nirvana 
were a kind of suffering, but the Buddha mercifully revealed to 
them the true happiness of Nirvana, where there is no mark of 
production and no mark of extinction. Further, there is 
absolutely no extinction of production and extinction, because 
right within production and extinction there appears the state of 
non-production and non-extinction. That is the manifestation of 
tranquil extinction. 

You can’t say that the manifestation of tranquil extinction is 
so long or so short, so high or so wide. It’s a kind of permanent 
happiness which is without an enjoyer or a non-enjoyer. If you 
would like to have this kind of happiness, you should know that 
there is no one who enjoys it or does not enjoy it. Why? It is the 
manifestation of the original self-nature. 

304 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Tao 

Sutra: 

“Listen to my verse: 

Supreme, great Nirvana is bright 

Perfect, permanent, still and shining. 

Deluded common people call it death, 

Other teachings hold it to be annihilation. 

All those who seek two vehicles 

Regard it as non-action. 

Ultimately these notions arise from feeling, 
And form the basis for sixty-two views, 
Wrongly establishing unreal names. 

What is the true, real principle? 

Only one who has gone beyond measuring 
Penetrates without grasping or rejecting, 

And knows that the dharma of the five heaps 
And the self within the heaps, 

The outward appearances—a mass of images— 
The mark of every sound, 

Are equally like the illusion of dreams, 

For him, views of common and holy do not arise 
Nor are explanations of Nirvana made. 

The two boundaries, the three limits are cut off. 
All organs have their function, 

But there never arises the thought of the function. 
All dharmas are discriminated 

Without a thought of discrimination arising. 
When the fire at the eon’s end 

305 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

burns the bottom of the sea 
And the winds blow the mountains 
against each other, 
The true, permanent, still extinct bliss, 
The mark of Nirvana is ‘thus.’ 
IT have struggled to explain it, 
To cause you to reject your false views. 
Don’t understand it by words alone 
And maybe you'll understand a bit of this.” 

After hearing this verse, Chih Tao was greatly 
enlightened. Overwhelmed with joy, he made obeisance 
and withdrew. 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “Listen. Great Nirvana is full, 
complete and bright. It’s permanent, unchanging, and constantly 
illuminating. Ordinary people say that it is death, and those of 
non-Buddhist religions say that it is annihilation. The two 
vehicles of the Shravakas and Pratyeka Buddhas think that it is 
non-action; that it is uncreated and arises spontaneously. But 
these are all discriminations which arise from emotion, and they 
form the basis of sixty-two wrong views. What are the sixty-two 
wrong views? 

1. The heap (skandha) is big and I am contained in the 

heap. 

2. Iam big and the heap is contained in me. 

3. The heap itself is me. 

4. Iam separate from the heap. 

306 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Chih Tao 

When each of the four above are applied to the five heaps— 
form, feelings, perceptions, impulses, and consciousness—they 
make twenty. The twenty multiplied by the three periods of 
time—past, present, and future—-make sixty. Adding the two 
extremes of permanence and annihilation makes sixty-two. 
None of them are real; they are all empty and false.” 

Then “what is the true real principle?” Only one who has 
gone beyond measuring penetrates without grasping at or 
rejecting them. Therefore he truly understands that the dharma 
of the five heaps and the self within those heaps, the marks of 
form and sound, are all like dreams, illusions, bubbles and 
shadows. 

“For him, views of common and holy do not arise.” He 
doesn’t have the views of a common person, he doesn’t have the 
understanding of the sage, and he doesn’t try to explain the bliss 
of Nirvana. “The two boundaries, the three limits are cut off.” He 
is attached neither to the boundary of emptiness, nor to the 
boundary of existence. Therefore the three limits of the past, 
present, and future are cut off and he is not attached to them. 

“All organs have their function, but there never arises the 
thought of the function.” The true suchness self-nature has the 
ability to function in accord with external conditions and yet not 
change. It’s responsiveness is inexhaustible and yet there is no 
thought of “Ah! I am functioning!” All “Dharmas are 
discriminated without a thought of discrimination arising.” You 
don’t think, “I am not making discriminations.” If you do think 
that, you have the mark of discrimination. To be truly without 
discrimination is to be without the mark of non-discrimination as 
well. 

“When the fire at the end of the eon burns the bottom of the 
sea and the wind blows the mountains against each other:” At the 
end of an eon, there are three disasters: flood, fire, and wind. 

307 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“The true permanent, still, extinct bliss, the mark of Nirvana is 
‘thus.’” If you have attained true permanence and the bliss of 
tranquil extinction, then the mark of Nirvana is just as it was 
explained above, and the three disasters cannot affect you. 

The Great Master concludes by saying that he has spoken the 
verse to encourage his listeners to cast aside their present 
knowledge and views. “When you no longer rely on the text in 
order to explain the Sutras,” he said, “I will grant that you 
understand just a little bit of what I’ve said.” 

308 

Bhikshu Hsing Szu 

Sutra: 

Dhyana Master Hsing Szu was born into the Liu 
family, which lived in An Ch’eng district in Chi Chou. 
Hearing of the flourishing influence of the Ts’ao Hsi 
Dharma Assembly, Hsing Szu went directly there to pay 
homage and asked, “What is required to avoid falling 
into successive stages?” 

The Master said, “What did you do before coming 
here?” 

He replied, “I did not even practice the Holy Truths.” 

The Master said, “Then into what successive states 
could you fall?” 

He replied, “If one isn’t practicing the Four Holy 
Truths, what successive stages are there?” 

The Master greatly admired his capacity and made 
him the leader of the assembly. 

One day the Master said, “You should go elsewhere to 
teach. Do not allow the teaching to be cut off.” 

Having obtained the Dharma, Hsing Szu returned to 
Ch’ing Yiian Mountain in Chi Chou, to propagate the 
Dharma and transform living beings. After his death he 
was given the posthumous title “Dhyana Master Hung 
Chi.” 

309 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

Dhyana Master Hsing Szu walked and thought about things 
at the same time. What did he think about? Do you know? I 
know. He walked and thought, “Who is mindful of the Buddha? 
Who is mindful of the Buddha?” and so he was called Hsing Szu, 
“walking thinker.” 

At that time the reputation of the Dharma Assembly at Ts’ao 
Hsi had spread all over China. Everyone knew that the person to 
whom the Fifth Patriarch had transmitted the robe and bowl was 
spreading the Dharma there. People “drift away from the empty 
and gather with the flourishing.” If there are only a few people 
in your place, it will soon be empty. For instance, here there are 
thirty people, but if there were only three or four people, soon 
they would all run away. The more people there are, the more 
will come from the outside. “There are a lot of people at the 
Buddhist Lecture Hall!” “Hippies who go there cut their hair and 
shave their beards. It’s inconceivable. There must be something 
happening there. Let’s go and see!” 

The Dharma Assembly at Ts’ao Hsi flourished. “Gather with 
the flourishing” can also be explained as “gather with the sages,” 
because in Chinese the words “flourishing” and “sage” sound the 
same. Many sages and common people came to support the 
Patriarch. 

Hsing Szu asked the Patriarch which Dharma door he should 
cultivate in order to avoid the successive stages of the gradual 
teaching. The sudden teaching does not have successive stages. 
Therefore, what he actually asked was, “How do I cultivate the 
sudden dharma?” He must have heard someone say, “The Sixth 
Patriarch is truly inconceivable. He has the five eyes and the six 
spiritual penetrations. I went there and didn’t say a thing and he 
knew what I was thinking and asked me about, it!” 

310 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Hsing Szu 

The Master regarded Hsing Szu highly. “What this man says 
makes sense,” he thought. “He surely must have good roots.” He 
appointed Hsing Szu head of the assembly and thereafter Hsing 
Szu always walked in front, leading the others during the 
ceremonies. 

The Sixth Patriarch saw Hsing Szu as a vessel of the Dharma, 
a Dharma-door “elephant and dragon.” This means that he had 
the capability of a patriarch, not a self-made patriarch, but one 
who had received the Sixth Patriarch’s certification and 
permission to teach. “Go and teach elsewhere,” said the Master. 
“You should not stay here with me but should go in such and 
such a direction to be a teaching master. Do not let the Dharma 
become extinct!” 

Hsing Szu received the robe and bowl and carried the 
transmission of the lamp of the wonderful Dharma. 

The posthumous title was conferred by the Emperor. Hsing 
Szu was given the name Hung Chi, “extensive crossing,” just as 
the Sixth Patriarch received the name Ta Chien, “great mirror.” 

311 

Dhyana Master Huai Jang 

Sutra: 

312 

Dhyana Master Huai Jang was the son of the Tu family in 
Chin Chou. He first visited National Master An of Sung 
Mountain, who told him to go to Ts’ao Hsi to pay 
homage. When he arrived, he bowed, and the Master 
asked him, “What has come?” 

He replied, “Sung Shan.” 

The Master said, “What thing is it and how does it 
come?” 

He replied, “To say that it is like a thing is to miss the 
point.” 

The Master said, “Then can there still be that which is 
cultivated and certified?” 

He replied, “Cultivation and certification are not 
absent, but there can be no defilement.” 

The Master said, “It is just the lack of defilement of 
which all Buddhas are mindful and protective. You are 
like that, and I am like that, too. In the West, Prajnatara 
predicted that a colt would run from under your feet, 
trampling and killing people under heaven. You should 
keep that in mind, but do not speak of it too soon.” 

Huai Jang suddenly understood. Accordingly he 
waited upon the Master for fifteen years, daily 
penetrating more deeply into the profound and 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Huai Jang 

mysterious. He later went to Nan Yao where he spread 
the Dhyana School. The title “Dhyana Master Ta Hui” 
was bestowed upon him posthumously. 

Commentary: 

Huai Jang received the Dharma-transmission from the Great 
Master and became the Seventh Patriarch. Huai means “to 
cherish.” What did he cherish? Jang, which means “to yield.” He 
was never arrogant toward anyone, but kept his mind humble 
and modest, respecting everyone above and below him. In his 
mind he always cherished politeness. What this Dhyana Master 
had, he appeared to be without; what was real appeared false. 
Although he had the Way, it seemed as though he didn’t. He was 
actually highly educated, but if anyone brought it up, he politely 
insisted that he was really just a beginner. 

He first went to study the Buddhadharma with National 
Master An. National Master An sent him to study at Ts’ao Hsi, 
because at that time everyone knew that Ts’ao Hsi was the place 
of the true orthodox Buddhadharma. If you really wanted to 
study and cultivate faith in the Buddhadharma you went to Ts’ao 
Hsi. Now, in America, if you really want to study the 
Buddhadharma, you should come and study the Sutras here. 
Don’t fear difficulty! Don’t fear suffering! Don’t be lazy! Study 
the Buddhadharma. 

At that time at Nan Hua Temple, the site of the platform of 
the Sixth Patriarch, there was Dhyana meditation and work on 
the mountain slopes every day. Everyone got up at three-thirty in 
the morning. At four o’clock they went to morning recitation, 
which was very vigorous and lasted until five-thirty. Then they 
sat in meditation until sunrise. After they had eaten some rice 
gruel, there was another hour of meditation. At eight o’clock 
they went out on the mountain slopes for two hours until ten 

313 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

o’clock. Because there were about two thousand people, in two 
hours they were able to do a lot of work. It was not like one or 
two people doing the work and not being able to finish it. 

At ten they returned from the slopes and rested until eleven, 
at which time they ate. From twelve to two they sat in 
meditation, and at two o’clock they went back out on the 
mountain slopes to work for two more hours. Then they returned 
and sat in meditation for six hours until ten o’clock. Afterwards, 
some did their own work, bowing in homage to the Sutras, or 
performing repentance ceremonies, until midnight. Every day it 
was this way. 

The “wind of the Way” blew severely at Nan Hua Temple. 
Everyone had to follow the rules. There were several thousand 
people and you never heard a person speak. No one spoke 
because they feared that they might strike up false thinking and 
then their work would not succeed. If you single-mindedly apply 
effort, you never pursue any train of random thought 
whatsoever. The Sixth Patriarch therefore established work in 
common which was very rigorous. 

When Dhyana Master Huai Jang arrived at Nan Hua Temple 
he bowed, and the Master said, “What has come?” This is Ch’an. 
In the Ch’an School, one never speaks of the principle outright. 
He merely said, “What has come?” Ostensibly it was a Bhikshu, 
but he said, “What comes?” At least he didn’t ask if it was a 
ghost. 

Huai Jang replied, “Sung Shan.” He meant, “I am from Sung 
Mountain.” 

The two were using the language of the Ch’an School— 
repartee. 

“Cultivation and certification are not absent, but there can be 
no defilement.” Cultivation has that which is cultivated and 
certification has that which is certified. Therefore cultivation and 

314 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Huai Jang 

certification are not non-existent. So cultivation and certification 
can exist, but defilement cannot; that is, you cannot be stained. 
The self-nature must be bright and light. 

When Huai Jang said this, the Master replied that there was 
no defilement, no filth in the self-nature. The defilements are 
self-seeking, jealousy, greed, hate, and delusion. “Without these 
defilements,” he said, “you are ‘thus’, just as I am. We two are 
the same—equal.” 

The Twenty-seventh Indian Patriarch, Prajnatara, the 
predecessor of Bodhidharma, had said that a colt would run from 
under Huai Jang’s feet. Who was the colt? He was Huai Jang’s 
Dharma successor, Great Master Ma Tsu “horse patriarch” 
Tao I. 

“Under your feet” means that the colt would be Huai Jang’s 
disciple, because a disciple behaves as if he were under his 
teacher’s foot. “In the future,” Prajnatara had said, “a colt will 
run out of your gate, trampling people all over the world. No 
other Dharma Master will match his superb eloquence and vast 
wisdom. None will defeat him. Under heaven, he will be 
supreme.” 

Master Huai Jang became the Sixth Patriarch’s personal 
attendant. Later he went to Heng Mountain in Nan Yao, which is 
in Hu Nan Province in south-central China, to propagate the 
Dhyana School. After Huai Jang died, the Emperor gave him the 
title “Great Master Ta Hui,” “Great Wisdom.” 

315 

Dhyana Master Hstian Chiao 

Sutra: 

316 

Dhyana Master Hstian Chiao of Yung Chia was the son 
of a family called Tai in Wen Chou. When he was young 
he studied the Sutras and commentaries and was skilled 
in the T’ien T’ai Dharma-door of “Stop and Look.” Upon 
reading the Vimalakirti Sutra, he understood the mind- 
ground. One day he happened to meet the Master’s 
disciple Hstian Ch’e and they had a pleasant talk. As 
Hsiian Chiao’s words were consonant with the words of 
all the Patriarchs, Hstian Ch’e asked him, “Kind Sir, 
from whom did you obtain the Dharma?” 

He replied, “I have heard the Vaipulya Sutras and 
Shastras, receiving each from a master. Later, upon 
reading the Vimalakirti Sutra, 1 awakened to the doctrine 
of the Buddha-mind, but as yet no one has certified me.” 

Hsiian Ch’e said, “That was acceptable before the 
time of the Buddha called the Awesome-Voiced King. But 
since the coming of that Buddha, all those who ‘self- 
enlighten’ without a master belong to other religions 
which hold to the tenet of spontaneity.” 

“Then will you please certify me, Kind Sir?” said 
Hsitian Chiao. 

Hsiian Ch’e said, “My words are of little worth, but 
the Great Master, the Sixth Patriarch, is at Ts’ao Hsi, 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Hstan Chiao 

where people gather like clouds from the four directions. 
He is one who has received the Dharma. If you wish to go, 
I will accompany you.” 

Commentary: 

Yung Chia is the name of a place. Because everyone greatly 
respected this Dharma Master, they addressed him after the 
name of his birthplace, according to Chinese custom. When he 
was young Yung Chia investigated the Buddhist Sutras and the 
commentaries written by the Patriarchs. When he read the 
Vimalakirti Sutra, he understood the Dharma-door of his own 
mind-ground. One day he had a chat with the Sixth Patriarch’s 
disciple Hstian Ch’e, and Hstian Ch’e found that their views 
were in agreement and that they both agreed with the principles 
of the Patriarchs. Supposing him to be a member of his own 
school, Hstian Ch’e asked, “Who transmitted our Dharma to 
you, Great Master Hstian Chiao? Who certified you?” 

When he learned Hsiian Chiao had enlightened himself by 
reading Vimalakirti Sutra, he said, “Before the time of 
Awesome-Voiced King Buddha, that would have been all right. 
But he was the first Buddha, and now, since his advent, anyone 
who claims to be enlightened without a master’s certification is 
simply not a Buddhist.” 

“Not a Buddhist? Oh no!” said Hstian Chiao. “Then please 
certify me!” 

I don’t know what certain people in America who certify 
themselves and then lecture on The Sixth Patriarch’s Sutra do 
when they come to this passage of text. How do they explain it? 

Awesome-Voiced King Buddha’s name means that the 
sound of his voice penetrates to the most remote places, through 
the wind and light to the original ground. 

317 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“T can’t certify you,” said Hsiian Ch’e, “because I don’t have 
the authority. Besides, it’s not certain that I myself am 
enlightened. However the Sixth Patriarch is at Nan Hua Temple. 
The Fifth Patriarch has transmitted both the Dharma and 
Bodhidharma’s robe and bowl to him.” 

Sutra: 

Thereupon Hsiian Chiao went with Hstian Ch’e to call 
upon the Master. On arriving, he circumambulated the 
Master three times, shook his staff, and stood in front of 
him. The Master said, “Inasmuch as a Shramana has 
perfected the three thousand awesome deportments and 
the eighty thousand fine practices, where does this 
Virtuous One come from and what makes him so 
arrogant?” 

Hsiian Chiao said, “The affair of birth and death is 
great and impermanence comes quickly.” 

The Master said, “Why not embody non-production 
and understand that which is not quick?” 

He replied, “The body itself is not produced and 
fundamentally there is no quickness.” 

The Master said, “So it is; so it is.” 

Commentary: 

When the two arrived at Ts’ao Hsi, Hsiian Chiao marched 
around the Sixth Patriarch three times, pounded his tin staff into 
the ground, and stood there as if angry. 

The Sixth Patriarch politely asked, “How did you get here 
and why are you so obnoxious? One who has left home has 
perfected the three thousand awesome deportments and the 

318 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Hstan Chiao 

eighty thousand fine practices, and yet you didn’t even bow to 
me.” 

There are two hundred and fifty deportments for each of the 
four body postures: standing, sitting, walking, and lying down. 
These thousand comportments multiplied by the past, present, 
and future make three thousand. There are actually eighty four 
thousand fine practices, although the text here gives the number 
as eighty thousand. 

Hsiian Chiao said, “I act this way because birth and death is 
a serious problem and one never knows when the Ghost of 
Impermanence will pay his inevitable call. It all happens very 
fast, you know.” What Hstian Chiao actually meant was, “I am 
trying to end birth and death and I have no time for good 
manners. Besides, I’ve put that sort of thing down.” 

“Then why don’t you think of a way to embody and 
comprehend that which is not produced and to understand what 
is not quick?” said the Master. “You should be clear about the 
principles of non-production and quickness.” 

“The body itself is not produced,” said Hsiian Chiao, “and, 
fundamentally the understanding is without quickness. That is, if 
I clearly understand birth and death, then there is no birth and 
death, and if I maintain that clear understanding, then in fact 
there is no quickness. Why then should I fear the Ghost of 
Impermanence?” 

Seeing that he understood, the Sixth Patriarch certified him 
saying, “Right! Good work! It’s just as you say.” 

Sutra: 

Hsiian Chiao then made obeisance with perfect 
awesome deportment. A short while later he announced 
that he was leaving and the Master said, “Aren’t you 
leaving too quickly?” 

319 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

He replied, “Fundamentally I don’t move; how can I 
be quick?” 

The Master said, “Who knows you don’t move?” 

He replied, “Kind Sir, you yourself make this 
discrimination.” 

The Master said, “You have truly got the idea of non- 
production.” 

“But does non-production possess an ‘idea’?” asked 
Hsiian Chiao. 

“If it is without ideas, then who discriminates it?” said 
the Master. 

“What discriminates is not an idea either,” he replied. 

The Master exclaimed, “Good indeed! Please stay for 
a night.” 

During his time he was called “The One Enlightened 
Overnight” and later he wrote the “Song of Certifying to 
the Way,” which circulated widely in the world. His 
posthumous title is “Great Master Wu Hsiang,” and 
during his lifetime he was called “Chen Chiao.” 

Commentary: 

The Master and Hsiian Chiao carried on some repartee: 
“Your eloquence indicates that you have truly understood the 
idea of non-production,” said the Master. 

“How can non-production have an idea?” Hstian Chiao 
replied. 

“Without ideas, who could discriminate it?” said the Master. 

Hsiian Chiao said, “Although there is discrimination, it is not 
done on the basis of the mind’s ideas; it is not the intellect 
engaging in intellection which discriminates. Rather, it is the 
Buddha’s wonderful observing wisdom which has no need to 

320 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Hstan Chiao 

resort to the process of reasoning and which yet knows 
everything. Therefore, what discriminates is not an idea either.” 

“You're absolutely right,” said the Master. 

Hstian Chiao stayed one night at Nan Hua Temple and 
became enlightened, so everyone called him “The One 
Enlightened Overnight.” Later on, he wrote the “Song of 
Certifying to the Way” which I am sure you all know. It begins: 

Have you not seen the man of the Way 

Who has cut off learning and, in leisure, 
does nothing 

Who does not reject false thinking or seek 
reality? 

For him, the real nature of ignorance is the 
Buddha nature 

And the empty body of illusion is the 
Dharma-body. 

After he died, the Emperor gave him the title, “Wu Hsiang” 
which means, “without marks,” and his contemporaries called 
him “Chen Chiao,” “true enlightenment.” 

321 

Dhyana Master Chih Huang 

Sutra: 

322 

Dhyana cultivator Chih Huang had formerly studied 
under the Fifth Patriarch and said of himself that he had 
attained to the “right reception.” He lived in a hut, 
constantly sitting, for twenty years. 

In his travels, the Master’s disciple Hsiian Ch’e 
reached Ho Shuo, where he heard of Chih Huang’s 
reputation. He paid a visit to his hut and asked him, 
“What are you doing here?” 

“Entering concentration,” replied Chih Huang. 

Hsitian Ch’e said, “You say you are entering 
concentration. Do you enter with thought or without 
thought? If you enter without thought, then all insentient 
things, such as grass, trees, tiles, and stones, should 
likewise attain concentration. If you enter with thought, 
then all sentient things which have consciousness should 
also attain concentration.” 

Chih Huang said, “When I properly enter 
concentration I do not notice whether I have thought or 
not.” 

Hsiian Ch’e said, “Not to notice whether or not you 
have thought is eternal concentration. How can you enter 
it or come out of it? If you come out of it or enter it, it is 
not the great concentration.” 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Chih Huang 

Chih Huang was speechless. After a long while, he 
finally asked, “Who is your teacher?” 

Hsiian Ch’e said, “My master is the Sixth Patriarch at 
Ts’ao Hsi.” 

Chih Huang said, “What does your master take to be 
Dhyana Concentration?” 

Commentary: 

Chih Huang practiced Dhyana meditation; his first teacher 
was the Fifth Patriarch, Hung Jen. Formerly, when cultivators 
left the home-life they would travel everywhere in search of a 
“bright-eyed knowing one.” 

Hsiian Ch’e did public relations work for the Sixth Patriarch. 
He traveled all over China saying, “My teacher is the Sixth 
Patriarch, the genuine recipient of the robe and bowl!” When he 
heard about Chih Huang’s cultivation he went to visit him and 
said, “Hey! What are you doing here, huh?” 

Chih Huang just said, “I am entering concentration.” 

“You say you are entering concentration,” said Hstian Ch’e. 
“Tell me, do you do it with the thought in mind that you want to 
enter concentration, or don’t you have such a thought? If you do 
not enter it with such a thought in mind, then all inanimate 
objects could also enter concentration, because they don’t have 
thought either. But if you do, then all living, conscious creatures 
could enter as well.” 

Chih Huang said, “When I enter concentration I don’t notice 
whether I have thought or not. At that time I’m empty.” 

Hstian Ch’e said, “If you don’t notice whether or not you 
have thought, then that is permanent concentration. How can you 
come out of it or enter it? How do you go in? How do you come 

out? If you can enter or leave it, it’s not the great concentration 
of the Buddha.” 

323 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Chih Huang was dumbfounded. “What am I going to do?” he 
thought. “I do go into concentration and come out of it.” He 
couldn’t open his mouth for a long time. He knew that his own 
words had no principle, that Hsitian Ch’e’s wisdom was higher 
than his own, and that he had no means to debate with him. 
Finally he asked, “Who is your teacher? Your eloquence is 
superb. Surely your master is even more clever than you. Who 
transmitted the Dharma to you?” 

“My teacher is the Sixth Patriarch, the Abbot of Nan Hua 
Temple in Ts’ao Hsi,” said Hsiian Ch’e. 

“What does he take to be Dhyana concentration?” Chih 
Huang asked. 

Sutra: 

Hsitian Ch’e said, “My teacher speaks of the 
wonderful, clear, perfect stillness, the suchness of the 
substance and function, the fundamental emptiness of the 
five skandhas, and the non-existence of the six organs. 
There is neither emerging nor entering, neither 
concentration nor confusion. The nature of Dhyana is 
non-dwelling and is beyond the act of dwelling in Dhyana 
stillness. The nature of Dhyana is unproduced and 
beyond the production of the thought of Dhyana. The 
mind is like empty space and is without the measure of 
empty space.” 

Commentary: 

The Sixth Patriarch says that the original nature is wonderful, 
clear, perfectly still and unmoving. Its substance and function 
both are “thus, thus unmoving, clear, clear, and illuminating.” 
The five shadows, i.e. the five skandhic heaps of form, feeling, 

324 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Chih Huang 

perception, impulses, and consciousness are fundamentally void 
and the six sense objects of form, sound, smell, taste, tangible 
objects, and objects of the mind are also non-existent. 

When you understand the wonderful function of the original 
substance, there is no question of either dwelling or not dwelling 
in Dhyana. The Dhyana nature transcends that kind of “dead 
Dhyana” which is attached to stillness. 

The nature of Dhyana itself is unproduced and transcends 
such thoughts as, “Here I sit in Dhyana meditation.” 

Sutra: 

Hearing this explanation, Chih Huang went directly 
to visit the Master. The Master asked him, “Kind Sir, 
where are you from?” Chih Huang related the above 
incident in detail. The Master then said, “It is truly just 
as he said. Simply let your mind be like empty space 
without being attached to the idea of emptiness and the 
correct function of the self-nature will no longer be 
obstructed. Have no thought, whether in motion or 
stillness; forget any feeling of being common or holy, put 
an end to both subject and object. The nature and mark 
will be ‘thus, thus,’ and at no time will you be out of the 
state of concentration.” 

Commentary: 

“What Hstian Ch’e told you was correct,” said the Master. 
“Just make your mind like empty space, but do not hold onto the 
idea of empty space. You will then function in an unhindered 
way. When something presents itself, you will respond and when 
it passes, you will be still. This is to be unobstructed. 

325 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Whether moving or still, whether walking, standing, sitting, 
or lying down, have no thought. Do not think, “I’m a sage!” and 
do not think, “I’m just a common person.” Forget about feeling 
holy or common; get rid of emotional feelings altogether. Be 
without subject or object: do not have something which sees and 
something which is seen, something which makes empty and 
something which is made empty. You should know that when 
you see brightness, your seeing is not bright; when you see 
darkness, your seeing is not dark; when you see emptiness, your 
seeing is not empty; when you see form, your seeing has no 
form; when you see existence, your seeing is not existent; and 
when you see non-existence, your seeing is not non-existent. The 
Shurangama Sutra says, “When your seeing sees the seeing 
(nature), that seeing is no (longer) seeing. Your seeing nature is 
beyond your seeing and your seeing cannot reach it.” Your 
seeing nature should be separate from and unattached to your 
false discriminating seeing and you should not hold onto the 
thought of seeing. If you adhere to the idea of subject and object, 
maintaining that there is someone who sees as well as an 
emptiness which is seen, you are left with just that knowledge 
and vision. You should put an end to both subject and object. 

Sutra: 

Just then Chih Huang attained the great 
enlightenment. What he had gained in twenty years 
vanished from his mind without a trace. That night the 
people of Hopei heard a voice in space announcing, 
“Today, Dhyana Master Chih Huang has attained the 
Way.” Later, he made obeisance and left, returning to 
Hopei to teach and convert the four assemblies there. 

326 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Dhyana Master Chih Huang 

Commentary: 

All of a sudden, Chih Huang had a great, not a small, 
enlightenment and the skill he had acquired in twenty years of 
diligent cultivation completely left him. There was not a trace, 
not an echo. Before he had entered samadhi thinking, “I am 
entering samadhi,” but now he had nothing at all. Everything 
was empty. He had returned to the root and source of all 
dharmas. 

Although Chih Huang himself was in Ho Shuo, that night in 
his native village on the outskirts of Peking, his neighbors, 
disciples, and Dharma protectors all heard a voice in space 
saying, “You should all know that today Dhyana Master Chih 
Huang reached enlightenment.” 

Later, Chih Huang bowed to the Sixth Patriarch, took leave 
and returned to Hopei to teach the Bhikshus, Bhikshunis, 
laymen, and laywomen there. 

Hopei is about fifteen hundred miles from Ho Shuo. That’s a 
long walk. 

327 

One Member Of The Sangha 

Sutra: 

One of the Sangha asked the Master, “Who got the 
principle of Huang Mei?” 

The Master replied, “The one who understands the 
Buddhadharma.” 

The Sangha member said, “High Master, have you 
obtained it?” 

“I do not understand the Buddhadharma,” the 
Master replied. 

Commentary: 

This member of the Sangha was truly a barbarian, an 
uneducated savage. He rudely confronted the Master and asked, 
“Who got the robe and bowl of the Fifth Patriarch Hung Jen of 
Huang Mei?” He knew very well that the Sixth Patriarch had it, 
but he asked anyway. From this we know that among those who 
came to the Master for instruction there were rude country 
peasants as well as good disciples. He knew that his question 
was insulting to the Master and what he meant by it was, “You 
can’t even read. How can you be worthy of the robe and bowl?” 

The Master said, “One who thoroughly comprehends the 
Buddhadharma obtains that principle and the Fifth Patriarch’s 
robe and bowl.” 

328 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - One Member Of The Sangha 

“But High Master,” the Bhikshu said, “have you got it or 
not?” He didn’t believe that the Master had received the 
transmission. 

The Sixth Patriarch didn’t say yes and he didn’t say no, he 
simply said, “I don’t understand the Buddhadharma.” What do 
you think? Was he telling the truth? 

329 

Bhikshu Fang Pien 

Sutra: 

One day the Master wanted to wash the robe which he 
had inherited, but there was no clear stream nearby. He 
walked about two miles behind the temple where he saw 
good energies revolving in a dense grove of trees. He 
shook his staff, stuck it in the ground, and a spring 
bubbled up and formed a pool. 

Commentary: 

The Master walked about two miles behind the temple, 
where he found a luxuriant grove filled with tall trees and good 
vibrations. People who have opened their five eyes and obtained 
the six spiritual powers can tell at a glance the geomantic 
properties of any particular piece of land. So when the Master 
planted his tin staff in the ground, the nine metal rings which 
hung from the head of his staff echoed through the wood, and a 
spring gushed forth to form a clear, pure pool. 

The public washing stream is about a third of a mile behind 
Nan Hua Temple. Whether this present stream is the same source 
that was used during the Sixth Patriarch’s time is uncertain. 

Sutra: 

As he knelt to wash his robe on a rock, suddenly a 
monk came up and bowed before him saying, “I am Fang 

330 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fang Pien 

Pien, a native of Hsi Shu. A while ago I was in India, 
where I visited the Great Master Bodhidharma. He told 
me to return to China immediately, saying, ‘The 
orthodox Dharma Eye Treasury and the samghati robe 
which I inherited from Mahakashyapa has_ been 
transmitted to the sixth generation at Ts’ao Hsi, Shao 
Chou. Go there and pay reverence.’ Fang Pien has come 
from afar, hoping to see the robe and bowl that his 
Master transmitted.” 

The Master showed them to him and asked, “Superior 
One, what work do you do?” 

“IT am good at sculpting,” he replied. 

Keeping a straight face, the Master said, “Then sculpt 
something for me to see.” 

Fang Pien was bewildered, but after several days he 
completed a lifelike image of the Patriarch, seven inches 
high and wonderful in every detail. The Master laughed 
and said, “You only understand the nature of sculpture; 
you do not understand the nature of the Buddha.” Then 
the Master stretched out his hand and rubbed the crown 
of Fang Pien’s head, saying, “You will forever be a field 
of blessing for gods and humans.” 

The Master rewarded him with a robe, which Fang 
Pien divided into three parts: one he used to wrap the 
sculpture, one he kept for himself, and the third he 
wrapped in palm leaves and buried in the ground, 
vowing, “In the future, when this robe is found again, I 
will appear in the world to be abbot here and restore 
these buildings.” 

Note: During the Sung Dynasty in the eighth year of 
the Chia Yu reign period (1063 A.D.), while Bhikshu Wei 
Hsien was repairing the hall, he excavated the earth and 

331 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

found the robe which was like new. The image is at Kao 
Ch’tian Temple and those who pray before it obtain a 
quick response. 

Commentary: 

Think about it: Bodhidharma had long since died in China, 
but Bhikshu Fang Pien met him in India. That is not surprising, 
however, because to this day no one knows exactly what 
happened to Bodhidharma. 

I will now tell you a true story. While I was living in 
Manchuria I decided, for various reasons, to leave the home-life 
and cultivate the Way. The man I most respected was Wang 
Hsiao Tzu, ‘Filial-Son Wang.’ When he was twenty-eight years 
old his mother died and he practiced filial piety by sitting beside 
her grave. He built a small hut out of scrap lumber to protect 
himself from the bitter Manchurian cold and lived there for three 
years, according to the Confucian custom. When the first three 
years were up he decided to stay for another three years, so in all 
he practiced for six years. 

During the second three-year period he did not speak, no 
matter who came. Every day he sat in his hut, meditating and 
reciting the Diamond Sutra. Toward the end of the sixth year he 
had a daydream. “In Ch’ien and Kuang Ling Mountains,” he 
thought, “there are cultivators who live for over a thousand 
years. When I fulfill my filial obligations Pll go there to 
cultivate.” The following morning, during meditation, he heard 
a Dharma Protector say, “Today an important guest will visit 
you.” He thought perhaps a great official was coming and he 
waited until ten o’clock when he saw a monk approaching 
wearing rag robes and carrying a bumble stick. Filial Son Wang 
did not speak out loud, but in his mind he wondered, “Where is 
he from?” 

332 

Chapter VII. Opportunities and Conditions - Bhikshu Fang Pien 

The monk replied, “I’m from Kuang Ling Mountain.” 

Filial Son Wang then thought, “What is his name?” The 
monk told him his name and added, “In the Ming dynasty I was 
a general and later I left home to cultivate. We two have a karmic 
affinity for one another, and so when I heard that you wanted to 
go to Kuang Ling Mountain, I felt I should advise you that the 
monks there cultivate solely for their own benefit. You, on the 
other hand, should cultivate for the good of all. After you have 
finished your act of filial piety, build a temple right here and 
spread the Buddhadharma.” 

Now, ‘Filial-Son Wang’ hadn’t spoken to the monk, and yet 
the monk read the questions in his mind. That shows that the 
monk had the spiritual power of knowing others’ thoughts and 
had obtained the five eyes and six spiritual penetrations. He said 
he was from the Ming dynasty. ‘Filial-Son Wang’ lived during 
the first years of the Republic, some three hundred years later. So 
you see that Bodhidharma could easily have been seen in 
southern India several hundred years after his disappearance 
from China. That he met Fang Pien there and told him about the 
robe and bowl is a very ordinary matter—nothing strange at all. 

Bhikshu Fang Pien knew how to make Buddha images. He 
carved them in wood and molded them in clay. The Master very 
solemnly said to him, “Please sculpt an image for me to see” 

Caught off guard, Fang Pien just stood there in silence, but a 
few days later he had finished making a true image of the 
Patriarch. It looked just like the Master. The nose, ears, eyes, all 
the features were exactly right. It was a perfect likeness right 
down to the finest detail. 

When the Master saw the little statue of himself he couldn’t 
help but smile. “Fang Pien,” he said, “you may know how to 
model clay, but you don’t know the Buddha nature. In any case, 

333 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you should leave home in every life, become a Bhikshu, and act 
as a field of blessing for humans and gods.” 

334 

Master Wo Lun’s Verse 

Sutra: 

One Bhikshu was reciting Dhyana Master Wo Lun’s 
verse: 

Wo Lun has the talent 

To stop the hundred thoughts: 

Facing situations his mind won’t move; 
Bodhi grows day by day. 

When the Master heard it he said, “This verse shows 
no understanding of the mind-ground, and to cultivate 

according to it will increase one’s bondage. Then he 
spoke this verse: 

Aui Neng has no talent 
To stop the hundred thoughts. 

Facing situations his mind often moves; 
How can Bodhi grow? 

Commentary: 

The name of the reciter of Wo Lun’s verse is not given. 
Perhaps he had no name or perhaps he didn’t want to be famous. 
Dhyana Master Wo Lun could cut off his thoughts, but Wo 
Lun himself, the cutter-off of thoughts, still remained. Thus he 

335 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

had fallen into the second or third position. He was not in the first 
position. 
Upon hearing Wo Lun’s verse, the Great Master replied, 

I haven’t a single talent, 

Nor even the thought of cutting off thought. 
My mind responds in a natural way: 

Who cares whether Bodhi grows or not? 

Here he expresses the same principle as in the verse he wrote 
while still a layman at Huang Mei: “Originally there is not one 
thing. Where can the dust alight?” The absolute is pure; what 
need is there to dust it off? 

336 

CHAPTER VIII 

SUDDEN AND GRADUAL 

Commentary: 

“Sudden” refers to the immediate understanding of a 
principle. You may be suddenly enlightened to a principle, but 
until you have been certified as one who is fully enlightened, you 
still must cultivate that principle gradually by putting it into 
practice in everyday life. 

Sutra: 

While the Patriarch was staying at Pao Lin Temple in 
Ts’ao Hsi, the Great Master Shen Hsiu was at Yui Ch’iian 
Temple in Ching Nan. At that time the two schools 
flourished and everyone called them, “Southern Neng 
and Northern Hsiu.” So it was that the two schools, 
northern and southern, were divided into “sudden” and 
“gradual.” As the students did not understand the 
doctrine, the Master said to them, “The Dharma is 
originally of one school. It is people who think of North 
and South. The Dharma is of one kind, but people 
understand it slowly or quickly. Dharma is not sudden or 
gradual. Rather it is people who are sharp or dull. Hence 
the terms sudden and gradual.” 

Nonetheless, Shen MHsiu’s followers continually 
ridiculed the southern Patriarch, saying that he couldn’t 
read a single word and had nothing in his favor. But Shen 
Hsiu said, “He has obtained wisdom without the aid of a 

337 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

teacher and understands the Supreme Vehicle deeply. I 
am inferior to him. Furthermore, my Master, the Fifth 
Patriarch, personally transmitted the robe and Dharma 
to him, and not without good reason. I regret that I am 
unable to make the long journey to visit him, as I 
unworthily receive state patronage here. But do not let 
me stop you. Go to Ts’ao Hsi and call on him.” 

Commentary: 

You all remember Shen Hsiu, the Great Master who was 
obsessed with the deadly ambition to be a patriarch. He was an 
intelligent man, and yet he couldn’t cut off his desire for the 
Patriarchate. 

In the south, the Sixth Patriarch taught the “sudden” Dharma 
to a flourishing assembly of over a thousand people. Shen Hsiu, 
in Ching Nan, was busy teaching “gradual” Dharma to an even 
larger crowd of over ten thousand people. Originally, Shen Hsiu 
had about two hundred followers, but every day more and more 
people came. However, everyone knew that the Fifth Patriarch 
had transmitted the robe and bowl to Hui Neng in the south. In 
spite of the fact that Shen Hsiu had been teaching master under 
the Fifth Patriarch and was extremely well-educated, he did not 
have the transmission. Still, Shen Hsiu’s disciples advertised 
him as the Sixth Patriarch and finally even sent an assassin to try 
to kill the Master and seize the robe and bowl. 

Because of the division into Northern and Southern schools, 
students of the Way did not know where to turn. Should they 
study with the Sixth Patriarch? He was illiterate and sometimes 
his teachings seemed to contradict the scriptures. On the other 
hand, Shen Hsiu didn’t have the robe and bowl. 

Seeing their dilemma, the Master said, “There is only one 
Dharma. People may come from the north or south but there is 

338 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

actually only one non-dual Dharma door. Intelligent people 
understand it all of a sudden and stupid people come to 
understand it gradually, but the Dharma itself is neither sudden 
nor gradual.” 

Still, Shen Hsiu’s men constantly made fun of the Sixth 
Patriarch. “Hey, look at him!” they said. “He can’t even read. 
The Southern School disciples are following an illiterate. That is 
perfectly ridiculous. What could they possibly learn from him?” 
Thus they slighted the Patriarch and his disciples, saying that 
they were ignorant, not having even one doctorate among them. 

Shen Hsiu said, “Don’t talk like that! He’s an enlightened 
man. He has obtained wisdom through his own effort, without 
the aid of a teacher, and has a thorough grasp of the Supreme 
Vehicle. Frankly, I’m not as good as he is; I do not possess his 
enlightened wisdom. Our teacher, the Fifth Patriarch, passed the 
wonderful mind-seal Dharma on to him, and for a good reason. 
It was no accident.” 

Shen Hsiu was a National Master. He and Masters Lao An, 
Chih Hsien, and Fa Ju were among the Fifth Patriarch’s ten great 
disciples. As they had received invitations to the Imperial Palace 
from Empress Wu Tsai T’ien, they received state patronage. 
Shen Hsiu told his disciples, “I can’t get away, as I receive state 
aid here. But don’t let me stop you. You may go to Ts’ao Hsi to 
call on the Great Master.” 

Actually, Shen Hsiu was just testing his disciples to see 
whether or not they would go. He said that the Sixth Patriarch 
had more virtue than he, but what he really meant was, “If you 
believe in me you won’t leave, even though he has more virtue. 
But if you don’t believe, you’ll go as soon as I tell you to leave. 
Go!” 

No one went. 

339 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

340 

One day Shen Hsiu told his disciple Chih Ch’eng, 
“You are intelligent and very wise. You may go to Ts’ao 
Hsi on my behalf and listen to the Dharma. Remember it 
all and take careful notes to read to me when you return.” 

As ordered, Chih Ch’eng proceeded to Ts’ao Hsi and 
joined the assembly without saying where he had come 
from. The Patriarch told the assembly, “Today there is a 
Dharma thief hidden in this assembly!” 

Chih Ch’eng immediately stepped forward, bowed, 
and explained his mission. The Master said, “You are 
from Yu Ch’iian; you must be a spy.” 

“No,” he replied, “I am not.” 

The Master said, “What do you mean?” 

He replied, “Before I confessed, I was; but now that I 
have confessed, I am not.” 

The Master said, “How does your Master instruct his 
followers?” 

Chih Ch’eng replied, “He always instructs us to dwell 
with the mind contemplating stillness and to sit up all the 
time without lying down.” 

The Master said, “To dwell with the mind 
contemplating stillness is sickness, not Dhyana. Constant 
sitting restrains the body. How can it be beneficial? 
Listen to my verse: 

When living, sit, don’t lie. 
When dead, lie down, don’t sit. 
How can a set of stinking bones 
Be used for training? 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

Chih Ch’eng bowed again and said, “Your disciple 
studied the Way for nine years at the place of Great 
Master Hsiu but obtained no enlightenment. Now, 
hearing one speech from the High Master, I am united 
with my original mind. Your disciple’s birth and death is 
a serious matter. Will the High Master be compassionate 
enough to instruct me further?” 

Commentary: 

Chih Ch’eng was a good disciple to Shen Hsiu, one of his 
favorites. “You may represent me at Ts’ao Hsi,” Shen Hsiu said. 
“T cannot go. If I were to go personally, Hui Neng would surely 
recognize me and not speak the Dharma. Write down everything 
he says without getting one word wrong. Then bring back your 
notes and read them to me.” 

When Chih Ch’eng asked for instruction at Ts’ao Hsi, he 
didn’t say where he was from. “I’ve been here and there,” he 
said, beating around the bush. 

That day there were several thousand people gathered to hear 
the Dharma. The Sixth Patriarch announced: “Everyone should 
be careful! There is a Dharma thief hidden in the assembly!” 

Chih Ch’eng pushed his way through the crowd, bowed at 
the Master’s feet and said, “I confess! I’m a spy. Shen Hsiu sent 
me here.” 

The Master explained the Dharma to Chih Cheng. 
“Contemplating stillness is a kind of occupational disease,” he 
said, “It is not Dhyana. As to constant sitting in meditation, this 
is a mere constraint on the body. What is the principle behind it? 
When you eat, just eat; when you sleep, just sleep. Don’t lock 
yourself up.” 

Shen Hsiu was just working on his stinking skin-bag. He 
didn’t know how to work in the self-nature. That is sickness. The 

341 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sixth Patriarch worked naturally in the self-nature, and he spoke 
this verse to say, 

You sit up when you’re alive, 

You lie down when you're dead. 

Your body’s a bone-bag composed of four elements: 
Why not work on the self-nature instead? 

To dwell with the mind contemplating stillness contradicts 
the principle of the Diamond Sutra, which tells us to “produce 
that thought which is nowhere supported.” The Sixth Patriarch 
spoke this verse to break Chih Ch’eng’s attachment to marks. 

Shen Hsiu taught people to dwell with the mind 
contemplating stillness and the Sixth Patriarch said that that was 
wrong. Nonetheless, if you can do it, bit by bit, you will gain 
benefit. If you always sit and do not lie down, although it is not 
very natural, it will assist your body and mind in cultivation. 
Then why did the Sixth Patriarch object to these practices? It was 
because Chih Ch’eng had just come from Shen Hsiu and it was 
necessary to break his attachments before he could properly 
receive the genuine Buddhadharma. In cultivation you should 
not be attached to your work and think, “Look at me! I really 
work hard, constantly sitting and never lying down!” Such 
thoughts will obstruct your progress. 

If the mind “dwells,” it is attached. In order to be united with 
the original wisdom of the self-nature, you must “produce that 
thought which is nowhere supported,” as the Diamond Sutra 
says. The Sixth Patriarch gave Chih Ch’eng this teaching in 
order to break his attachments. If you can constantly sit and feel 
natural and unforced doing so, then go ahead, but do not force 
yourself. Force is not the way. You should work naturally. 

“Good!” you say. “Then I don’t have to follow the rules.” 

342 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

This does not mean that you can ignore the rules. If you lie 
down when people sit, and sit when they lie down, you are not in 
accord with Dharma and are just trying to show that you think 
you are special. In general, you must follow the rules and be 
natural with yourself as well. But “being natural” does not mean 
that you can break the rules. Is this clear? 

Chih Ch’eng had studied nine years with Shen Hsiu. How 
many years have you studied here? One year. And you think that 
is a very long time. Cultivators may study for ten, twenty, or 
thirty years with great effort. You can’t graduate in just a few 
months. 

As soon as the Sixth Patriarch spoke, his principles entered 
Chih Ch’eng’s heart like water flowing into water: “thus, thus,” 
like milk mixing with milk. There was not the slightest 
difference between them. “The Patriarch’s heart is my heart,” 
said Chih Ch’eng, “and my heart is the Patriarch’s heart. I am 
suddenly united with the original mind because our minds are 
fundamentally one and the same.” 

“But I do not know when I will die,” Chih Ch’ eng continued, 
“and I do not know when I will be born again. This matter of 
birth and death is most pressing. Please be compassionate and 
help me understand.” 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “I have heard that your Master 
instructs his students in the dharmas of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom. Please tell me how he defines 
the terms.” 

Chih Ch’eng said, “Great Master Shen Hsiu says that 
morality is abstaining from doing evil, wisdom is offering 
up all good conduct, and concentration is purifying one’s 
own mind. This is how he explains them, but I do not 

343 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

know, High Master, what dharma of instruction you 
use.” 

The Master said, “If I said that I had a dharma to give 
to others, I would be lying to you. I merely use expedients 
to untie bonds and falsely call that samadhi. Your 
master’s explanation of morality, concentration, and 
wisdom is truly inconceivably good but my conception of 
morality, concentration, and wisdom is different from 
his.” 

Commentary: 

“T don’t have any dharmas at all,” said the Sixth Patriarch. 
“I'd be cheating you if I said that I did. I have no special dharma 
to give to people. For each individual I use an appropriate 
teaching to untie his bonds. To ‘untie bonds’ means to break 
attachments. The attachments of living beings bind them up. I 
just untie their bonds and set them free of their attachments. 
Fundamentally this teaching has no name whatsoever, but it is 
hypothetically called ‘samadhi.’ Thus, my view of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom is special; it is not the same as Shen 
Hsiu’s.” 

Sutra: 

Chih Ch’eng said, “There can only be one kind of 
morality, concentration, and wisdom. How can there be a 
difference?” 

The Master said, “Your master’s morality, 
concentration, and wisdom guide those of the Great 
Vehicle, whereas my morality, concentration, and 
wisdom guide those of the Supreme Vehicle. 

344 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

Enlightenment is not the same as understanding; seeing 
may take place slowly or quickly. 

Commentary: 

When you become enlightened, in that moment of 
enlightenment you attain your aim. Understanding, on the other 
hand, is a gradual process. Thus perception may be sudden or 
gradual, fast or slow. 

Sutra: 

“Listen to my explanation. Is it the same as Shen 
Hsiu’s? The Dharma which I speak does not depart from 
the self-nature, for to depart from the self-nature in 
explaining the Dharma is to speak of marks and 
continually confuse the self-nature. You should know 
that the functions of the ten thousand dharmas all arise 
from the self-nature and that this is the true morality, 
concentration, and wisdom. Listen to my verse: 

Mind-ground without wrong: 
Self-nature morality. 
Mind-ground without delusion: 
Self-nature wisdom. 
Mind-ground without confusion: 
Self-nature concentration. 
Neither increasing nor decreasing: 
You are vajra. 
Body comes, body goes: 
The original samadhi. 

345 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

“When I speak the Dharma,” said the Sixth Patriarch, “I 
never stray from the self-nature. When you stray from the self- 
nature you become attached to marks and confuse the self- 
nature. All dharmas are composed of the substance of the self- 
nature and respond with unlimited function. Now, listen to this: 

Mind-ground without wrong: 
Self-nature morality. 

“The mind is like a piece of ground. Whatever you plant in it 
grows there. If you plant a good cause, you reap a good result in 
the future; if you plant a bad cause, you reap a bad result. When 
the mind-ground contains no thoughts of greed, malice, envy, or 
selfishness, it is without wrong thoughts, and that is the morality 
of the self-nature.” 

Master Shen Hsiu said that morality is to abstain from evil; 
that is almost the same as the Sixth Patriarch’s instructions to 
clear the mind-ground of wrong thoughts. But Shen Hsiu gave 
morality another name, calling it the abstention from evil, while 
the Sixth Patriarch spoke of the morality of the mind-ground, the 
morality of the self-nature. 

Mind-ground without delusion: 
Self-nature wisdom. 

When your mind-ground is free of delusion, the conduct you 
offer can be extremely good, just as Shen Hsiu instructed. But 
Shen Hsiu merely passed out names. He did not speak of 
morality, concentration, and wisdom in terms of the self-nature 
and the mind-ground. Do not plant the causes of stupidity in the 
mind-ground: that is the self-nature’s wisdom. 

346 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

Mind-ground without confusion: 
Self-nature concentration. 

When it is without confusion, the mind is purified. Shen 
Hsiu’s instructions to purify the mind did not relate 
concentration to the self-nature, whereas the Sixth Patriarch 
always spoke Dharma from the mind-ground. His Dharma arose 
from the self-nature and did not come from outside. Shen Hsiu 
spoke about external dharmas and was attached to marks. In 
other words, Shen Hsiu spoke from outside the mind; the Sixth 
Patriarch spoke from within. 

Neither increasing nor decreasing: 
You are vajra. 

The brilliant light of the self-nature illuminates everything; it 
is miraculous, profound, and all-inclusive. The self-nature 
neither increases nor decreases; it is your very own 
indestructible vajra. 

Body comes, body goes: 
The original samadhi. 

You go away, you come back, and you’re in samadhi all the 
time: standing, sitting, walking, and lying down. 
Sutra: 

Hearing this verse, Chih Ch’eng regretted his former 
mistakes, and he expressed his gratitude by saying this 
verse: 

These five heaps are 
A body of illusion. 
And what is illusion, 

347 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Ultimately? 

If you tend toward 
True suchness 
The Dharma is 
Not yet pure. 

Commentary: 

The five skandhas are not real. The body, too, is false—merely 
a combination of the four elements. Knowing this, you should 
not attach so much importance to it by looking for good food, 
good clothes, a nice place to live, or a good wife or husband. 

How do the four elements combine to form your body? The 
earth is the hard part of your body: the skin, nails, bones, and 
muscles. Tears, mucus, saliva and excrement are the water and 
your body heat is the fire. The circulatory and respiratory 
systems are the wind. After you die, the body decomposes and 
the earth returns to the earth, the water to the water, the fire to 
the fire, and the wind to the wind. But where do you go? You 
don’t know, do you? We are studying the Buddhadharma just to 
understand this question. 

The body, then, is nothing but a transformation of the five 
skandhas and the four elements. And what, ultimately, is this 
illusion? 

If you tend toward true suchness, the Dharma is not pure yet, 
for you have not arrived at the root-substance and you have not 
returned to purity. Why? Because you still have the thought, “I’d 
like to go back to true suchness.” If you have even one thought, 
you cannot penetrate the basic substance, because the basic 
substance functions independently and freely, without 
obstruction. There is no grasping or rejecting it, no thinking of 
this or that. 

348 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

Sutra: 

The Master approved, and he said further to Chih 
Ch’eng, “Your Master’s morality, concentration, and 
wisdom exhort those of lesser faculties and lesser wisdom, 
while my morality, concentration, and wisdom exhort 
those of great faculties and great wisdom. If you are 
enlightened to your self-nature, you do not set up in your 
mind the notion of Bodhi or of Nirvana or of the 
liberation of knowledge and vision. When not a single 
dharma is established in the mind, then the ten thousand 
dharmas can be established there. To understand this 
principle is to achieve the Buddha’s body which is also 
called Bodhi, Nirvana, and the liberation of knowledge 
and vision as well. Those who see their own nature can 
establish dharmas in their minds or not establish them as 
they choose. They come and go freely, without 
impediments or obstacles. They function correctly and 
speak appropriately, seeing all transformation bodies as 
integral with the self-nature. That is precisely the way 
they obtain independence, spiritual powers, and the 
samadhi of playfulness. This is what is called seeing the 
nature.” 

Commentary: 

“You're right,” said the Master, “‘and your verse is not bad at 
all. You should know that my morality, concentration, and 
wisdom are not the same as Shen Hsiu’s. His teaching is for 
people of lesser wisdom.” 

Here the Master describes the people of great wisdom for 
whom his teaching is intended. “They have awakened to the self- 
nature,” he said, “and they don’t even entertain the notion of 

349 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Bodhi, Nirvana, or the liberation of knowledge and vision.” 
None of these dharmas exist for them. Not a single thing 
remains. 

Not one dharma established, 
ten thousand dharmas are empty. 

Because such people do not set up the notion of a single dharma, 
they can set up the ten thousand dharmas. Although not a single 
dharma exists, the ten thousand dharmas are present all the same. 

If you understand this principle, you may become a Buddha 
on the spot. Then you may call it Bodhi, Nirvana, or the 
liberation of knowledge and vision. You may call it anything you 
like. But first you must understand it. If you don’t understand it, 
you can’t call it anything at all. 

People of genuine enlightenment who have understood the 
mind and seen the nature can establish dharmas or not establish 
them. They come and go without obstruction. You say, “I’m this 
way too. If I want to come to the Buddhist Lecture Hall, I come; 
if I want to go, I go.” You’re wrong. The Sixth Patriarch was 
speaking of freedom over life and death. With this kind of 
freedom, if you want to live, you live; 1f you want to die, you can 
die any place, any time, like the Third Patriarch Seng Ts’an, who 
died of his own will, hanging by one hand from a tree. That’s 
why I often say to you, “Everything’s O.K.” If you are master of 
this, you hold the power of life and death in your hands. Live or 
die, as you please. No one can stop you. “Freedom to come and 
go” is not like your coming and going from the Buddhist Lecture 
Hall. 

People who see the nature “function correctly and speak 
appropriately, seeing all transformation bodies as integral with 
the self-nature.” They don’t need to think, they just speak. But 
they always speak with principle. If someone asks you about the 

350 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

heavens and you reply, “On earth there are mountains and 
rivers,” or if they ask, “What’s a horse?” and you say, “Oxen 
have two horns,” you are just confusing the issue and going 
against common sense. 

People who see the nature “obtain independence” just like 
Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva. The “spiritual powers” that they 
obtain are the six spiritual powers: 1) the heavenly eye; 2) the 
heavenly ear; 3) the knowledge of others’ thoughts; 4) the 
knowledge of former lives; 5) the knowledge of the extinction of 
outflows; 6) psychic power. 

One who has obtained the “samadhi of playfulness” sings, 
but not like other singers; he eats, but not like other people. For 
example, he may say, “Lunch time! Let’s eat!” and then run to 
the table and eat every morsel of food in sight. Then he’ll say, 
“The food is still in the kitchen.” When everyone looks in the 
kitchen the food is still there. He didn’t really eat it after all. That 
is a lot of fun. 

Sutra: 

Chih Ch’eng asked the Master further, “What is 
meant by ‘not establishing?’” 

The Master replied, “When your self-nature is free 
from error, obstruction, and confusion, when Prajna is 
present in every thought, contemplating and shedding 
illumination, and when you are constantly apart from the 
dharma marks and are free and independent, both 
horizontally and vertically, then what is there to be 
established? 

“In the self-nature, in self-enlightenment, in sudden 
enlightenment, and in sudden cultivation there are no 
degrees. Therefore, not a single dharma is established. 

351 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

All dharmas are still and extinct. How can there be 
stages?” 

Chih Ch’eng made obeisance and attended on the 
Master day and night without laziness. He was a native of 
T’ai Ho in Chi Chou. 

Commentary: 

When there is nothing in your self-nature which is 
obstructive or confused, what is there to be established? 
“Confusion” means “upside-down.” You should not think that if 
your hand points to the earth it is upside-down down and if you 
raise it above your head it is right-side up. There is actually no 
such thing as upside-down or right-side up. 

“Prajna is present in every thought, contemplating and 
shedding illumination.” Similarly, the Master said earlier, “You 
should know that the self-nature constantly generates wisdom.” 
Further, you should be separate from any attachment to dharma 
marks, and then you will be free to come and go. Vertically, if 
you want to jump, jump! Horizontally, if you want to move 
sideways, go ahead. Ascend into the heavens or plunge into the 
hells; visit the Western Paradise or the Eastern Crystal Azure 
World. You can go anywhere and always be in accord with 
Dharma. So what dharma is there to be established? That is why 
the Master says that not a single dharma is established. 

You should enlighten your self-nature by yourself. If you are 
enlightened immediately, you will cultivate immediately and 
there will be no question of sudden and gradual stages of 
progress. Therefore no dharmas are established: all dharmas are 
empty—marked with still extinction. How can you arrange them 
in stages according to number one, number two, and so on? 

Hearing the Master’s instruction, the former spy defected 
and was converted to the Master’s teaching. He changed his 

352 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual 

mind and reformed his conduct. That is called “going straight.” 
He did whatever the Patriarch told him to do, no matter how 
difficult, because he knew that the Sixth Patriarch had become a 
patriarch by doing bitter work, threshing rice at Huang Mei for 
over eight months. He thought, “I have an opportunity to serve a 
Patriarch and I should work diligently.” 

353 

Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 

Sutra: 

Bhikshu Chih Ch’e, a native of Chiang Hsi, had the 
family name Chang and the personal name Hsing 
Ch’ang. As a youth he was an itinerant warrior. When 
the schools split into the Northern and Southern, 
although the two leaders had lost the notion of self and 
other, the disciples stirred up love and hate. The disciples 
of the Northern School secretly set up Shen Hsiu as the 
Sixth Patriarch. Fearing that the country would hear of 
the transmission of the robe, they hired Hsing Ch’ang to 
assassinate the Master. But the Master had the power of 
knowing the thoughts of others. He knew of this matter in 
advance and set ten ounces of gold on his chair. That 
night Hsing Ch’ang entered his room intending to kill 
him. The Master just stretched out his neck. Hsing 
Ch’ang swung the blade three times but could not harm 
him. 

Commentary: 

Neither Shen Hsiu nor the Sixth Patriarch had thoughts of 
“self? or “others.” But their disciples agitated, stirring up 
thoughts of love and hate in people. More specifically, Shen 
Hsiu’s disciples did the agitating, denouncing the Southern 
Patriarch as illiterate and incompetent. 

354 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 

The Sixth Patriarch’s disciples really believed in him. “You 
can’t talk that way about our teacher!” they said. “He has 
obtained wisdom without the aid of a master.” 

It never occurred to the Sixth Patriarch’s disciples that they 
should kill Shen Hsiu, but Shen Hsiu’s disciples were jealous 
and wanted to kill the Sixth Patriarch. They knew that the robe 
and bowl were in the South. The rumors flew. “That Hui Neng 
would do anything: homicide, manslaughter. Why, in the old 
days he was a confidence man and now he’s pretending to be a 
Patriarch. How absurd.” 

Others said, “He used to be a poor firewood gatherer in the 
mountains. What talent could he have? The people in the south 
have made him their leader, but it’s only talk.” They did 
everything they could to ruin him. “At Huang Mei everyone 
knew that he was a barbarian. He doesn’t know anything at all.” 

Shen Hsiu had several thousand men behind him, even 
though he did not have the robe and bowl. They each wanted to 
be the Seventh Patriarch, and without a father how can there be 
a son? With Shen Hsiu as the Sixth Patriarch, the Seventh 
Patriarch would surely be one of them. But they didn’t dare 
make the news public because it was all too obvious that the 
position rightly belonged to Hui Neng. 

T’ang dynasty Buddhism was extremely complex. 

Hsing Ch’ang’s family name had been Chang, but after he 
left home the Master named him Chih Ch’e. As a boy, he robbed 
from the rich and gave to the poor, always fighting for the 
underdog. His martial skills were outstanding. Light and limber, 
he could leap twenty feet in the air in a single bound. They called 
him “Flying Cat” Chang because he ran so fast and with such 
agility that he could break into your house without a sound, just 
like a cat. Not only could this cat walk silently, he could fly. But 

355 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

you won’t find this nickname in any of the history books; you 
would have to have been there. 

Having unsuccessfully tried to capture the Master by burning 
off the mountain behind Nan Hua Temple, Shen Hsiu’s men 
decided to hire an assassin to kill the master and steal the robe 
and bowl. 

The Sixth Patriarch could read minds, and so he was 
expecting his visitor. He put some gold on his chair and waited 
until midnight, when the sky was black and Hsing Ch’ang came 
creeping up the stairs, down the hall, and into his room. 

Was this a tense situation or not? What do you think the 
Master did? He just stretched out his neck, and although he 
didn’t say anything, he thought, “Go ahead and swing your 
sword. Come on, kill me!” This is called “sticking your neck 
out.” 

Hsing Ch’ang was oblivious to the Master. He was 
determined to carry out orders and had nothing on his mind but 
murder. “I don’t care if you’re a Bhikshu, an Arhat, or even a 
Patriarch, I’m going to kill you!” he said, swinging at the 
Master’s neck. He swung three times and nothing happened. 
Now, just what do you think this means? 

Sutra: 
The Master said, 
A straight sword is not bent. 
A bent sword is not straight. 

I merely owe you gold. 
Ido not owe you life. 

Hsing Ch’ang fell to the ground in fright. After a 
while he came to and begged for mercy, repenting of his 

356 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 

error and vowing to leave home. The Master gave him the 
gold and said, “Go! I fear that my followers will come to 
take revenge. Change your appearance and return 
another day and I will accept you.” 

Commentary: 

The Master said, “A straight sword is not bent,” that is, the 
straight sword of the proper Dharma cannot be harmed by 
deviant dharma. “The deviant cannot defeat the right; the right 
always overcomes the deviant. You may have a sword, but you 
can’t harm me with it. I merely owe you the gold which I 
borrowed in a past life,” the Master said, “I don’t owe you my 
life because I never killed you.” 

It was all too much for Hsing Ch’ang, and he fainted. When 
he came to, the Master talked with him for a long time, “Why did 
you want to kill me?” he asked. 

“Tt wasn’t my idea,” said Hsing Ch’ang. “They told me that 
you were a scoundrel, a thief, and a hunter. They said that you 
were nothing but a firewood gatherer who was pretending to be 
a Patriarch. Hearing this, I felt it was my duty to kill you, but 
now I know that I was wrong. Why? If you had no virtue, my 
sharp sword would have sliced your head right off. Having met 
you, I realized that the affairs of the world are of no great 
interest. Please let me leave home and bow to you as my 
teacher.” 

The Master said, “Here, take this gold and go quickly. My 
disciples are fond of me and they would kill you if they found out 
about this. Go somewhere else and leave home. When you return 
I will teach and transform you.” 

357 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

358 

Hsing Ch’ang received his orders and disappeared 
into the night. Later he left home under another Bhikshu, 
received the complete precepts and was vigorous in 
practice. One day, remembering the Master’s words, he 
made the long journey to have an audience. The Master 
said, “I have thought of you for a long time. What took 
you so long?” 

He replied, “The High Master once favored me by 
pardoning my crime. Although I have left home and 
although I practice austerities, I shall never be able to 
repay his kindness. May I try to repay you by 
transmitting the Dharma and taking living beings 
across? 

“Your disciple often studies the Mahaparinirvana 
Sutra, but he has not yet understood the principles of 
permanence and impermanence. I beg the High Master 
to be compassionate and explain them for me. 

The Master said, “Impermanence is just the Buddha 
nature and permanence is just the mind discriminating 
good and evil dharmas.” 

“High Master, your explanation contradicts the Sutra 
text!” Hsing Ch’ang replied. 

The Master said, “I transmit the Buddha’s mind-seal. 
How could I dare to contradict the Buddhas’ Sutras?” 

Hsing Ch’ang replied, “The Sutra says that the 
Buddha nature is permanent and the High Master has 
just said that it is impermanent; it says that good and evil 
dharmas, reaching even to the Bodhi Mind, are 
impermanent and the High Master has just said that they 
are permanent. This contradiction has merely intensified 
your student’s doubt and delusion.” 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 

The Master said, “Formerly, I heard Bhikshuni Wu 
Chin Tsang recite the Nirvana Sutra. When I commented 
on it, there was not one word or principle which did not 
accord with the Sutra text. My explanation to you now is 
not different.” 

Hsing Ch’ang replied, “Your student’s capacity for 
understanding is superficial. Will the High Master please 
explain further?” 

The Master said, “Don’t you understand? If the 
Buddha nature were permanent, what use would there be 
in speaking of good and evil dharmas? To the end of an 
eon not one person would produce the Bodhi Mind. 
Therefore I explain it as impermanent. That is exactly 
what the Buddha explained as the meaning of true 
permanence.” 

Commentary: 

The Buddha explained the Buddha nature as permanent to 
those attached to impermanence, and he explained it as 
impermanent to those attached to permanence. If you say that the 
Buddha nature is permanent, what good and evil dharmas remain 
for discussion? Living beings would have all become Buddhas 
long ago. Why should one bother to speak the Dharma to them 
in order to take them across? If the Buddha nature is permanent, 
everyone would be a Buddha and there would be no need to 
cultivate. “So,” the Master said, “you see that my explanation of 
the Buddha nature as impermanent is exactly what the Buddha 
meant when he spoke of permanence.” 

359 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

“Furthermore, if all dharmas were impermanent, all 
things would have a self-nature subject to birth and 
death, and the true permanent nature would not pervade 
all places. Therefore, I explain it as permanent. That is 
exactly what the Buddha explained as the meaning of 
true impermanence.” 

Commentary: 

Basically, the Buddha nature is neither permanent nor 
impermanent. That is the ultimate principle of the middle way. 
Then why did the Sixth Patriarch say that it was impermanent? 
Why did he say that the mind which discriminates good and evil 
was permanent? He did it to cure Hsing Ch’ang of his 
attachments. Once you are rid of attachment, you do not need the 
Buddhadharma. The Sixth Patriarch took advantage of an 
opportunity to heal Hsing Ch’ang, but he wouldn’t necessarily 
have explained it the same way to every one. 

Sutra: 

“It was for the sake of common people and those who 
belong to other religions who cling to deviant views of 
permanence, and for all those who follow the two-vehicle 
way, mistaking permanence for impermanence 
formulating the eight perverted views, that the Buddha in 
the ultimate Nirvana teaching destroyed their prejudiced 
views. He explained true permanence, true bliss, true 
selfhood, and true purity.” 

360 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 

Commentary: 

Common people and non-Buddhists cling to false 
permanence; Shravakas and Pratyeka Buddhas mistake 
permanence for impermanence. These two groups each have 
four perverted views, making eight in all. 

Common people and non-Buddhists turn the four marks of 
conditioned existence upside-down and say: 

1. The suffering of conditioned existence is bliss; 

2. Its impermanence is permanent; 

3. Its impurity is pure; and 

4. Its “no-self” is “self.” 

The Shravakas and Pratyeka Buddhas turn the four virtues of 
Nirvana upside-down and say: 

5. The bliss of Nirvana is suffering; 

6. Its permanence is impermanent; 

7. Its purity is impure; and 

8. Its “self” is “no-self.” 

Sutra: 

“You now contradict this meaning by relying on the 
words, taking annihilation to be impermanence and 
fixing on a lifeless permanence. In this way you 
misinterpret the last, subtle, complete and wonderful 
words of the Buddha. Even if you read it a thousand 
times, what benefit could you derive from it?” 

Hsing Ch’ang suddenly achieved the great 
enlightenment and spoke this verse: 

To those who hold impermanence in mind, 
The Buddha speaks of the permanent nature; 

361 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Not knowing expedients is like 
Picking up pebbles from a spring pond. 

But now without an effort 

The Buddha nature manifests; 
The Master did not transmit it, 
And I did not obtain a thing. 

The Master said, “Now you understand! You should 
be called ‘Chih Ch’e’ (breadth of understanding).” 
Chih Ch’e thanked the Master, bowed, and withdrew. 

Commentary: 

Unless you understand that the Buddha’s dharmas are 
expedient devices, you might as well collect rocks from the 
bottom of a pool: you’re useless. 

Hearing the Master’s instruction, Hsing Ch’ang returned to 
the source and went back home. Suddenly enlightened, he 
understood his mind and saw his nature. But his enlightenment 
was not given to him by the Sixth Patriarch, and his attainment 
was actually no attainment. He simply opened up to his own 
inherent wisdom. 

The Master gave him certification saying, “Now that you are 
truly enlightened, Ill give you the name ‘Chih Ch’e.’” 

362 

Bhikshu Shen Hui 

Sutra: 

A young boy thirteen years old named Shen Hui, who was 
from a Kao family in Hsiang Yang, came from Yi 
Ch’tian to pay homage. The Master said, “The Knowing 
One’s journey must have been difficult. Did you bring the 
original with you? If you have the original, you should 
know the owner. Try to explain it to me.” 

Shen Hui said, “I take non-dwelling as the original 
and seeing as the owner.” 

The Master said, “This Shramanera imitates the talk 
of others.” 

Shen Hui then asked, “When you sit in Ch’an, High 
Master, do you see or not?” 

The Master hit him three times with his staff and said, 
“When I hit you, does it hurt or not?” 

He replied, “It both hurts and does not hurt.” 

The Master said, “I both see and do not see.” 

Shen Hui asked, “How can you both see and not see?” 

The Master said, “What I see is the transgression and 
error of my own mind. I do not see the right, wrong, good, 
or bad of other people. This is my seeing and not seeing. 
How can you Say it both hurts and does not hurt? If it 
does not hurt you are like a piece of wood or a stone, but 
if it does hurt you are just like a common person and will 

363 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

give rise to hatred. Your ‘seeing and not seeing’ are two 
extremes and your ‘hurting and not hurting’ are 
production and extinction. You have not even seen your 
own nature and yet you dare to ridicule others.” 

Commentary: 

Shen Hui was an exceptional child. Precocious and brilliant, 
he forgot his body for the sake of the Dharma. He could tell at a 
glance that Shen Hsiu didn’t have the genuine Buddhadharma; 
he set out for the Sixth Patriarch’s place, eighteen hundred miles 
distant. His shoes fell apart and the rocks and slivers of glass on 
the road cut into his feet, but he continued to walk, tearing up his 
robe to bandage his bleeding feet and acting as if there were no 
pain at all. When the Great Master saw him he knew that he had 
undergone much suffering. 

“Good Knowing Advisor,” he said, “your journey must have 
been difficult. Did you bring the original with you? Have you 
attained your original face or not? Do you recognize your 
original face? If you have the original, you should know the 
owner. If you have the original, the Buddha-nature, and if you 
have understood your mind, seen your nature, you should know 
the owner. The owner is the Buddha-nature. Tell me about it!” 

But this unruly child had a mind of his own. “I take “not 
dwelling anywhere’ as my original face,” he said, “and my 
seeing nature as the host.” 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “You’re just imitating the talk of 
other people. You pretend to know what you do not know, to 
understand what you do not understand, and to see what you do 
not see. This is nothing but verbal zen. It is not an expression of 
the self-nature. 

Shen Hui had a lot of gall. “When the High Master sits in 
meditation,” he asked, “does he see or not?” This child was wild 

364 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Shen Hui 

and difficult to teach. The Patriarch, not being an ordinary 
person, gave no ordinary answer. He hit Shen Hui with his staff 
and shouted, “Does that hurt?” 

It is not known whether the child was afraid, or whether he 
cried or not. 

Shen Hui said, “It both hurts and does not hurt.” 

The Master said, “I both see and do not see.” 

“How can this be?” said Shen Hui. 

“T see my own mistakes,” said the Master. “I keep an eye on 
my evil false thinking and immediately put a stop to it. I do not 
see the faults of others: others’ evils, others’ obsessions, others’ 
conditions, others’ transgressions.” Students of the 
Buddhadharma should take note of this. See your own errors, not 
those of other people. Don’t be like a watchdog watching 
someone else’s door. The dog doesn’t have anything of its own 
and so it watches over other people’s things. Don’t be critical 
and don’t gossip: see and do not see. 

“T see and do not see,” said the Master, “but how can you 
both hurt and not hurt? If you don’t hurt, you are just like a rock. 
If you do hurt, then you’ll catch fire and get angry and afflicted, 
just like an unenlightened common person. Seeing and not 
seeing are two extremes and hurting and not hurting are dharmas 
of production and extinction. You haven’t even seen your own 
nature and yet you have the nerve to come here and talk down to 
me?” 

Sutra: 

Shen Hui bowed, apologized, and thanked the Master. 
The Master continued, “If your mind is confused and you 
do not see, then ask a Good Knowing Advisor to help you 
find the Way. If your mind is enlightened, then see your 
own nature and cultivate according to the Dharma. You 

365 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

yourself are confused and do not see your own mind, and 
yet you come to ask me whether or not I see. If I see, I 
know it for myself, but is that of any help to you in your 
confusion? In the same way your seeing is of no use to me. 
Why don’t you know and see it for yourself, instead of 
asking me whether or not I see?” 

Shen Hui bowed again over one hundred times, 
seeking forgiveness for his error. He served the Master 
with diligence, never leaving his side. 

Commentary: 

The Master said, “Shen Hui, if your mind is unclear and you 
cannot see the nature, then ask a Good Knowing Advisor to 
teach you how to work at cultivation. If your mind is enlightened 
and you have understood the mind and seen the nature, then you 
should cultivate according to Dharma. You haven’t even seen 
your original mind, and yet you come to ask me whether or not 
I have seen it. If I’ve seen it, that’s my own business, of no use 
to you in your deluded condition. If you’ve seen the nature and 
obtained the original face, that’s of no use to me. Why not turn 
the light around and reverse the illumination to find out whether 
you’ ve seen your own mind or not? Isn’t that better than asking 
me? What difference does it make whether I’ve seen it or not?” 

After that, Shen Hui was really sorry. Why had he been so 
incorrigible? Did he really have no conscience? His questioning 
of the Patriarch was like trying to sell dime novels to Confucius 
or going to the home of Lu Pan, China’s first engineer and 
foremost carpenter, to do remodeling. He begged for 
forgiveness, saying, “I’m just a kid. I don’t know how high the 
heavens are or how deep the earth is. Please don’t hold it against 
me.” From then on, Shen Hui waited on the Master, following 

366 

Chapter VIII. Sudden and Gradual - Bhikshu Shen Hui 

along everywhere the Master went to give lectures on the Sutras 
and speak about the Dharma. 

Sutra: 

One day the Master addressed the assembly as 
follows: “I have a thing. It has no head or tail, no name or 
label, no back or front. Do you all know what it is?” 

Shen Hui stepped forward and said, “It is the root 
source of all Buddhas, Shen Hui’s Buddha nature!” 

The Master said, “I just told you that it had no name 
or label, and you immediately call it the root-source of all 
Buddhas. Go and build a thatched hut over your head! 
You’re nothing but a follower who pursues knowledge 
and interpretation.” 

After the Master’s extinction, Shen Hui went to Ching 
Lo where he propagated the Ts’ao Hsi Sudden Teaching. 
He wrote the Hsien Tsung Chi which circulated widely 
throughout the land. He is known as Dhyana Master Ho 
Che. 

Commentary: 

Everyone shut their mouths; no one said a word. Some of 
them didn’t speak because they knew and some didn’t speak 
because they did not know. Seeing that no one was going to 
answer, Shen Hui jumped out from the assembly and said, “I 
know what it is! It’s the origin of all Buddhas: my Buddha 
nature!” 

“Tn the ranks of the Ch’an School,” said the Master, “‘you’re 
nothing but a scholar. You have no genuine understanding.” 

367 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

In a way the Master’s scolding was a compliment. It isn’t 
easy to be a Ch’an scholar of the school of those who know and 
interpret. 

When the Sixth Patriarch died, Shen Hui went to the capital 
at Loyang to spread the Sudden Teaching of the Ch’an School. 
He later wrote the Hsien Tsung Chi, a treatise on the Northern 
and Southern Schools, which exposed Shen Hsiu as a false 
pretender and proclaimed the Southern Patriarch Hui Neng as 
the real Sixth Patriarch, the recipient of the Buddha’s mind-seal. 
Had Shen Hui not written this book, Shen Hsiu would have 
stolen the title of the Sixth Patriarch. 

Shen Hui came to be known as Ho Che, which is the name of 
the place where he went to live. 

368 

Difficult Questions 

Sutra: 

The Master saw many disciples of other schools, all with 
evil intentions, gathered beneath his seat to ask him 
difficult questions. Pitying them, he said, “Students of the 
Way, all thoughts of good or evil should be completely 
cast away. What cannot be named by any name is called 
the self-nature. This non-dual nature is the real nature, 
and it is within the real nature that all teaching doors are 
established. At these words you should see it for 
yourselves.” 

Hearing this, they all made obeisance and asked him 
to be their master. 

Commentary: 

Not only did Shen Hsiu’s party want to murder the Great 
Master, but those of other sects, such as the Consciousness Only 
School, came to ask the Master difficult questions. “Which came 
first,” they would ask, “the Buddha or the Dharma? Where does 
the Buddhadharma begin?” They had many questions. 

The Sixth Patriarch said, “If you can speak the Dharma, then 
it’s first the Buddha, then the Dharma. If you can listen to the 
Dharma, then it’s first the Dharma and then the Buddha. The 
Buddhadharma comes from the minds of living beings.” 

369 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

On this occasion he saw that the crowd was full of spies and 
would-be assassins. “Cultivators should not hold thoughts of 
good or evil,” he said, “What cannot be named by any name is 
called the self-nature. The self-nature is non-dual; it is also 
called the real nature, the real mark. Within it all schools and 
sects are set up. It’s not enough just to talk about it, however. 
You must understand and immediately give proof to the state of 
no-mark.” 

Hearing these words, the assembly realized that all their 
thoughts had been bound up in good and evil and they were 
greatly ashamed. They bowed down before him and said, “From 
now on we’ll be different. Please, Great Master, be our teacher.” 

370 

CHAPTER [IX 

PROCLAMATIONS 

Sutra: 

On the fifteenth day of the first month, during the first 
year of the Shen Lung reign (A.D. 705) Empress Tse 
T’ien and Emperor Chung Tsung issued the following 
proclamation: 

“We have invited Masters Hui An and Shen Hsiu to 
the palace to receive offerings so that we may investigate 
the One Vehicle in the leisure time remaining after our 
myriad duties. The two Masters have declined, saying 
that in the South there is Dhyana Master Hui Neng, who 
was secretly transmitted the robe and Dharma of the 
Great Master Hung Jen who now transmits the Buddhas’ 
mind-seal. 

“We now send Chamberlain Hsieh Chien with this 
invitation, hoping that the Master will remember us with 
compassion and come to the capital.” 

The Master sent back a petition pleading illness 
saying that he wished to spend his remaining years at the 
foot of the mountain. 

Commentary: 

The Ninth Chapter is entitled “Proclamations.” 
Wu Tse T’ien was an empress during the T’ang dynasty. She 
believed in the Buddha, but she wasn’t very orthodox. In fact, 

371 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

she would do anything. But she believed in Buddhism and so she 
invited all the high monks to the palace to receive offerings. 

Her son, Emperor Chung Tsung, reigned only a short time 
before the empress had him exiled to Lu Ling to be king there, 
so that she could take the throne. 

A proclamation was a letter from the emperor. When 
ordinary people received a proclamation, they bowed to it as a 
gesture of respect to the emperor, but people who have left home 
don’t do this, of course. 

Wishing to study the One Buddha Vehicle, the Sudden 
Teaching Dharma door, the empress invited Masters Hui An and 
Shen Hsiu to come to the palace to receive offerings. But they 
refused. “We do not have enough virtue,” they said, “You should 
invite Hui Neng. He has received the Fifth Patriarch’s robe and 
bowl and is a true transmitter of the mind seal.” 

The empress took the two masters’ advice and invited the 
Sixth Patriarch to the capital, Ch’ang An. The invitation was 
brought by a chamberlain, that is, by an official of the inner 
court. The chamberlain, Hsieh Chien, was a eunuch. Eunuchs 
began serving Chinese emperors during the Han dynasty. 

The Sixth Patriarch wrote back “I am very ill.” Actually, he 
wasn’t ill at all; this was merely an expedient device, because the 
Sixth Patriarch did not wish to visit a ruler. More specifically, he 
did not wish to visit an empress. It would have been against the 
rules. Wu Tse T’ien knew nothing about moral precepts and she 
didn’t follow any rules. But the Sixth Patriarch couldn’t say, 
“You are an empress and I am a Patriarch and I don’t have to 
visit you,” so he said, “I am old and sick.” 

Sutra: 

Hsieh Chien said, “The Virtuous Dhyana Masters at 
the capital all say that to master the Way one must sit in 

372 

Chapter IX. Proclamations 

Dhyana meditation and practice concentration, for 
without Dhyana concentration, liberation is impossible. I 
do not know how the Master explains this dharma. 

The Master said, “The Way is awakened to from the 
mind. How could it be found in sitting? The Diamond 
Sutra states that to say that Tathagata either sits or lies 
down is to walk a deviant path. Why? The clear pure 
Dhyana of the Tathagata comes from nowhere and goes 
nowhere and is neither produced nor extinguished. The 
Tathagata’s clear pure ‘sitting’ is the state of all dharmas 
being empty and still. Ultimately there is no certification; 
even less is there any ‘sitting.’” 

Commentary: 

For an illiterate, the Master was quite intelligent. He 
answered, “You awaken to the Way from within your mind. You 
can’t just sit there. You have to understand the principles of the 
Buddhadharma and be enlightened to them. The enlightenment 
is ‘understanding’ and the sitting is ‘practice.’ Practicing without 
understanding is stupid; understanding without practice is 
nothing but intellectual zen.” 

You must understand and practice. Don’t just sit, sit, sit for 
several decades without even understanding the principle of 
enlightening your mind. 

The Master added, “Since ultimately there is nothing to be 
attained or certified to, why be attached to sitting in meditation?” 

Sutra: 

Hsieh Chien said, “When your disciple returns to the 
capital, their majesties will surely question him. Will the 
High Master please be compassionate and instruct me on 

373 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

374 

the essentials of the mind so that I can transmit them to 
the two palaces and to students of the Way at the capital? 
It will be like one lamp setting a hundred thousand lamps 
burning, making all the darkness endlessly light.” 

The Master said, “The Way is without light or 
darkness. Light and darkness belong to the principle of 
alternation. ‘Endless light’ has an end, too, because such 
terms are relative. Therefore the Vimalakirti Sutra says, 
‘The Dharma is incomparable because it is not relative.’” 

Hsieh Chien said, “Light represents wisdom and 
darkness represents affliction. If cultivators of the Way 
do not use wisdom to expose and destroy affliction, how 
can they escape from the birth and death that have no 
beginning?” 

The Master said, “Affliction is Bodhi; they are not two 
and not different. One who uses wisdom to expose and 
destroy affliction has the views and understanding of the 
two vehicles and the potential of the sheep and deer carts. 
Those of superior wisdom and great roots are completely 
different.” 

Hsieh Chien said, “What are the views and 
understanding of the Great Vehicle?” 

The Master said, “The common person sees light and 
darkness as two, but the wise person comprehends that 
their nature is non-dual. The non-dual nature is the real 
nature. The real nature does not decrease in common 
people nor increase in worthy sages. In afflictions it is not 
confused and in Dhyana concentration it is not still. It is 
neither cut off nor permanent. It does not come or go. It 
is not inside, outside, or in the middle. It is not produced 
or destroyed. The nature and mark is ‘thus, thus.’ It 

Chapter IX. Proclamations 

permanently dwells and does not change. It is called the 
*“Way.’” 

Commentary: 

Hsieh Chien wished for instruction on the essentials of the 
principle of using the mind to seal the mind. He said that the 
Patriarch was like a lamp, setting a hundred thousand lamps 
burning in the capital: bright, bright limitless light. 

The Master said, “You shouldn’t see light and darkness as 
different or affliction and Bodhi as different. Affliction and the 
enlightenment nature are one. Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas 
destroy affliction by means of wisdom, but Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas are completely different from them. Ordinary 
people see understanding and ignorance as two, but wise people 
know that in essence they are one, not two. That non-dual nature 
is the real nature. In states of confusion, the real nature is not 
confused; in Dhyana concentration, it is not still. It is both still 
and moving; it both moves and is still. The nature and mark are 
both ‘thus’. We call it the ‘Way.’” 

Sutra: 

Hsieh Chien said, “How does your explanation of the 
self-nature as neither produced nor destroyed differ from 
that of other religions?” 

The Master answered, “As non-production and non- 
extinction are explained by other religions, extinction 
ends production and production reveals extinction. Their 
extinction is not extinction and what they call production 
is not production. My explanation of non-production and 
non-extinction is this: originally there was no production 

375 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

and now there is no extinction. For this reason my 
explanation differs from that of other religions. 

“Tf you wish to know the essentials of the mind, simply 
do not think of good or evil. You will then enter naturally 
the clear, pure substance of the mind, which is deep and 
permanently still, and whose wonderful abilities are as 
numerous as the sand grains in the Ganges River.” 

Commentary: 

Other religions see production and extinction as two. They 
say that extinction puts an end to production and that production 
reveals extinction. Their explanation is not the ultimate one. As 
I explain the terms, originally there was no production, and so 
now there is no extinction. 

The Master continued, “If you would like to know about the 
wonderful mind-transmission Dharma, the essential points of the 
mind-ground Dharma door, I will tell you: simply do not think 
of good or evil. Then you will spontaneously understand the true 
principle and enter into the pure substance of the mind.” The 
mind-substance is deep and constantly pure and still. Although 
it is always still, within its true emptiness there is wonderful 
existence, and its wonderful abilities are innumerable. 

Sutra: 

Hsieh Chien received this instruction and was 
suddenly greatly enlightened. He bowed, took leave, and 
returned to the palace to report the Master’s speech. 
That year on the third of the ninth month a proclamation 
was issued in praise of the Master. It read: 

“The Master has declined our invitation because of 
old age and illness. He cultivates the Way for us and is a 

376 

Chapter IX. Proclamations 

field of blessings for the country. The Master is like 
Vimalakirti who pleaded illness in Vaishali. He spreads 
the great fruit widely, transmitting the Buddha-mind and 
discoursing on the non-dual Dharma. 

“Hsieh Chien has conveyed the Master’s instruction, 
the knowledge and vision of the Tathagata. It must be due 
to accumulated good acts, abundant blessings, and good 
roots planted in former lives that we now have met with 
the Master when he appears in the world and have 
suddenly been enlightened to the Supreme Vehicle. We 
are extremely grateful for his kindness which we receive 
with bowed heads, and now offer in return a Mo Na robe 
and crystal bowl as gifts. We order the Magistrate of 
Shao Chou to rebuild the temple buildings and convert 
the Master’s former dwelling place into a temple to be 
called ‘Kuo En,’ (Country’s Kindness).” 

Commentary: 

Hsieh Chien returned to the capital and submitted a written 
report to the empress which set forth the principles the Master 
had discussed with him. The palace then issued a statement in 
praise of the Master, saying he was the highest Master in the 
nation and one of unexcelled cultivation. They said that the Sixth 
Patriarch was like the layman Vimalakirti, who was sick in 
Vaishali. 

“The Master propagates the ‘great fruit,’ the Mahayana 
Buddhadharma, and transmits the ‘Buddha-mind,’ the mind-seal 
of all Buddhas. At Nan Hua Temple he expounds the non-dual 
Dharma door, saying that production and extinction are one and 
the nature and mark are not two. His knowledge and vision are 
that of the Buddha. We must have done a lot of good things in 
past lives in order to meet the Master now and suddenly awaken 

377 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

to the wonderful principle of the Supreme Vehicle. We bow to 
his teaching every day and hold it respectfully above our heads.” 

They offered the Master an expensive robe made of Korean 
cloth which had been sent as tribute to the empress. It was a 
patchwork robe, with a Buddha image embroidered on each 
patch. Some say that the empress embroidered them herself, but 
there is no way to know with certainty. 

378 

CHAPTER X 

FINAL INSTRUCTIONS 

Sutra: 

One day the Master summoned his disciples Fa Hai, Chih 
Ch’eng, Fa Ta, Shen Hui, Chih Ch’ang, Chih T’ung, 
Chih Ch’e, Chih Tao, Fa Chen and Fa Ju, and said to 
them, “You are not like other people. After my passage 
into extinction, you should each be a master in a different 
direction. I will now teach you how to explain the 
Dharma without deviating from the tradition of our 
school. 

“First bring up the three classes of Dharma-doors, 
and then use the thirty-six pairs of opposites, so that, 
whether coming or going, you remain in_ the 
Bodhimandala. While explaining all the dharmas, do not 
become separated from your self-nature. Should 
someone suddenly ask you about a dharma, answer him 
with its opposite. If you always answer with the opposite, 
both will be eliminated and nothing will be left, since each 
depends on the other for existence.” 

Commentary: 

One day the Master called his room-entering disciples 
together for a talk. They are called room-entering disciples 
because they had received the transmission of the Master’s 
Dharma and were therefore permitted to enter his room. 

379 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The first of the ten was Fa Hai. You remember him. He 
edited The Sixth Patriarch Sutra and was a great disciple. He put 
his name at the head of the list here because, no matter what, he 
had to be number one. 

Chih Ch’eng was the Dharma-thief who later reformed and 
joined the Master. Fa Ta was the arrogant, Bhikshu who had read 
The Lotus Sutra over three thousand times but couldn’t bring 
himself to put his head on the ground before the Master even 
once. Shen Hui was the thirteen-year-old child who had talked 
back to the Master. There was also Chih Ch’ang, Chih T’ung, 
and Chih Ch’e, also known as Flying Cat Chang; Chih Tao, Fa 
Chen, and Fa Ju. These were the Master’s ten great disciples. 

The Master said, “You ten men should each be a master 
teacher in a certain direction and receive offerings there from 
humans and gods. I will now teach you how to spread the 
Dharma without straying from the tradition of our Sudden 
Enlightenment Dharma Door Teaching. 

“In speaking the Dharma,” the Master went on, “the most 
important thing is to base your speech on the self-nature. How 
does one do this? Suppose someone asks you a question about 
the Buddhadharma. Whatever his principle may be, it’s bound to 
have an opposite. You should answer him with the opposite 
dharma. For example, coming and going are relative concepts. 
Without a coming there is no going; without a going there is no 
coming. Coming is the prerequisite of going and going can only 
result from coming. Since opposites depend upon each other for 
existence, ultimately they both will be cast out, canceling each 
other out so that nothing is left behind. There will be no coming 
and no going, for there will be no place left to go. 

380 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Sutra: 

“The three classes of Dharma doors are the heaps, the 
realms, and the entrances. The five heaps are: form, 
feeling, perception, impulses, and consciousness. The 
twelve entrances are the six sense objects outside: forms, 
sounds, smells, tastes, tangible objects, and objects of the 
mind, and the six sense organs within: eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, body, and mind. The eighteen realms are the six 
sense objects, the six sense organs and the six 
consciousnesses. 

“The self-nature is able to contain all dharmas; it is 
the ‘store-enveloping consciousness.’ If one gives rise to a 
thought, it turns into consciousness, and the six 
consciousnesses are produced which go out the six organs 
and perceive the six sense objects. 

“Thus the eighteen realms arise as a function of the 
self-nature. If the self-nature is wrong, it gives rise to 
eighteen wrongs; if the self-nature is right it gives rise to 
eighteen rights. Evil functioning is that of a living being, 
while good functioning is that of a Buddha. What is the 
functioning based on? It is based on opposing dharmas 
within the self-nature.” 

Commentary: 

The self-nature includes all dharma doors, and so it is called 
the “store-enveloping consciousness.” This is the eighth 
consciousness, which may be transformed into the wisdom of 
the great perfect mirror. If you give rise to thinking and 
considering, the store-enveloping consciousness turns to the 
seventh consciousness which in turn produces the six 

381 

The 

Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

consciousnesses which go out the six organs and perceive the six 
sense objects. 

If you use the self-nature correctly, it is the Buddha-use, but 

if you misuse it you are just a living being. How do the different 
usages arise? They come from the opposites within the self- 
nature. 

Sutra: 

382 

“External insentient things have five pairs of 
opposites: heaven and earth, sun and moon, light and 
darkness, yin and yang, and water and fire. 

“In speaking of the marks of dharmas one should 
delineate twelve opposites: speech and dharmas, 
existence and non-existence, form and formlessness, the 
marked and the unmarked, the presence of outflows and 
the lack of outflows, form and emptiness, motion and 
stillness, clarity and turbidity, the common and the holy, 
membership in the Sangha and membership in the laity, 
old age and youth, and largeness and smallness. 

“From the self-nature nineteen pairs of opposites 
arise: length and shortness, deviance and orthodoxy, 
foolishness and wisdom, stupidity and _ intelligence, 
confusion and concentration, kindness and cruelty, 
morality and immorality, straightness and crookedness, 
reality and unreality, danger and safety, affliction and 
Bodhi, permanence and impermanence, compassion and 
harm, joy and anger, generosity and stinginess, advance 
and retreat, production and extinction, the Dharma-body 
and the Form-body, the Transformation-body and the 
Reward-body.” 

The Master said, “If you can understand and use 
these thirty-six pairs of opposites you can connect 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

yourself with the dharmas of all the Sutras and avoid 
extremes, whether coming or going. When you act from 
your self-nature in speaking with others, you are separate 
from external marks while in the midst of them and 
separate from inward emptiness while in the midst of 
emptiness. If you are attached to marks, you will add to 
your wrong views and if you grasp at emptiness, you will 
increase your ignorance.” 

Commentary: 

“Opposite” means mutually dependent and mutually 
opposed. Nineteen opposites arise as a function of the true- 
suchness self-nature. For example, if there was no long, there 
would be no short. Long is the opposite of short and short is the 
opposite of long. Long and short are relative terms and between 
them is the Middle Way. 

Kindness bestows happiness and is the opposite of cruelty. 
Morality and immorality are opposites. Morality is the practice 
of all good actions and the absence of all evil. Compassion pulls 
living beings out of suffering and is the opposite of harmfulness. 
Generosity means giving; if you can give, you are not stingy. 
The Dharma-body pervades all places and is the opposite of the 
form-body. 

Sutra: 

“Those who grasp at emptiness slander the Sutras by 
maintaining that written words have no use. Since they 
maintain they have no need of written words, they should 
not speak either, because written words are merely the 
marks of spoken language. They also maintain that the 
direct way cannot be established by written words, and 

383 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

yet these two words, ‘not established’ are themselves 
written. 

“When they hear others speaking, they slander them 
by saying that they are attached to written words. You 
should know that to be confused as they are may be 
permissible, but to slander the Buddha’s Sutras is not. Do 
not slander the Sutras for if you do, your offense will 
create countless obstacles for you. 

“One who attaches himself to external marks and 
practices dharmas in search of truth, or who builds many 
Bodhimandalas and speaks of the error and evil of 
existence and non-existence will not see his nature for 
many eons. 

“Listen to the Dharma and cultivate accordingly. Do 
not think of the hundred things, for that will obstruct the 
nature of the Way. Listening without cultivating will 
cause others to form deviant views. Simply cultivate 
according to the Dharma, and do not dwell in marks 
when bestowing it.” 

Commentary: 

People who are attached to emptiness say that they don’t 
need anything at all. They say that it isn’t necessary to study the 
Sutras. They say that they don’t use written words. 
“Everything’s empty,” they say, don’t use words. Words are 
nothing but an attachment to marks! If that is so, then nobody 
should even speak, because written words are simply the visible 
manifestation of spoken language. 

They also say, “The direct mind is the Bodhimandala. Do not 
set up written words.” But unless you quit speaking altogether, 
you still have language, and the phrase “do not set up” is itself 
made up of words. 

384 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

“Your own confusion is your own business,” the Master 
adds, “but do not slander the Buddha’s Sutras. You should not 
refrain from thinking, for if you do, you fall into a useless, dull 
kind of emptiness. You should cultivate in the way I have 
instructed you. Do not become attached to appearances. 

Sutra: 

“If you understand, then speak accordingly, function 
accordingly, practice accordingly, and act accordingly, 
and you will not stray from the basis of our school. 

“If someone asks you about a meaning, and the 
question is about existence, answer with non-existence; if 
you are asked about non-existence, answer with 
existence; asked about the common life, answer with the 
holy life; asked about the holy life, answer with the 
common life. Since in each case the two principles are 
interdependent, the meaning of the Middle Way will arise 
between them. If you answer every question with an 
opposite, you will not stray from the basic principle. 

“Suppose someone asks, ‘What is darkness?’ You 
should answer, ‘Brightness is the cause and darkness the 
condition. When there is no brightness, there is darkness. 
Brightness reveals darkness and darkness _ reveals 
brightness.’ Since opposites are interdependent, the 
principle of the Middle Way is established. 

“Answer every question that way, and in the future, 
when you transmit the Dharma, transmit it in the way I 
am instructing you. Then you will not stray from the 
tradition of our school.” 

385 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Commentary: 

If you answer every question with an opposite dharma, you 
will not deviate from the basic principle of the Sudden 
Enlightenment doctrine. 

Sutra: 

In the seventh month of the year Jen Tsu, the first 
year of the T’ai Chi and Yen Ho reigns (ca 712 A.D.), the 
Master sent his disciples to Hsin Chou to build a pagoda 
at Kuo En Temple. He ordered them to hurry the work 
and it was completed by the end of the summer of the 
following year. 

Commentary: 

During the cyclical year Jen Tsu, the reign was renamed 
twice. In the fifth month it was changed from T’ai Chi to Yen 
Ho. In the seventh month the emperor abdicated in favor of his 
son and in the eighth month the reign was renamed Hsien T’ien. 

Hsin Chou was the Master’s homeland. His disciples built a 
pagoda there so that the Master’s body might rest in it after his 
death. 

Sutra: 

On the first day of the seventh month he gathered his 
disciples together and said, “In the eighth month I wish to 
leave this world. Those of you with doubts should ask 
about them soon so that I may resolve them for you and 
put an end to your confusion, because when I am gone 
there will be no one to teach you.” 

Hearing this, Fa Hai and the others wept. Only Shen 
Hui was unmoved and did not cry. The Master said, 

386 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

“Little Master Shen Hui has attained to the equality of 
good and evil. He is not moved by blame or praise and 
does not feel sadness or joy. None of the rest of you have 
attained that. All these years on the mountain—how have 
you been cultivating? 

“Now you cry. Who are you worrying about? Are you 
worrying that I don’t know where I’m going? I know 
where I’m going. If I didn’t know, I wouldn’t have been 
able to tell you about it in advance. No doubt you are 
crying because you don’t know where I am going, but if 
you knew you wouldn’t need to cry. Originally the 
Dharma nature is not produced or extinguished; it does 
not come or go.” 

Commentary: 

The Great Master rang the bell and beat the drum. The sound 
rang out, summoning all of his disciples to his side. “Pay 
attention!” he said. “In the eighth month of this year I am going 
to leave this world.” 

Then here he is again! Fa Hai-number one! He didn’t even 
list the names of the other disciples; he just said, “Fa Hai and the 
others.” 

They all wept. Their eyes ran with tears and their noses ran 
with snot, just like children who have lost their mother and have 
no milk to drink. “Waaah! Waaah!” They cried like babies. 
Some of them cried in secret, some cried openly, and some faked 
tears, fearing it would be bad manners not to cry along with 
everyone else. There was both truth and falsehood in the 
situation; it was exactly like a play. 

But the youngest of the babies did not cry. Was it because he 
was too young to understand or care that he was about to lose his 
mother, or in this case, his teacher? Was it that? 

387 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

No. Shen Hui was young in years, but old in wisdom. He 
understood the principle of not moving in any state. Mencius 
was forty years old before he reached that level. With an 
unmoving mind, 

They praise: you are not pleased; 

They scold: you are not annoyed. 

They say you work hard, you are not moved. 
They say you are lazy: no matter what 

You are not moved. 

However, when you are really being lazy and someone 
scolds you, you can’t say, “I have samadhi. He doesn’t bother 
me at all.” You must have a true unmoving mind, like that of 
little Shen Hui. 

The Sixth Patriarch called Shen Hui “Little Master.” In the 
first ten years after taking precepts one is called a “little master,” 
or “junior-seated.” From ten to twenty years one is “middle- 
seated” and from twenty to thirty years one is “senior seated.” 

“Little Master Shen Hui is better than all of you,” the Master 
said, “because he doesn’t have a discriminating mind. He has 
truly turned his consciousness into wisdom.” 

Shen Hui was not moved by praise or blame. “That Dharma 
Master does not cultivate! All he does is run after women.” 
Criticism like that didn’t bother him. “He really works hard. Not 
only does he not sleep, he doesn’t even lie down. And he only 
eats once a day. Such austerity!” Praise like that didn’t affect 
him either. 

If you don’t react, then people can slander you but it’s as if 
nothing happened. “You’re a pig,” they may say. “Fine,” you 
answer, “I’m a pig. No problem.” If you don’t react, then they 
can praise you and it doesn’t matter either. “You have both 
virtue and learning,” they may say, but you pay no attention. 

388 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

If you are pleased when someone praises your learning, then 
you really have no learning at all. If you get angry when 
someone scolds you, you have been influenced by an outside 
state. To be unmoved by any state is to neither grasp nor reject, 
neither love nor hate. 

You can tell Little Master Shen Hui that he is good, but he 
will not be happy; you can tell him he is bad, but he will not get 
angry. He has no thoughts of misery or delight. There truly is 
complete understanding of the Middle Way. Rare indeed! 

“You old ones,” the Master said, “you middle-aged ones, 
none of you passes. None of you has out-waited the fire.” 

When anger sets you ablaze, you should think, “Wait. Wait a 
minute. Wait a minute and then get angry.” Then you wait, and 
your anger disappears. That is called “out-waiting the fire.” If 
you don’t wait, the fire burns, but if you can wait, it will die out. 

When steel is red hot, you can shape it into a vessel. But 
unless you wait for the fire to burn it red hot, you can’t mold the 
metal; you haven’t out-waited the fire. 

“You have been on the mountain for so many years,” said the 
Master. “What have you been doing all this time? Huh? You 
hear that I am going to complete the stillness and you cry like 
babies; you’re all worthless. How have you been cultivating? By 
eating and sleeping! Are you upset because you think I don’t 
know where I’m going? I will tell you something! I do know. Of 
course I know! There is no reason for you to worry about me. I 
can take care of myself: 

No big, no small, 

No within or without; 

You cultivate, you understand: 

You make the arrangements yourself.” 

389 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

“All of you sit down, and I will recite a verse called 
‘The True-False Motion-Stillness Verse.’ If you take it up 
and recite it, you will be of the same mind as I am. If you 
rely on it to cultivate, you will not stray from the true 
principle of our school.” 

The assembly bowed and begged the Master to recite 
the verse. 

There is nothing true in anything, 

So don’t view anything as true. 

If you view anything as true, 

Your view will be completely false. 

You can know what is true by yourself. 

Being apart from the false is the truth of the mind. 
When your own mind is not apart from the false 
And lacks the truth, then where is the truth? 

Commentary: 

“Now don’t be nervous,” the Master said. “Sit down and 
don’t jump around. Don’t cry right in front of me like that. 
Really, you are undisciplined disciples. Listen to my verse. It 
discusses the true and the false and the principles of motion and 
stillness. If you can understand it and bear it in mind, you won’t 
deviate from the Sudden Teaching.” 

“Turn the light around,” said the Master. “Shine it inside at 
your own self-nature, and you can know the truth. To find your 
true mind is simply to separate yourself from all the false forms 
and images of this world. If there is no truth within your own 
mind, where will you find the truth? The truth is not apart from 
the self-nature; apart from the self-nature there is no truth.” 

390 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Sutra: 

Sentient beings understand motion. 
Insentient beings do not move. 

If you cultivate the work of non-movement, 
Like insentient beings, you will not move. 
If you seek the true non-movement, 

In movement, there is non-movement. 
Non-movement is non-movement, but 
Things without sentience lack the Buddha-seed. 
Fully able to discriminate among marks, 
But unmoving in the primary meaning: 
The very act of viewing in this way, 

Itself is the function of true suchness. 

Commentary: 

Do not seek non-movement apart from movement, for it is 
just within movement that stillness can be found. All sentient 
beings move, but if you can be still while remaining sentient, that 
is true non-movement. If, as a sentient being, you are able to 
clearly distinguish the marks of all dharmas, not with your 
consciousness but with wisdom, you can give proof to the 
attainment of the substantive principle of your self-nature and 
achieve the ultimate state. That is true, proper non-movement. 

Sutra: 

I tell you, students of the Way, 

Apply your minds with effort and take care, 
At the gate of the Great Vehicle 

Do not grasp the wisdom of birth and death. 

391 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

If there is response at these words, 

Then let us discuss the Buddha’s meaning 

together. 

If there is no response, 

Join your hands together and make others glad. 

The basis of this school is non-contention. 

Contention is not the meaning of the Way. 

For in grasping at the Dharma doors of 
contradiction and contention, 

The self-nature enters birth and death. 

Commentary: 

You are face to face with the Great Vehicle Buddhadharma; 
do not continue to grasp at your understanding which binds you 
up in birth and death, at the kind of wisdom that is still attached 
to marks. If you can’t understand what I am trying to tell you, 
then put your hands together to please living beings. My school 
of Sudden Enlightenment is based on the cultivation of the 
patience of unproduced Dharmas. There should be no debating. 
When you argue with others you lose the meaning of the Way. 

Debating, the thoughts of victory and defeat 
Stand in contradiction to the Way. 

Giving rise to the four-mark mind, 

How can samadhi be obtained? 

If you insist on arguing, your self-nature won’t escape the 
revolving wheel. Giving rise to the marks of a self, others, living 
beings, and a life, you will certainly continue to undergo birth 
and death. 

392 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Sutra: 

When the followers heard this verse, they understood 
its meaning and bowed down before the Master. They 
made up their minds to practice in accord with the 
Dharma and not to argue, knowing that the Great Master 
would not remain long in the world. 

The Senior Seated Fa Hai bowed again and asked, 
“After the High Master enters extinction, who will inherit 
the robe and Dharma?” 

Commentary: 

Fa Hai never forgets himself. No doubt he wanted the robe 
and bowl for himself. 

Sutra: 

The Master said, “Since the time I lectured on the 
Dharma in the Ta Fan Temple, transcriptions of my 
lectures have been circulated. They are to be called The 
Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra. Protect and transmit them 
in order to take humankind across. If you speak 
according to them, you will be speaking the Orthodox 
Dharma. I will explain the Dharma to you, but I will not 
transmit the robe, because your roots of faith are pure 
and ripe. You certainly have no doubts and are worthy of 
the great Work. According to the meaning of the 
transmission verse of the First Patriarch Bodhidharma, 
the robe should not be transmitted. His verse said, 

Originally I came to this land, 
Transmitting Dharma, saving living beings. 

393 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

One flower opens; five petals and 
The fruit comes to bear of itself.” 

Commentary: 

The students didn’t have tape-recorders as we do, so they 
wrote down their notes with brush and ink and compared them 
among themselves. 

“You should take good care of these lectures,” the Master 
said. “They are Dharma jewels. Print and distribute them and so 
take living beings across. I know that you all believe in me, and 
so I don’t need to transmit the robe. Besides, the Great Master 
Bodhidharma said that beginning with the Sixth Patriarch the 
robe should not be transmitted. He said, ‘I originally came to 
China in order to transmit the right Dharma and take across all 
these confused living beings. From me, this one flower, in the 
future five petals will open—the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and 
Sixth Patriarchs. And the fruit will come to bear of itself; that is, 
there will be no need to transmit the robe. Transmitting the 
Dharma will suffice.’ 

This is why the Fifth Patriarch told the Sixth Patriarch, “As 
the robe is a source of contention, do not transmit it. Should you 
continue to transmit it, your life will hang by a thread.” 

“The fruit comes to bear of itself.” You should know that the 
fruit which ripens in this line is just all of you who have taken 
refuge with me. The first character of your Dharma-names is 
“Kuo” and it means “fruit” or “result.” So don’t forget to ripen. 

All of you should ripen right away. Most importantly don’t 
be lazy! Bodhidharma gave you all predictions long ago. The 
Sixth Patriarch himself said, “The Bodhi fruit accomplishes 
itself.” They both knew that, in the future, there would be all of 
you disciples in America with the first name “Kuo,” fruit. The 

394 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

fruit they spoke of is just all of you. That fruit is you; you are that 
fruit. The two are one. 

Sutra: 

The Master added, “All of you Good Knowing 
Advisors should purify your minds and listen to my 
explanation of the Dharma. If you wish to realize all 
knowledge, you must understand the Samadhi of One 
Mark and the Samadhi of One Conduct. 

“If you do not dwell in marks anywhere and do not 
give rise to hate or love, do not grasp or reject, and do not 
calculate advantage or disadvantage, production and 
destruction while in the midst of marks, but instead 
remain tranquil, calm, and yielding, then you will have 
achieved the Samadhi of One Mark. 

“In all places, whether walking, standing, sitting, or 
lying down, to maintain a straight and uniform mind, to 
attain the unmoving Bodhimanda and the true 
realization of the Pure Land. That is called the Samadhi 
of One Conduct.” 

Commentary: 

“Wash your minds clean,” said the Master, “and get rid of 
greed, hate, and delusion. If you wish to realize all knowledge, 
you need to understand the Samadhi of One Mark, which 
consists in not dwelling in marks, and the Samadhi of One 
Conduct, which consists in not dwelling in conduct. 

The Samadhi of One Mark: whether you are in a good place 
or a bad place, whether moving or still, do not dwell in marks. 
While in the midst of marks, do not give rise to dislike or to 
fondness. 

395 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Neither love nor hate 
Should move the mind; 
The mind should not 
Grasp or reject. 

If you have a thought of love, you will grasp at the object of your 
desire. The twelve conditioned causes say, “love conditions 
grasping, grasping conditions existence...” 

To reject means to cast away. If you hate something then you 
reject it. Love and hate cause grasping and rejecting. Do not 
calculate advantage and disadvantage. If you think, ““What’s in it 
for me?” you are just being greedy, self-seeking, and impure. Do 
you understand? You should not have such thoughts. 

You should remain tranquil, with nothing at all to do, and 
calm, like water without waves. “No waves” means no 
afflictions, no love, no hate, no grasping, no rejecting, no 
advantage, no disadvantage, no success and no failure. You 
should be yielding, like empty space. Take a look: everything 
comes from empty space and yet empty space does nothing at 
all. It does not set itself up as boss and say, “Go be born! Go 
die!” Everything is born and dies within it, undergoing 
transformations in a most natural way without the slightest 
difficulty. Yield and be flexible. If you are flexible then 
whatever happens just happens. That’s the way it is. There is no 
greed, hatred, or delusion; there is nothing at all. With few 
wants, one is content, being without longing or self-seeking. 

It is no use to think, “Wait until my book gets published. I 
will be a famous scholar.” 

You may want to do something strange to make the world 
take notice of you; but you should not have such ideas. You 
should decrease your desires, no matter what they are, and 
always be content. 

396 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Knowing enough, you’re always happy. 
Able to be patient, you’re at peace. 

If you can be tranquil, calm, and yielding, and leave marks 
while in the midst of them, if you can transcend the dust while in 
the dust, just that is the Samadhi of One Mark. 

The Samadhi of One Conduct: no matter where you are, ina 
good place, a bad place, a wholesome place, an unwholesome 
place, a right place, a wrong place—walking, standing, sitting or 
lying down—maintain a direct mind. The direct mind is the 
Bodhimandala. Students of the Buddhadharma should not be 
devious. Be direct in your thoughts, words, and deeds. Speak 
your mind; don’t think east and speak west. The straight mind is 
the Bodhimandala. If the cause is not straight, the result will be 
crooked. Your mind should be uniform and of one purity. You 
who cultivate the Way: toward others, toward yourself, toward 
everything, be straightforward. Don’t try to trick people out of 
their money, no matter how poor you are. If you borrow a little 
money and return it right away, you have not lost the virtue of a 
gentleman, but if you borrow and don’t return it, your position is 
very low. 

Be an unmoving Bodhimandala with a straightforward mind, 
for that is the realization of the Pure Land and is called the 
Samadhi of One Conduct. 

Sutra: 

“One who perfects the two samadhis is like earth in 
which seeds are planted; buried in the ground, they are 
nourished and grow, ripening and bearing fruit. The One 
Mark and One Conduct are just like that. 

“IT now speak the Dharma which is like the falling of 
the timely rain, moistening the great earth. Your 

397 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Buddha-nature is like the seeds which, receiving 
moisture, will sprout and grow. Those who receive my 
teaching will surely obtain Bodhi and those who practice 
my conduct will certainly certify to the wonderful fruit. 
Listen to my verse: 

The mind-ground contains every seed; 
Under the universal rain they all sprout 
Flower and feeling—Sudden Enlightenment: 
The Bodhi-fruit accomplishes itself.” 

After speaking the verse the Master said, “Dharma is 
not dual nor is the mind, and the Way is pure and without 
marks. All of you take care not to contemplate stillness or 
empty the mind. The mind is basically pure and does not 
grasp or reject anything. Each of you work hard, and go 
well, in harmony with circumstances.” 

At that time, his followers made obeisance and 
withdrew. 

Commentary: 

The timely rain falls just when it is needed. If it falls too soon, 
it may drown the crops, and if it comes too late, they may wither 
and die. The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma is like the timely rain 
which moistens all of the great earth. Your own inherent 
Buddha-nature is like seeds which receive the moisture and 
flourish ripening into Bodhi-fruits. The Bodhi-sprouts become 
Bodhi-fruits. 

The Master went on, “You who understand my doctrine are 
certain to obtain Bodhi. If you cultivate according to this 
method, you will surely obtain the wonderful Bodhi-fruit. Now 
that I have spoken so much Dharma for you, you are probably all 

398 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

flustered, so pay attention while I speak this verse. Purify your 
minds! 

Your self-nature contains every seed; 

At the timely rain they all sprout. 

When sentient beings suddenly enlighten, 
The Flower opens, the fruit is ripened. 
And the Bodhi-fruit accomplishes itself. 

The wonderful fruit of Bodhi ripens of itself. Bodhidharma 
said, “The fruit comes to bear of itself,” and the Sixth Patriarch 
said, “The Bodhi fruit accomplishes itself.” They were speaking 
of all of you who have the Dharma name “Kuo” (fruit). You 
should ripen throughout the world. All places should reap this 
fruit. What fruit? The Bodhi-fruit. The Sixth Patriarch was afraid 
that you might not have understood and so he spoke it very 
clearly. “The Bodhi fruit accomplishes itself.” You should all 
ripen on your own. I cannot help you. If you don’t ripen you are 
just cheating yourselves. So ripen! 

Isn’t this strange? Your Dharma names all begin with the 
word “fruit,” and our School’s transmission verse says also: 

Contemplating, cultivating the 
ever blissful fruit; 

Personally transmitting the 
unconditioned teaching. 

In the future all of you will personally transmit the 
unconditioned teaching. 

The Master went on, “My Sudden Enlightenment Dharma 
door is not two, it is one. What is the one? It is just the Sudden 
Teaching. The mind is not two either; therefore it should return 
to the one. The Way we cultivate is pure and without marks. 

399 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

“Although it is without marks, don’t make the mistake of 
contemplating stillness because that is just another attachment. 
Do not loiter in dull emptiness either, because the mind of living 
beings is naturally and fundamentally pure. The original 
substance of the mind is pure and immaculate, without grasping 
or rejecting. 

“Work hard, all of you. Go forward and don’t be lazy. Go 
where circumstances take you and build Bodhimandalas. Be 
good, cultivate good conduct and work hard.” 

Sutra: 

On the eighth day of the seventh month, the Master 
suddenly said to his disciples, “I wish to return to Hsin 
Chou. Quickly ready a boat and oars.” 

The great assembly entreated him earnestly to stay, 
but the Master said, “All Buddhas appear in the world 
and then are seen to enter Nirvana. This body of mine 
must return somewhere.” 

The assembly said, “Master, you are leaving, but 
sooner or later you will return.” 

The Master said, “Falling leaves return to the root. 
There was no day on which I came.” 

They further asked, “Who has received the 
transmission of the Right Dharma-eye Treasury?” 

The Master said, “The one who has the Way obtains 
it; the one without a mind penetrates it.” 

Commentary: 

“Patriarch,” said the assembly, “you are leaving now, but we 
can’t believe that you will enter Nirvana. Sooner or later you will 
come back, won’t you?” 

400 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

The Master said, “Just as leaves fall and return to the root of 
the trees, I must go. Besides, there was no day on which I came.” 

The Chinese text reads, “When I came I had no mouth,” but 
this is a misprint for the word “day.” However, you can also 
explain it as, “When I came I had no mouth.” On the day when 
the Patriarch came into this world, he had no mouth; that is, he 
had no words. He did not speak Dharma when he came and he 
did not speak Dharma when he left; coming and going he did not 
speak Dharma. The Dharma does not increase or decrease and 
although he spoke Dharma for so many years, he never spoke 
Dharma at all. 

There are no fixed Dharmas. You can explain it any way you 
wish, as long as you are in accord with principle. But if you don’t 
explain it correctly, you can explain your listeners right into the 
hells, and that is taking the unfixed Dharma too far. 

The Patriarch’s disciples, unable to bear the thought of their 
Master’s imminent departure, tried to delay him with questions 
until the Master, in exasperation, probably decided that they 
were just too much trouble. “I’m getting out of here,” he 
probably thought. 

The “Right Dharma-eye Treasury” refers to the robe and 
bowl. So many disciples, and yet not one of them knew who had 
received the Dharma transmission. If they hadn’t been greedy 
for it themselves, they wouldn’t have asked this question. Why 
else would they be “standing by the river and gazing out into the 
sea?” If you weren’t longing for the sea, why would you be 
standing there? Everyone thought the robe and bowl was 
extremely important, but the Sixth Patriarch was not a business 
man. If he had been, at $65.00 a transmission, he could have 
made a lot of money. 

“Who got the transmission? The one who has the Way 
obtains it; the one without a mind penetrates it. Whoever has no 

401 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

self-seeking mind understands my Dharma, because he has 
obtained the Samadhis of the One Mark and the One Conduct.” 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma is to be found in these verses 
and these principles, and if you cultivate according to them you 
will obtain his Dharma. 

Sutra: 

They further asked, “In the future, there won’t be any 
difficulties, will there? 

The Master said, “Five or six years after my 
extinction, a man will come to take my head. Listen to my 
verse: 

Offerings to the parents with bowed head. 
There must be food in the mouth. 

When the difficulty of ‘Man’ is met, 

The officials will be Yang and Liu. 

Commentary: 

Remembering the demonic difficulties which had beset the 
Master during his lifetime—assassination attempts, arson, 
thievery, and spying—the Master’s disciples wondered what 
would happen when he was gone. 

I know that the Sutra does not record all of the hardships the 
Master underwent. There were at least six attempts made to steal 
the robe and bowl and the thieves were armed and prepared to 
kill the Master, if necessary. So his disciples asked hopefully, 
“There won’t be any difficulties like that in the future, will 
there? No one will want to kill us, will they? Will they try to kill 
us instead of you?” 

402 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

While he was alive, they tried to take his life. After his death, 
they tried to steal his head. In those days it wasn’t easy to be 
Patriarch. It’s not so difficult today, however, so don’t retreat. 

The Sixth Patriarch’s verse was a prophecy. No one 
understood it at the time, but later it came true. Five or six years 
after the Master’s death, a Korean monk named Chin Ta Pei 
hired Chan Ching Man of Hung Chou to steal the Patriarch’s 
head and bring it back to Korea so that he could make offerings 
to it. 

Chan Ching Man was poor and hungry and so he took the 
money because “there must be food in the mouth.” The Korean 
monk was no doubt very rich. 

At the time of the “difficulty” of Chan Chin “Man,” the 
Magistrate was named Liu T’ien and the Governor was named 
Yang K’an. 

The flesh-body of the Patriarch was housed in the pagoda. 
Having heard the Master’s prediction, his disciples had bound 
his neck with sheets of iron for protection. Chan Ching Man 
chopped at it with his knife, but he wasn’t able to remove the 
Master’s head. He made a lot of noise, and when the Bhikshus 
came running to catch him they saw a man wearing white 
mourning clothes run from the pagoda. The Bhikshus reported 
the incident to the police and within five days the thief was 
arrested and brought to Nan Hua Temple to be tried. 

“Why did you try to steal the Sixth Patriarch’s head?” they 
asked. 

“A Korean monk paid me to do it,” he said, “and I was 
hungry, so I took his money.” 

The Magistrate turned to the Master’s disciple Ling T’ao and 
said, ‘““What do we do now?” 

403 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Ling T’ao said, “According to the law, he deserves to die, but 
in the Buddha’s teaching there are no friends or enemies. 
Besides, the Master predicted this would happen. Let him go.” 

“The Buddha’s gate is indeed wide,” said the Magistrate, and 
he set the criminal free. 

Sutra: 

The Master also said, “Seventy years after my 
departure, two Bodhisattvas, one who has left home and 
one who is a layman will simultaneously come from the 
east to propagate and transform. They will establish my 
School, build and restore monasteries, and glorify the 
Dharma for its heirs.” 

Commentary: 

The Bodhisattva who had left home was Patriarch Ma Tsu 
Tao I. He built many monasteries in China. It is said, “Ma Tsu 
built the temples and Pai Chang wrote the rules.” Pai Chang was 
Ma Tsu’s Dharma successor. 

The Bodhisattva who had not left home was P’ang Yiin, the 
enlightened layman. His entire family was enlightened, wife, 
daughter, and son, and they all went to Nirvana. Layman P’ang 
had been incredibly wealthy, but he built a big boat one day, put 
all of his money in it, sailed out to sea, and dumped it overboard. 

Some say that the two Bodhisattvas are Dhyana Master 
Huang Po and layman P’ei Hsiu. You may explain it any way 
you like, as long as you pick two people: a monk and a layman. 

Layman P’ang gave all his money as a gift to use for 
remodeling the Dragon Palace at the bottom of the sea. He 
returned to his home and took up a lowly occupation, and in the 

404 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

midst of their bitter poverty, the P’ang family cultivated the 
Way. 
One day, Mr. P’ang sighed, 

It’s hard, it’s hard 

It’s really just as hard as putting seeds 
On all the leaves 

Of trees in the yard. 

“What do you know, old man?” said Mrs. P’ang. “It’s not 
hard at all. In fact, 

It’s easy, it’s easy 

It’s easy, because I find 

On the tip of every blade of grass 
The Patriarch’s mind.” 

She thought it was easy and he thought it was hard. Then their 
little daughter came and disagreed with both of them: 

It’s not easy, 

It’s not hard; 

I eat when I’m hungry and 
I sleep when I’m tired! 

“There’s nothing to it!” she said. 

Although Mr. P’ang was married, he and his wife were like 
good friends and did not carry on like ordinary men and women. 
As a consequence, they became enlightened. Lay people should 
all imitate their inconceivable purity. 

405 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

The assembly made obeisance again and asked, “Will 
you please let us know for how many generations the 
teaching has been transmitted since the first Buddhas 
and Patriarchs appeared in the world?” 

The Master said, “The Buddhas of antiquity who have 
responded to appear in the world are numberless and 
uncountable.” 

Commentary: 

“Their number is incalculable,” said the Master. “Besides, I 
never learned to read or write and I’m not very good at 
arithmetic. So let’s not count them.” 

Sutra: 

“But now I will begin with the last seven Buddhas. In 
the Past ‘Adorned Eon’ there were Vipashyin Buddha, 
Shikhin Buddha, and Vishvabhu Buddha. In the present 
‘Worthy Eon’ there have been Krakucchanda Buddha, 
Kanakamuni_ Buddha, Kashyapa’ Buddha, and 
Shakyamuni Buddha.” 

Commentary: 

In the Adorned Eon (Alamkarakalpa) a thousand Buddhas 
appeared in the world. The 998th Buddha of that kalpa was 
Vipashyin Buddha. His name means “Victorious 
Contemplation,” “Every Kind of Contemplation,” “Victorious 
View,” or “Every Kind of View.” If you just remember 
“Vipashyin Buddha” that will do for general purposes. 

“Shikhin Buddha.” Shikhin is translated as “fire.” 
“Vishvabhu Buddha” was the last Buddha of the Adorned Eon. 

406 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

We are now living in the Worthy Eon (Bhadrakalpa), so- 
called because many worthy sages will appear during it. 

Of the thousand Buddhas of this eon, Krakucchanda Buddha 
was the first. His name means “Worthy of Offerings,” because 
he should receive the offerings of humans and gods. His name 
also means “Adornment.” 

The second Buddha was Kanakamuni, the third, Kashyapa, 
and the fourth, Shakyamuni. These are the most recent Buddhas. 

Sutra: 

“From Shakyamuni Buddha, the transmission went 
to Arya Mahakashyapa, Arya Ananda, Arya 
Sanakavasa, Arya Upagupta, Arya Dhrtaka, Arya 
Miccaka, Arya Vasumitra, Arya Buddhanandi, Arya 
Buddhamitra, Arya Parshva...” 

Commentary: 

Shakyamuni Buddha, in the midst of the millions of humans 
and gods who were circumambulating him, picked up a flower 
and Mahakashyapa, the First Patriarch, had to smile. No one 
knew what was happening when Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I 
have the Right Dharma-eye Treasury, the wonderful mind of 
Nirvana, the real mark, which is unmarked. This is the mind-to- 
mind transmission, transmitted outside the teaching. I have 
already given it to Mahakashyapa in mind-to-mind 
transmission.” 

The Third Patriarch, the Venerable Sanakavasa, was born 
wearing clothes, and as he grew, his clothes grew along with 
him. After he left home under Arya Ananda, his clothes changed 
into a great Samghati robe. Just before he died, he said, “This 

407 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

robe will not decay until Shakyamuni Buddha’s Dharma is 
completely extinguished.” 

The Tenth Patriarch, Arya Parshva, lived in his mother’s 
womb for more than sixty years. He was born with white hair 
and a white beard, just like Lao Tzu in China. 

Lao Tzu lived in his mother’s womb for eighty-one years and 
was born with white hair and a long white beard. They named 
him “Lao Tzu” which means “Old Child,” but he was actually a 
reincarnation of Mahakashyapa. He was reborn in China because 
Shakyamuni Buddha had noticed that the Chinese had good 
karmic roots. Most of them did not believe in the Buddha, 
however, so Mahakashyapa was sent to China to found the 
religion of Taoism, which is the same as the Brahman religion of 
India and which cultivates purity of conduct. 

Arya Parshva, the Tenth Patriarch, was born with a liking for 
cultivation. When he met the Ninth Patriarch, Buddhamitra, he 
left home and the Dharma door of the Buddha’s mind-seal was 
transmitted to him. 

Sutra: 

“..Arya Punyayashas, Mahasattva Ashvaghosha, 
Arya Kapimala, Mahasattva Nagarjuna, Arya 
Kanadeva, Arya Rahulata, Arya Sanghanandi, Arya 
Gayashata...” 

Commentary: 

When the Eleventh Patriarch, Punyayashas, met Parshva he 
asked him, “How can I realize Buddhahood?” 

Parshva said, “You wish to realize Buddhahood? It is just 
your present non-realization.” 

408 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Punyayashas said, “You say that my present non-realization 
is the Buddha, but how can I know that?” 

Parshva replied, “How can you know that your present non- 
realization is not the Buddha?” 

With that question and that answer, Punyayashas became 
enlightened and received the Dharma transmission. Later on, he 
met the Great Master Ashvaghosha, the Eleventh Patriarch. 
Mahasattva Ashvaghosha was’ extremely _ intelligent. 
Punyayashas knew that Ashvaghosha’s conditions were ripe—he 
was ready to become the twelfth Patriarch. When Punyayashas 
went to teach him, Ashvaghosha asked, “How can I know the 
Buddha?’” 

Punyayashas said, “You wish to know the Buddha? He is just 
your not knowing.” 

Ashvaghosha said, “Not knowing the Buddha, how can I 
know that my not knowing is the Buddha?” 

Punyayashas said, “If you do not know the Buddha, how can 
you know that your not knowing is not the Buddha?” 

Ashvaghosha said, “Ah! So this is the meaning of sawing! 
You say this and I say that, and we hack at the principle like 
sawing through a piece of wood.” 

Punyayashas replied, “Ah! So that is the meaning of wood! 
But what is the meaning of sawing?” 

Ashvaghosha said, “It’s just what you are! And what is the 
meaning of wood?” 

Punyayashas said, “You have just been sawed open by me; 
you have just been liberated by me.” 

Ashvaghosha was instantaneously enlightened. He left 
home, received the transmission, and became the Twelfth 
Patriarch. He was called Ashvaghosha, “horse cry,” because 
when he spoke the Dharma all the horses cried out. He was a 
Mahasattva, that is, a “great being,” a great Bodhisattva. 

409 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Nagarjuna Bodhisattva, the Fourteenth Patriarch, is the one 
who went to the Dragon Palace and brought back the 
Avatamsaka Sutra. He was very, very wise. 

Sanghanandi, the Seventeenth Patriarch, asked Gayashata, 
the Eighteenth Patriarch, “How old are you?” 

The child replied, “I’m one hundred years old.” 

“But you’re so young,” said the Patriarch, “how can you be 
a hundred years old?” 

“If I were a hundred years old and did not understand the 
Buddhadharma, I would not be as good as a one-day-old baby 
who did.” 

Hearing such an intelligent answer, the Seventeenth 
Patriarch let the child leave the home life under him and later 
transmitted the Dharma to him. 

Sutra: 

“,.Arya Kumarata, Arya Jayata, Arya Vasubandhu, 
Arya Manorhita, Arya Haklena, Arya Aryasimha, Arya 
Basiasita, Arya Punyamitra, Arya Prajnatara, Arya 
Bodhidharma, Great Master Hui K’o, Great Master 
Seng Ts’an, Great Master Tao Hsin, Great Master Hung 
Jen, and I, Hui Neng, am the Thirty-Third Patriarch. 
Thus the transmission has been handed down from 
patriarch to patriarch. In the future transmit it 
accordingly from generation to generation. Do not allow 
it to become extinct.” 

The assembly heard and faithfully accepted what the 
Master had said, bowed, and withdrew. 

410 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Commentary: 

Aryasimha, the Twenty-Fourth Patriarch, was a native of 
Central India. In his practice of the Buddhadharma, he traveled 
to Kashmir. The King of Kashmir did not believe in the Buddha, 
but instead followed two non-Buddhist leaders who were intent 
on destroying Buddhism. As Bhikshus were not allowed within 
the country, the King demanded of Aryasimha, “Have you ended 
birth and death?” 

Aryasimha wanted to convert the King. “I have ended it,” he 
answered. 

“The Buddha’s teaching says that practicing the Bodhisattva 
way, you must give up your head, your eyes, your brains, and 
your blood. You must give up whatever someone happens to 
need. Now, I need your head. Give it to me! Since you have 
ended birth and death, you must give me your head. Can you do 
it?” 

“T don’t even have birth or death,” said Aryasimha. “What 
does it matter if I lose my head? It’s yours. Take it.” 

The King sliced off Aryasimha’s head but instead of blood, 
a milky white fluid ran out of his neck. The King’s arm fell to the 
ground. No one cut it off; it fell off by itself because he had 
murdered an Arhat. The King then put the two leaders of the 
non-Buddhist religion to death, but there was nothing special 
about their executions. They bled just like everyone else. The 
King prohibited their non-Buddhist religion and spread the 
Buddhadharma widely. 

Sutra: 

On the third day of the eighth month of the year Kuei 
Ch’ou, the second year of the Hsien T’ien reign 
(A.A. 713), after a meal in Kuo En Temple, the Master 

411 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

412 

said, “Each of you take your seat, for I am going to say 
goodbye.” 

Fa Hai said, “What teaching dharma will the High 
Master leave behind so that confused people can be led to 
see the Buddha-nature?” 

The Master said, “All of you please listen carefully. If 
those of future generations recognize living beings, they 
will have perceived the Buddha-nature. If they do not 
recognize living beings, they may seek the Buddha 
throughout many eons, but he will be difficult to meet. 

“T will now teach you how to recognize the living 
beings within your mind and how to see the Buddha- 
nature there. If you wish to see the Buddha, simply 
recognize living beings, for it is living beings who are 
confused about the Buddha and not the Buddha who is 
confused about living beings. 

“When enlightened to the self-nature, the living being 
is a Buddha. If confused about the self-nature, the 
Buddha is a living being. When the self-nature is 
impartial, the living being is the Buddha. When the self- 
nature is biased, the Buddha is a living being. 

“If your thoughts are devious and malicious, the 
Buddha dwells within the living being, but by means of 
one impartial thought, the living being becomes a 
Buddha. Our minds have their own Buddha and that 
Buddha is the true Buddha. If the mind does not have its 
own Buddha, where can the true Buddha be sought? 
Your own minds are the Buddha; have no further doubts. 
Nothing can be established outside the mind, for the 
original mind produces the ten thousand dharmas. 
Therefore the Sutras say, ‘The mind produced, all 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

dharmas are produced; the mind extinguished, all 
dharmas are extinguished.’” 

Commentary: 

The Great Master instructed his disciples to take their seats. 
In Buddhism, everything has a fixed order. Those who take 
precepts first stand or sit in front of those who take them later. If 
you have held precepts for even one day longer, you sit in front. 

Once again Fa Hai, number one, heard that the Sixth 
Patriarch was going, and so he acted as spokesman. He was the 
oldest, so naturally he was higher than everyone else. “What 
Dharma will you leave with us, High Master, so that we can 
teach the deluded ones of future generations to understand the 
mind and see the nature?” 

The Master said, “If you want to find the Buddha, you must 
look among living beings. If you recognize living beings, you 
recognize the Buddha-nature.” Why does Never-Slighting 
Bodhisattva bow before everyone he meets? Because he knows 
that everyone is a Buddha, he will accomplish Buddhahood 
himself. If he saw everyone as a demon, he would become a 
demon. 

See the Buddha within your own mind; don’t seek him 
outside. If you wish to see the Buddha you must first respect 
living beings and recognize them all as the Buddha; then you’ ve 
understood the mind and seen your nature. Confused living 
beings do not recognize the Buddha, but the Buddha recognizes 
living beings. 

If you are biased and continually pick at other people’s 
faults, even if you are a Buddha, you turn into a living being. 
Living beings and the Buddha are a thought apart. 

Buddha is mind; mind is Buddha. Right thoughts are the 
Buddha; deviant thoughts are the demon. Pure thoughts are the 

413 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Buddha; defiled thoughts are the demon. Take a look at your 
thoughts. If you can keep your mind clean, that is the real 
Buddha. Without a clear, pure, genuine Buddha-mind, where 
can you go to find the Buddha? You’ll never find him. The 
Buddha is made in your mind; do not seek him outside. 

Nothing is separate from the self-nature. Nothing is separate 
from your own mind. The ten thousand dharmas are all produced 
from your mind, not from outside. 

The Buddha spoke all dharmas 
For the minds of living beings. 
If there were no minds, 

What use would dharmas be? 

Sutra: 

“Now, to say goodbye, I will leave you a verse called 
the ‘Self-Nature’s True Buddha Verse.’ People of the 
future who understand its meaning will see their original 
mind and realize the Buddha Way. The verse runs: 

The true-suchness self-nature 
is the true Buddha. 

Deviant views, the three poisons, 
are the demon king. 

Commentary: 

The most important part of the Platform Sutra is this last 
verse. It explains everything extremely well. The Sixth Patriarch 
left it not just for the people of his day, but for us, now, to 
cultivate according to its principles. He saw that you and I would 
be here listening. We all have a share, and we should cultivate 

414 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

according to this verse because we are all people of future 
generations, not animals. The animals of future generations will 
have to be reborn as people before they can have a share. The 
Sixth Patriarch spoke this verse for people, not animals. Animals 
who wish to become Buddhas must first be reborn as human 
beings. 

We should not lose this opportunity. 

“The true-suchness self-nature is the true Buddha.” The self- 
nature is your mind. Your true-suchness self-nature is also called 
the real mark, the Tathagata Store, the Buddha-nature, and your 
own nature. True suchness is just your own nature which is the 
true Buddha. 

“Deviant views, the three poisons, are the demon king.” If 
you know the true Buddha, you should also know the demon 
king. The demon king is just your deviant views: greed, hate, and 
delusion, the three poisons. Greed for riches, greed for sex, greed 
for anything at all is nothing but poison. 

If, after you leave home, you are still greedy and self- 
seeking, that too is poison. If you scheme to get more disciples, 
that is poison. 

So, you see, we have been here for a long time and not many 
have taken refuge and become disciples. Those who take refuge 
must do it on their own. No one advises them. If I told you to take 
refuge with me, you might wonder if I had the right to be your 
teacher and Good Knowing Advisor. I don’t know myself 
whether I am a Good Knowing Advisor, and so I do not go about 
it in this way. 

Sutra: 

At times of deviant confusion 
the demon king is in the house; 

415 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

But when you have proper views 
the Buddha is in the hall. 
Deviant views, the three poisons 
produced within the nature, 
Are just the demon king 
come to dwell in the house. 
Proper views casting out 
three poisons of the mind 
Transform the demon into Buddha- 
true, not false. 

Commentary: 

“Deviant confusion” is ignorance. Ignorance creates love 
and desire, and that is the demon king dwelling in your house. 

If you have proper views and not the wrong ones of greed, 
hate, and delusion, then your mind is pure and the Buddha is in 
the hall. 

The Buddha and the demon are both manifested from your 
own nature. When you hold deviant views, the three poisons 
arise, and the demon comes to dwell in your house. What is your 
house? Your body. 

Proper views spontaneously expel the three poisons, and the 
demon immediately changes into Buddha. This principle is 
absolutely true; it cannot possibly be false. You need only hold 
proper views, and that is the Buddha. Improper views are the 
demon. 

Sutra: 

Dharma-body, Reward-body, 
and Transformation-body: 

416 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Fundamentally the three bodies 
are one body. 
Seeing that for yourself 
within your own nature 
Is the Bodhi-cause 
for realizing Buddhahood. 
The pure nature is originally produced 
from the Transformation-body. 
The pure nature is ever-present within 
the Transformation-body, 
One’s nature leads the Transformation-body 
down the right road. 
And in the future the full perfection 
is truly without end. 

Commentary: 

Although spoken of as three, the clear, pure Dharma-body, 
the perfect, full Reward-body, and the hundred thousand 
myriads of Transformation bodies are fundamentally one. The 
three bodies are simply transformations of your one body. This 
is called “Three in one, one in three.” 

Your seeing for yourself the true Buddha within your self- 
nature is a cause for your future realization of Buddhahood. It is 
a seed of Buddhahood. Having planted the Bodhi-seed, you will 
certainly reap the Bodhi-fruit and become a Buddha. 

The clear, pure self-nature originally arises from the 
Transformation-body. Your pure self-nature, your pure Dharma- 
body, is within your Transformation body. 

In the future, your Bodhi self-nature will be perfected, and 
the perfect, full Reward-body will be truly inexhaustible. 

417 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

The root cause of purity 
is the lust nature, 
For once rid of lust, 
the substance of the nature is pure. 
Each of you, within your natures; 
abandon the five desires. 
In an instant, see your nature- 
it is true. 

Commentary: 

Everyone has sexual desire, but you do not need to be afraid 
of it. In The Shurangama Sutra we read about Ucchusma, the 
“Fire-Head Vajra” whose sexual desire was unbearably intense 
when he first began to cultivate. But he was able to discipline 
and temper the fire of lust, transforming it into the fire of wisdom 
and transforming himself into the “Fire-Head Vajra.” 

“The root cause of purity is the lust nature.” Proper thoughts 
are the cause of purity in the nature, and deviant thoughts the 
cause of impurity. Therefore cut off the nature of sexual desire, 
which means transform it. This certainly is not telling you to 
castrate yourself. That’s not the answer. Just change your 
thoughts and make them pure in nature. You don’t have to cut off 
sexual desire. Don’t cut it off, transform it instead. Transform 
lust into purity, which is simply proper knowledge and proper 
views. The lust within the nature is simply deviant knowledge 
and deviant views. 

“Once rid of lust, the substance of the nature is pure.” To get 
rid of lust means to transform it. You don’t have to throw it 
away, all you have to do is transform it. You don’t have to throw 

418 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

it away, all you have to do is change your thoughts and direct 
them to the pure nature. That is the clear, pure, substance of the 
self-nature, the Dharma-body. 

The five desires are for wealth, sex, fame, food, and sleep. 
They may also be explained as forms, sounds, smells, tastes, 
tangible objects, and objects of the mind. In general, stay far 
away from them; do not have deviant thoughts within your self- 
nature. Cultivate proper knowledge and proper views, and 
abandon the five desires. Once you leave the five desires, you 
can see the nature in an instant and obtain your own true- 
suchness wonderful nature. 

Sutra: 

If in this life you encounter 

the door of the Sudden Teaching 
You will be suddenly enlightened to your self- 

nature, 

and see the Honored of the World. 

If you wish to cultivate 
and aspire to Buddhahood, 
You won’t know where the truth 
is to be sought 
Unless you can see the truth 
within your own mind, 
This truth which is the cause 
of realizing Buddhahood. 
Not to see your self-nature 

but to seek the Buddha outside: 

If you think that way, you are 

419 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

deluded indeed. 
I now leave behind 

the Dharma-door of the Sudden Teaching 
To liberate worldly people 

who must cultivate themselves. 

Tannounce to you 

and to future students of the Way: 
If you do not hold these views 

you will only waste your time. 

Commentary: 

Having encountered the Sudden Teaching of the Dhyana 
School, you may become instantly enlightened and understand 
your original mind and see your original nature. At that moment 
you will personally meet the World Honored Ones, the Buddhas 
of the ten directions; you can see them all. 

Unless you apply effort in the self-nature instead of looking 
outside, you will never find the genuine Buddha. Understand 
your mind and see your nature: that is the way to realize 
Buddhahood. 

If you do not turn the light around and seek within yourself, 
but run outside instead to look for the Buddha, you are being 
stupid, stupid, extremely stupid. 

You must cultivate the Dharma of Sudden Enlightenment on 
your own. Do not fail to cultivate. If you do not hold the notions 
expressed in this verse, you are wasting your time. You’ll never 
obtain the smallest advantage. 

420 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Sutra: 

Having spoken the verse the Master continued, “All of 
you should take care. After my extinction, do not act with 
worldly emotion. If you weep in sorrow, receive 
condolences, or wear mourning clothes, you are not my 
disciples, for that is contrary to the proper Dharma. 
Simply recognize your own original mind and see your 
own original nature which is neither moving nor still, 
neither produced nor extinguished, neither coming nor 
going, neither right nor wrong, neither dwelling nor 
departing.” 

Commentary: 

The Master said, “Unlike common, vulgar, worldly folk, do 
not make an emotional display of your feelings. Don’t behave 
like that. Don’t weep tears like rain to irrigate the fields. My 
disciples have to obey me! If you do such things, not only are 
you not my disciples, but you are also contradicting the 
Buddhadharma. 

“Do not strike up false thinking. Don’t fail to put it down. 
Don’t fail to break through it. You must see through it, smash it, 
and put it all down. Then you can be free.” 

“If we are not supposed to mourn, then what should we do?” 
the disciples wondered. 

“Recognize your original mind. What is it like? It doesn’t 
move and it isn’t still. It doesn’t come or go. It’s not right or 
wrong, good or bad, black or white, long or short. It doesn’t stay 
and it doesn’t leave. It’s neither here nor there. Work to see the 
self-nature; understand your mind. Then you will not have 
wasted your time.” 

421 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

Sutra: 

“Because I am afraid that your confused minds will 
misunderstand my intention, I will instruct you again so 
that you may see your nature. After my extinction, 
continue to cultivate accordingly, as if I were still present. 
Should you disregard my teaching, then even if I were to 
remain in the world, you would obtain no benefit.” 

He further spoke this verse: 

Firm, firm: Do not cultivate the good. 
High, high: Do not do evil. 

Sill, still: Cut off sight and sound. 
Vast, vast: The mind unattached. 

Commentary: 

“Firm, firm’ means not moving: “thus, thus unmoving,” 
clear, clear, and constantly bright. “Do not cultivate the good,” 
does not mean that you should not cultivate good. It just means 
that you should not be attached when you cultivate the good. 
Don’t be like that greedy-minded ghost Emperor Wu of Liang 
who thought, “Look at all my merit!” 

“High, high,” means happy and cheerful, independent and 
content from morning to night. Do not do evil does not mean that 
you can think, “I am not attached to doing evil, so it’s no 
problem.” Attached or not attached, you should not do evil. 
What is evil? Killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct. 

Of the ten-thousand evils 
Licentiousness is the worst. 

Do not walk down 
This road of death. 

422 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

Do not walk this road. Do not do evil. 

“Still, still: Cut off sight and sound.” This state is peaceful, 
comfortable, and happy. Still, still, quiet, quiet, you cut off sight 
and sound by not producing deviant thoughts at the gates of the 
six sense organs. It is all right to have proper thoughts, but cut 
off the deviant ones. Cut off deviant sights and sounds. For 
example, if people are speaking improperly, don’t listen. 

“Vast, vast: The mind unattached.” This mind’s capacity 
extends throughout the universe and fills up heaven and earth. It 
is high, great, broad, vast, limitless, and unbounded, and it is not 
attached anywhere. 

Sutra: 

After speaking this verse, the Master sat upright until 
the third watch, when suddenly he said to his disciples, “I 
am going!” In an instant he changed, and a rare 
fragrance filled the room. A white rainbow linked with 
the earth, and the trees in the wood turned white. The 
birds and the beasts cried out in sorrow. 

Commentary: 

The Master sat meditating with his disciples until the middle 
of the night, at twelve o’clock, when he said, “The time has come 
to go. See you all again!” His energy was cut off and he no 
longer moved. He had entered Nirvana. “He changed” means 
that he moved to a new house. Who moved? The flesh-body 
Bodhisattva! 

The forest turned white because the white rainbow light 
shone on it. You could also say that the trees knew the Master 
was dead and so they expressed their grief by wearing the white 
clothes of mourning. 

423 

The 

Sixth Patriarch’s Dnarma Jewel Platform Sutra 

All the animals on the mountain cried uncontrollably. Grass 

and trees seem to be without feelings, but they put on mourning 
clothes; birds and beasts ordinarily don’t understand very much, 
but they showed forth a spiritual nature and wept. 

Sutra: 

424 

In the eleventh month, a dispute arose among the 
officials, disciples, Sangha, and laity of the three 
countries of Kuang Chou, Shao Chou, and Hsin Chou as 
to who should receive the true body. 

As they could not agree, they lit incense and prayed 
saying, “The Master will be returned to the place 
indicated by the incense smoke.” 

The smoke went directly to Ts’ao Hsi and so, on the 
thirteenth day of the eleventh month, the reliquary and 
the transmitted robe and bowl were returned there. In 
the following year, on the twenty-fifth day of the seventh 
month, the body was removed from the reliquary and 
Disciple Fang Pien anointed it with incense paste. 
Remembering the prophecy that his head would be 
taken, the disciples wrapped sheets of iron and lacquered 
cloth around his neck for protection and then placed his 
body in the pagoda. Just then a white light appeared 
within the pagoda, shot up into the sky, and did not fade 
for three days. The Magistrate of Shao Chou reported 
this to the Emperor and received an imperial order to 
erect a stone tablet commemorating the Master’s conduct 
in the Way. 

The Master’s springs and autumns were seventy-six. 
The robe was transmitted to him when he was twenty- 
four and when he was thirty-nine his hair was cut. For 
thirty-seven years he spoke Dharma to benefit living 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

beings. Forty-three men inherited his Dharma, and an 
uncountable number awoke to the Way and overstepped 
the common lot. The robe of belief transmitted from 
Bodhidharma, the Mo Na robe and precious bowl 
conferred by Emperor Chung Tsung, as well as the 
lifelike image sculpted by Fang Pien and other articles of 
the Way, were entrusted to the attendant in charge of the 
stupa and were permanently retained at the Pao Lin 
Bodhimandala for the Bodhimanda’s protection. 

The Platfom Sutra has been transmitted to set forth 
the principles of our school, to glorify the Triple Jewel, 
and to benefit all living beings. 

Commentary: 

Those from Kuang Chou wanted to take the body to Fa Hsing 
Temple. “The Sixth Patriarch had his head shaved here. He 
should return here now to receive offerings.” 

The Hsin Chou people all said, “The Great Master is a native 
of Hsin Chou. He should return there!” and those of Shao Chou 
insisted that since the Patriarch had expounded his teaching there 
he should not be returned to that place. 

While the Patriarch was alive, they had never quarreled over 
him, for he had been most independent. But now the Master had 
completed the stillness and everyone felt as if they personally 
had the right to remove his body and make offerings to it. 

“Wasn’t the Sixth Patriarch originally from Hsin Chou? And 
didn’t the Master himself say, ‘Falling leaves return to the 
root?’” 

“But the Sixth Patriarch himself built Nan Hua Temple,” said 
those of Shao Chou. “He really should return there.” 

“The Patriarch left home in Kuang Chou. He let his hair fall 
there and his Dharma should all fall back to us!” 

425 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

The text says that “they could not agree,” and that indicates 
that the situation was extremely grave; it was a crisis. Everyone 
was trying to take the body away by force. They argued and 
argued until one intelligent person said, “Stop! While he was 
alive, we obeyed the Master’s instructions. Now that he has died, 
we should still listen to him. Let’s ask the Master to decide!” 

“But he’s already dead,” they said. “How can he tell us where 
he wants to go?” 

“The Master has great spiritual powers,” he said, “And he 
knows all of our thoughts. It must displease him to see us here 
fighting over the right to make offerings to his body. Let’s light 
some incense, and in whatever direction the smoke drifts, that is 
where the Master wants to go. Then no one can argue about it.” 

The smoke went straight to Nan Hua Temple and there was 
nothing that the people from Kuang Chou and Hsin Chou could 
say. 

The lectures are now complete and the Sutra has been 
explained. You have undergone much suffering, but I don’t 
know whether you realized it was suffering or not. If you felt it 
was suffering, you are just a common person, but if you did not 
feel that it was suffering, then you are just a rock or a piece of 
wood. Well, was it suffering? 

As to my explanation, I don’t know whether I explained well 
or badly, and I also don’t know if you listened well or badly. 
Good and bad-get rid of them both! Explaining is just explaining 
and listening is just listening. 

We have met because of a karmic affinity. We have heard the 
story of the Sixth Patriarch’s life and of his cultivation of the 
Way. You should not look for good or bad points, but look 
instead to see whether you believe. Advance down the right road 
and retreat from the wrong. 

426 

Chapter X. Final Instructions 

You should cultivate according to the Dharma. Memorize the 
last verse of this Sutra and recite it often, for if you reflect on its 
meaning you will certainly realize Buddhahood. And don’t 
discriminate as to whether I explained the Sutra well or not. Just 
look to see whether or not you cultivate. If you cultivate, what is 
bad is good, but if you do not cultivate, what is good is bad. 

Now I am going to ask you a question. The Sixth Patriarch 
was an illiterate, and illiterates cannot have much knowledge. 
How could someone who couldn’t even read speak a Sutra? 
What does this mean? 

[Student: “I think the Sutra shows that you don’t need a lot 
of scholarly learning in order to become enlightened. The 
Sudden Teaching is just the mind, realizing the mind, and we 
should do it.] 

Who else has a view? This is a democracy. Speak up! 

[Student: “In the Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma explanation, 
where could a word arise?”’] 

[Student: “The principles contained in the Sutra are so clear 
and out in front, that, every time I try to say something about 
them, I get tied up in dualism and feel hopelessly 
overwhelmed.” | 

Does anyone else have an opinion? 

[Student: “Master, when the Sixth Patriarch was about to 
enter Nirvana, he said, ‘See you later.’ Where is he now?’’] 

He comes right from where you are speaking! 

Now, why was it that the Master never learned to read? 
During the time of the Sixth Patriarch, schools were not 
available to all, and to attend, you had to have money. The Sixth 
Patriarch’s family was extremely poor, because his father was an 
honest official who never took bribes. As a boy, even getting 
food to eat was a problem for the Master, so of course he 
couldn’t go to school. It was a question of environment, then. He 

427 

The Sixth Patriarch’s Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra 

never learned to read because his family was poor and because 
schools were not available. 

But there is yet another reason. Why did the Sixth Patriarch 
choose to appear in a poor family? He did it to show us that even 
illiterates can realize Buddhahood and become Patriarchs. Thus 
he raised the hopes of those who could not read. 

Seeing the Sixth Patriarch, everyone thought, “He never 
went to school but he cultivated and obtained the fruit of the 
Way. We can do it too!” It is not the case that if you can’t read, 
you can’t cultivate. If you think, “Only educated people can 
cultivate,” you are holding a prejudice. The Sixth Patriarch 
appeared to cause us all to lay down such prejudices. As I see it, 
these are three reasons why the Sixth Patriarch never learned to 
read. There’s one more thing you should recognize clearly about 
the Sixth Patriarch. He was not lazy. He always practiced the 
Buddhadharma. He became enlightened and after his 
enlightenment he spoke the Platform Sutra. Being able to read is 
just worldly knowledge. The Sixth Patriarch understood his 
mind, saw his nature, and opened up to his inherent wisdom. 
Because this Sutra was spoken from the bright light of this 
wisdom, its value is incomparable. It is the same as Sutras 
spoken by the Buddha, so do not take him lightly just because he 
couldn’t read. 

The Sutra is now complete, and, after teaching it, I make that 
statement to all of you. 

428 

General Index 

A 

Adorned Eon 406 
affliction 85, 98, 124-129, 135-136, 
155, 160-161, 167, 179, 191, 193, 
195, 230-233, 271, 374-375, 396 
and Bodhi 10, 24, 127, 382 
hand analogy 127 
pain 20 
age, Chinese/Western comparison 33 
alayavijnana, see eighth consciousness 
alms 45 
America, myths about 234 
analogy 90, 123, 185-186, 192 
lamp and light 205 
sun and moon 243, 382 
White Ox Card 278 
anger 98, 389 
Dharma Master Shen Kuang 12, 14, 20 
Patriarch Hui K’o 21, 23 
annihilation 305—306, 361 
see sixty-two wrong views 
Aranya 46 
def. 47 
Arhat 77, 169, 288 
def. 77 
five rebellious acts, killing of 112 
merit 61 
arrogance 176, 192, 228, 239, 269 
repentance of 229 
assassinatation 402 
assassination 
attempt by Hsing Ch’ang 354 
attempts on Layman Lu 78 

attachment 77, 88, 120, 130, 138, 150, 
186, 192, 205—207, 213, 215, 218, 
226, 239, 303, 344 
Chih Ch’eng 342 
Emperor Wu 180 
grasping and rejecting 120 
Hsing Ch’ang 360 
non-attachment 17, 39, 80, 130, 136 
obstruction 175 
to Bodhi 76 
to dharma 150, 207, 297, 352 
to mind 219 
to purity 218-219 
to rules 138 
to sense-objects 130 
to smells 237 
to stillness 400 
to words 384 

Avatamsaka Sutra 4, 240 
Dragon Palace 410 

B 

barbarian 58, 328 
Hsin Chou 294 
Hui Neng 60, 72, 74, 77-78, 102— 

103, 144, 355 

Patriarch Bodhidharma 11, 14 
southeners 59 

beheaded, Aryasimha 22 

bhikshu, def. 10 

birth and death 60-61, 72—73, 125, 
257, 302—304, 318-319, 341, 343, 
360, 392 

431 

General Index 

affliction 124 
Aryasimha 411 
attachments 88 
emotional love 86 
ending 11, 38, 167, 319, 374 
freedom of 13 
is Nirvana 24, 127 
Seng Ts’an 24 
Shen Kuang 11, 14-15 
the other shore 124 
transcending 45 
verse 127, 298, 391 
blessings 234 
and misfortune 212—213 
and wisdom 236, 239 
difference with merit and virtue 180 
field of 58-59, 331, 334, 377 
getting rid of offenses 256 
seeking 61, 174-175, 255 
verse 245, 253, 269 
bliss 361 
of Nirvana 303, 307-308 
production and extinction 300—302 
transcendental 303 
verse 299, 306 
Bodhi 9, 75-76, 79, 93-94, 126, 226 
and affliction 10, 24, 126-127 
and Prajna 116 
clear and pure 52 
hand analogy 127 
supreme 69, 71, 74 
tree 67, 72, 74, 112 
tree branch, Jnanabhaishajya 42 
verse 67, 70, 72, 75 
Bodhimanda 29, 46, 94, 170, 264, 395, 
425 
Jewelled Wood 47 
mind 207 
Pao Lin 48 
Bodhisattva 

432 

aid to Master Tao-hsin 95 
def. 5 
golden-armored vajra king 28 
Master Gunabhadra’s prediction 41 
Master Jnanabhaishajya’s prediction 42 
past lives 140 
Way 80, 92, 411 
Bodhisattva-shila Sutra 141, 220 
bondage 207 
with dharmas 206 
with thoughts 210 
bowing 269-270 
Brahma Net Sutra 3 
Brahman 
past life of Shakyamuni Buddha 299— 
301 
religion of India 408 
Buddha 
appearing in the world 273 
knowledge and vision 273-276, 279— 
280, 293 
Buddha nature 10, 58-59, 94, 137, 
214, 250, 294-295, 333, 358-360, 
367 
verse 247, 321, 362 
Buddha Speaks of Amitabha Sutra 3 
Buddha Way 129-131, 301 
Buddhadharma 166 
arises from difficulty 97, 101 
being straightforward 397 
China 1, 12 
Great Vehicle, Mahayana 11 
non-dualistic 111 
origin of 369 
original mind 90 
protecting 79 
study and practice 233 
understanding 158 
verse 157 
Buddha-mind 377, 414 

General Index 

certification 316 

C 

cause and effect 247, 287 
transformation of consciousness 287 
certification 34, 95 
false 208 
of Hsing Szu 311 
Ch’an meditation 221, 296 
Ch’an School 181, 199, 217—220, 286, 
314, 367 
misconception about 207, 218 
cheating 212-213 
Christian heaven 201 
compassion 93, 165, 191-192 
complete precepts 37, 39, 43, 358 
concentration 266—268, 325 
and wisdom 203—215 
refuge 222—223 
confusion 190—191, 220, 253-255, 
352, 375 
and attachment 275 
and emptiness 297 
and enlightenment 86—87, 232, 234— 
235 
and Prajna 123 
and recitation 278—279 
and the pure mind 185 
deviant 146-148, 416 
in beliefs 38 
verse 99, 148, 167, 277, 295, 345, 
415 
with marks 273 
Consciousness Only School 369 
criticism 163, 200 
is yin 246 
cultivation 36, 126, 162, 185, 205, 250, 
427—428 

and certification 314-315 
and money 236—237 
athome 197—201 

deviant 138—139 

mind and Buddha 267—268 
of blessings 174, 255—256 
of good 422 

of merit and virtue 177—180 
of no-mark 154—167, 384 

of non-movement 218—219 
of patience 392 

of Prajna 117, 126 

of self nature 190 

of true and false 390 

proper knowledge & views 419 
sudden and gradual 209—210 

D 

death 21, 24, 26, 249, 257, 303 
of Bodhidharma 19 
Defilement 193 
defilement 129-131, 135-136, 140, 
142, 189, 240, 315 
delusion 186, 218, 231, 245-246, 248 
demon 164, 413, 415 
and Buddha 416 
obstacles 36 
desire 126-127, 141-142, 159, 162, 
167, 240 
sexual, see sexual desire 
thoughts of 142 
deviant 
dharma 357 
enlightenment 235 
knowledge and views 138 
see confusion 
thoughts 147, 190, 193, 230, 423 
views 120, 135, 167, 212, 239, 
245-246, 276, 302—303, 360, 

433 

General Index 

415—416 
Dharma 
body 222, 301 
bondage 151 
def. 5, 9 
doors 160 
ending age 44, 164 
Host, def. 42 
nature 302 
non-dual 339, 377 
protectors 5, 104, 262, 332 
Seat 5 
three classes of 379 
transcendental 166—167 
transmission 17 
without words 83 
Dharma Eye Treasury 331 
Dharma Flower Sutra 272, 281 
Dharmagupta Vinaya 41 
Diamond Sutra 34, 54, 56, 85, 131— 
133, 138-139, 226, 332, 342, 373 
quote 33, 68-69, 84, 86, 150, 226, 
257, 271-272, 342 
discrimination 128, 187, 320 
concentration & wisdom 205 
of dharmas 307 
of right and wrong 28 
See sixty-two wrong views 
sixth consciousness 287 

E 

Earth Store Bodhisattva Sutra 
quote 233—234 
East Mountain Dharma Door 28 
Eight Deviations 183 
Eight Perverted Views 360-361 
Eighteen Realms 381 
listed 112 
Eight-Fold Path 183 

434 

Eighth consciousness 286—289, 381 
Eighty Thousand Fine Practices 318 
emotion and love 86—87 
evil 

and goodness 232 

F 

five consciousness 
transformation of 288—289 
five desires 182, 419 
five eyes 11 
and six spiritual powers 330, 333 
five heaps 129-130, 303-304, 307, 
347, 381 
production & extinction 302 
five organs 196 
five pairs of opposites (external insen- 
tient) 382 
five periods of Tien T’ai 8 
Five Profound Meanings of T’ien T’ai 7— 
8 
five rebellious acts 111-112 
five schools of Buddhism 181 
five (kinds of) terms not translated 115 
five-fold Dnarma-body refuge 221-224 
four assemblies 37 
four elements 301, 342, 348 
related to body 348 
four (divisions of) enlightenment 273— 
274 
Four Heavenly Kings 45 
Four Holy Truths 
see Four Noble Truths 
four marks 204—205 
listed 364 
Four Noble Truths 225 
four serious prohibitions 111-112 

General Index 

four unlimited thoughts 192 
four vehicles 297 
four virtues of Nirvana 303 
of Shravakas, Pratyeka Buddhas 361 
four (all-encompassing) vows 230—233 
four wisdoms 284—286, 290 
transforming the consciousness into 288 

G 

Ghost of Impermanence 14, 319 
Good Knowing Advisor 34, 142 
seeking one 145—148 
good knowing advisor 
imposters 34 
Gradual Teaching 159, 310 
Great Perfect Mirror Wisdom 287, 289, 
381 
Great Universal Buddha Flower Adorn- 
ment Sutra 
see Avatamsaka Sutra 
Great Vehicle 10, 133, 256, 298, 374 
and Supreme Vehicle 344 
difference with Small, Middle vehicles 
297 
doubting 134 
in China 11, 19 
Root Nature 18 
greed 
and hell 193-194 
and love 275—276 
see ten evils 
see three poisons 

H 

habits 27, 135, 150, 163, 190 
happiness 
and compassion 191 

and sexual desire 160 
of Nirvana 304 
hatred 
and hell 193-194 
see ten evils 
see three poisons 
head-mouth zen 91, 117, 121 
see intellectual zen 
hell 100 
and evil thoughts 248 
beings, see three evil paths 
greed, hatred 193-194 
humble mind 232—234 
humility 176 
and deceitful/false beings 231 
is merit 175 
hypocrisy 207 

I 

Icchantika 112, 137 
ignorance 86, 100, 122, 195 
and afflictions 124 
and attachment to marks 383 
and bad karma 228 
and birth & death 86 
and Buddhahood 85 
and offenses 196 
and sexual desire 159 
and the white yang realm 22 
see Twelve Conditioned Causes 
impermanence 358-361 
see permanence 
intellectual zen 208, 252, 283, 373 
intelligence 
Americans 55 
and consciousness 287 
and the Western Paradise 183 
and wisdom 243 

435 

General Index 

J 

Jataka tales 299-301 
jealousy 177, 229 

K 

karma 99 
and ignorance 228 
and offenses 100 
and the eight consciousness 287 
body and mind 142 
see three obstacles 
Karmadana 40—41 
knowing and seeing 293, 295-296 

L 

Lankavatara Sutra 65, 92, 284 
and Ch’an School 286 
leaving home, reasons for 37—39 
liberation 
and Dhyana concentration 373 
and no-thought 150-151 
and original mind 149 
and self-enlightenment 146 
and self-seeking 224 
and sexual desire 213 
of knowledge and vision 349-350 
life and death 304 
and non-attachment 136 
and Patriarchs 24 
freedom from 350 
living dead person 15 
Lotus Sutra 271 
and Bhikshuni Tsung Ch’ih 20 
and Fa Ta 270-271, 380 
and the poor son 82 
doubts 279-281 
love 

436 

and birth & death 86 

and Buddhahood 165 

and greed 275-276 

and hate 396 

of living 303 

see Twelve Conditioned Causes 
lust 418 

see sexual desire 

M 

Maha Prajna Paramita 115-118, 129 
Mahaparinirvana Sutra 3, 137 
and Bhikshu Chih Ch’e 358 
and Bhikshuni Wu Chin Tsang 261— 
262 
Mahayana 
see Great Vehicle 
mani 81 
Master Hua 
practicing austerities in Manchuria 237— 
238 
meditation 
and aching legs 10, 97, 174 
and Ch’an 217 
and Dhyana 157, 185 
and the wonderful observing wisdom 
288 
constraint to the body 341 
non-attachment to 373 
Middle Vehicle 298 
difference with Small, Great Vehicles 
297 
see Great Vehicle 
Middle Way 86, 91, 360, 383, 385, 389 
and extremes 152, 297 
and self nature 118 
Ming dynasty 
and Filial Son Wang 333 
Mo Na robe 377, 425 

General Index 

N 

Naga concentration 288 
National Master 
An of Sung Mountain 312—313 
Shen Hsiu 339 
nineteen pairs of opposites 382-383 
Nirvana 3, 86, 124-125, 127, 137 
as explained in The Diamond Sutra 226 
entering, Bodhidharma 20 
entering, Hung Jen 29, 101 
entering, Seng Ts’an 257 
entering, Tao Hsin 24, 27 
entering, the Buddha 272 
without residue 160-161 
Nirvana Sutra 111 
and Bhikshu Chih Tao 299 
see Mahaparinirvana Sutra 

O 

One Buddha Vehicle 
and Empress Wu Tse T’ien 372 
and the White Ox Cart 278-281 
One Important Matter 273 
One Vehicle 281, 298, 371 
see One Buddha Vehicle 
opposites 380, 382 
and the Middle Way 385 
see five pairs of opposites 
see nineteen pairs of opposites 
see thirty-six pairs of opposites 
see twelve opposites 
other people’s faults 164, 413 
outflows 
and concentration 204 
and the white yang realm 22 
see six spiritual powers 
see twelve opposites 

P 

Paramita 116, 124 
patience 199—200 
of unproduced Dharmas 392 
see Six Paramitas 
Patriarchate 
and Hui Neng 92, 96, 109 
and Shen Hsiu 64, 78, 338 
inheritance, Hung Jen 35 
Perfecting Wisdom 285, 288—289 
permanence 302, 308, 358—361 
see four virtues of Nirvana 
see impermanence 
see sixty-two wrong views 
persecution 
of Buddhism by Emperor Wu 24 
petty mind 198, 200—201 
poisoning 
of Bodhidharma 18—19 
politeness 176 
and the self-nature 245 
praise 
is yang 246 
Prajna 
see Maha Prajna Paramita 
see three kinds of Prajna 
wisdom 88, 121-122, 129, 134— 
135, 139, 160-161, 166, 232— 
233 
Precept Certifier 40 
precept spirits 41 
Precept Transmitter 39 
and Karmadana 40—41 
Chih Kuang, Hsi Ching 37 
precepts 3, 172 
against handling money 236 
against killing 232 
and concentration 204 
and dragons 289 

437 

General Index 

and the three poisons 199 

keeping them 222 

protecting 16 

see complete precepts 

see Precept Transmitter 
prediction 43, 212 

a division of Sutra text 139 

by Bodhidharma 394 

by Jnanabhaishajya 42, 48 

of Hui Neng’s head 402—403, 424 

transmission of Mahayana to China 9 
production and extinction 124—125, 

301, 304, 365, 377, 382 

and Chih Tao 299-304 

and other religions 376 

and Paramita 124 

and Shen Hui 364—365 

no thought, no mark and no dwelling 213 

verse by a ghost 300 

see nineteen pairs of opposites 

Q 

Questions of Manjushri, Sutra of the 4 

R 

rain 
and dragons 133 
and sages’ teeth 12 

rakshasa ghost 299-300 

Reward body 242, 251 

Right Dharma-eye Treasury 400—401, 
407 

Rock of Refuge 262, 265 

S 

Samadhi of One Conduct 395, 397 
Samadhi of One Mark 395, 397 

438 

Samadhi of Playfulness 349, 351 
Samghati robe 331 
and Sanakavasa 407 
Self-Nature’s True Buddha Verse 414 
Seven Buddhas of antiquity 406 
seven places Ananda looked for his 
mind 16 
seven precious things 90 
seven types of sutra titles 3-4 
Seventh consciousness 287 
sexual desire 126, 142, 159-160, 213, 
236, 239, 418 
and Ucchusma 418 
Shurangama Mantra 
and Hung Jen 29 
Shurangama Sutra 40 
and sexual desire 418 
and the seeing nature 326 
and Yajnadatta 252 
of true and false 235 
of Vinaya Masters 40 
see Shurangama Mantra 
Single Conduct Samadhi 206—207 
six consciousnesses 250 
see Eighteen Realms 
six desire heavens 195—196 
Six Paramitas 225 
six sense objects 250, 325, 381—382 
see Eighteen Realms 
six sense organs 250, 381, 423 
see Eighteen Realms 
six spiritual penetrations 
see six spiritual powers 
six spiritual powers 330, 333, 351 
six Sutra requirements 51—52 
Sixth consciousness 287—288 
sixty-two wrong views 306—307 
Small Vehicle 298 
difference with Middle, Great Vehicles 

General Index 

297 
Song of Certifying to the Way 320-321 
Southern School 338—339, 368 
Stop and Look, T’ien T’ai Contemplation 
316 
Store-enveloping Consciousness 381 
stupidity 
see ten evils 
see three poisons 
Sudden and Gradual 209, 337 
Sudden Dharma 160, 188 
Sudden Teaching 135—136, 145, 153, 
158-159, 167, 204, 210, 257, 267, 
310, 368, 390, 399, 420, 427 
and Wu Tse T’ien 372 
good roots 113 
shallow roots 134 
transmission of 91 
Ts’ao Hsi 367 
Sung Dynasty 41, 331 
Supreme Vehicle 42, 298 
and deviant views 302 
and the Sixth Patriarch 338, 344 
as explained by the Sixth Patriarch 297 
Sutra 6 
explaining correctly 7—8 
four additional meanings 6 
other meanings 7 
see seven types of sutra titles 

T 

Tang Dynasty recording 85—86 
Taoism 408 
Tathagata Store 214, 415 
Teaching of Sudden Enlightenment 91 
Teaching Transmitter 41 

and Shen Hsiu 62, 64 

Tung Ying 40 

ten Dharma Realms 249 
ten directions 16 
ten disciples of the Sixth Patriarch 379 
ten evils 183 
ten good practices 194 
thirty-six pairs of opposites 379, 382 
three bodies 284 
three carts 279, 281 
three classes of Dnarma-doors 379, 381 
three disasters 307-308 
three divisions of the Tripitaka 41 
three evil paths 4, 69 
and the Western Paradise 185 
three evils 253, 255 
three karmas 227 
three obstructions (obstacles) 161 
three periods of time 6 
three poisons 130, 194 
and precepts 199 
and the demon king 414—416 
three (kinds of) Prajna 115 
three realms 38—39 
Three Refuges 5 
three thousand awesome deportments 
318 
Triple Jewel 165 
Offerings to 171, 173, 180 
protecting & supporting 170 
taking refuge with 238, 241-242 
Triple Refuge 236—237 
Triple World 40, 239, 282 
True-False Motion-Stillness Verse 390 
Ts’ao Hsi 
Dharma Assembly 309-310 
Tung Shan Dharma-door 112—113 
Twelve Conditioned Causes 225, 396 
Twelve Divisions of Sutras 139-140 
twelve entrances 381 

439 

General Index 

twelve opposites regarding marks of 
dharmas 382 

two boundaries 305, 307 

two vehicles 305—306, 374 

Vv 

Vimalakirti Sutra 206, 214, 220, 316— 
317, 374 
Vinaya Master 40 

WwW 

White Ox Cart 277—280 
wisdom of equal nature 285, 289 
see seventh consciousness 
Wonderful Dharma Lotus Flower Sutra 
4, 8 
Wonderful Observing Wisdom 287—288, 
320 
see sixth consciousness 
Worthy Eon 406—407 

440 

People & Places Index 

A 

Amitabha 187 
Buddha 181, 182, 190, 192, 193 
Sutra 183 

An of Sung Mtn., National Master 312 

Ananda 16, 154, 407 

Aryasimha, Patriarch 22, 410, 411 

Ashvaghosha, Mahasattva 408, 409 

Avalokiteshvara, Bodhisattva 130, 190, 
191, 227, 351 

Awesome-Voiced King Buddha 316, 
317 

B 

Basiasita 410 

Bear's Ear Mountain 15, 17 

Bodhidharma xviii, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 
65, 94, 95, 154, 169, 171, 172, 
173, 180, 231, 247, 257, 286, 315, 
318, 331, 332, 333, 393, 394, 399, 
410, 425 

Bodhiruci 18, 21, 24, 231, 247 

Buddhamitra 407, 408 

Buddhanandi 407 

Buddhist Lecture Hall 56, 188, 189, 
196, 310, 350 

C 

Chan Ching Man 403 

Chang Jih Yung, official 73 

Chen Chiao 320 
see also Wu Hsiang 

Chen Kuan, reign period 25, 31 

Chi Chou 309, 352 

Chiang Hsi 354 

Chih Hsien 29, 339 

Chih Huang 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 
327 

Chih Kuang 37, 39 

Chih Tao 299, 301, 302, 306, 379, 380 

Chih Te 29 

Chin Chou, province 312 

Chin Ta Pei 403 

Ching Lo 367 

Ching Nan 337, 338 

Chi Hsi 32 

Chung Tsung, Emperor 371, 372, 425 

D 

Dhrtaka 407 
Double Peak, Mtn. 27, 28 

E 

Eastern Crystal Azure World 352 

F 

Fa Chen 379, 380 
Fa Hai 1, 31, 50, 266, 267, 270, 289, 
379, 380, 386, 387, 393, 412, 413 

441 

People & Places Index 

Fa Hsing Monastery 425 
Fa Hsing Monatery 109 
Fa Hsing, Monastery 110 
Fa Ju 29, 102, 339, 379, 380 
Fa Ta 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 277, 
278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 379, 380 
Fan Yang, district 53 
Fang Pien 330, 331, 332, 333, 424, 425 
Flying Cat Chang 355, 380 
see also Hsing Ch’ang 
Fo To 10, 11, 24 
see also Yeh She 

G 

Gayashata 408, 410 
Gunabhadra 41 

H 

Haklena 410 

Heng Mtn. 315 

Ho Che 367, 368 

Ho Shuo 322, 327 

Hopei 326, 327 

Hou Ching Chung, Magistrate 48 

Hsi Ching (Ch’ang An) 37, 39 

Hsi Shu 331 

Hsiang Yang 363 

Hsieh Chien 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 
376, 377 

Hsien Tsung Chi 367, 368 

Hsin Chou 53, 57, 59, 292, 294, 386, 
400, 424, 425, 426 

Hsing Szu 309, 310, 311 
see also Hung Chi 

Hst Yun, verse 82 

Hstian Chiao 316, 317, 318, 319, 320 

442 

Huai Jang 312, 313, 314, 315 

Huai, district 95, 96, 262 

Huang Mei 28, 33, 34, 35, 44, 55, 56, 
57, 59, 106, 110, 111, 154, 261, 
264, 270, 328, 336, 353, 355 

Huang Mei, honorific 106, 107 

Hui Neng 5, 29, 30, 31, 32, 52, 53, 54, 
56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 72, 73, 74, 75, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 87, 89, 92, 
95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 103, 104, 105, 
106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 
182, 188, 230, 335, 338, 341, 355, 
368, 371, 372, 410 

Hui Tsang 29 

Hung Chi 309, 311 
see also Hsing Szu 

Hung Chou 269, 271, 292, 403 

Hung Jen 28, 29, 30, 55, 65, 262, 323, 
328, 371, 410 

I 

| Fang 29 

J 

Jambudvipa 133, 233 
Jayata 410 
Jnanabhaishajya 42, 43, 46, 47, 48 

K 

K'e Ta Ha Na Lu 28 

Kanadeva 408 

Kanakamuni Buddha 406 

Kao Kuei Te Wang Bodhisattva 111, 112 
Kapimala 408 

Kashyapa Buddha 406 

People & Places Index 

Krakucchanda Buddha 406, 407 

Kuang Chou 109, 110, 221, 299, 424, 
425, 426 

Kuang Hsiao Monastery 42, 110 

Kuang Ling Mtn. 332, 333 

Kuang T'ung 18, 21 

Kuang Tung 102 

Kumarata 410 

Kuo En Temple 377, 386, 411 

L 

Land of Ultimate Bliss 129, 181, 182 
Lao An 29, 339 

Lao Tzu 408 

Ling Nan 53, 57, 58, 168 

Liu Chih Liao 261, 262, 264 

Liu Chu Pu 29 

Liu Tien 403 

Loyang 15 

Lu Ling 372 

Lu Mtn. 10, 11 

M 

Ma Tsu Tao | 315, 404 
Mahakashyapa 42, 154, 331, 407, 408 
Mahasthamaprapta 190, 192 
Maitreya 179 

Malaya Mtn. 65 

Manorhita 410 

Mencius 223, 388 

Meng Mtn. 106, 107 

Mi To 40, 41 

Miccaka 407 

Mount Sumeru 119, 190, 192, 194 

N 

Nagarjuna 408, 410 

Nan Ching 11, 172 

Nan Hai 46, 53, 299 

Nan Hsiung 102 

Nan Hua Temple 5, 9, 31, 43, 45, 47, 
171, 221, 262, 264, 265, 298, 313, 
314, 318, 321, 324, 330, 356, 377, 
403, 425, 426 

Never-Slighting Bodhisattva 413 

O 

One Enlightened Overnight 320, 321 

P 

Pang Yun 404 

P'ei Hsiu 404 

P’ing Mao Mtn. 28, 97, 102 

Pai Chang 404 

Pai Feng Mtn. 292 

Pao Lin 43, 44, 47, 48, 51 
as place requirement 52 
Bodhimanda 46, 48 
Bodhimandala 425 
Mountain 52, 221 
Temple 262, 337 

Parshva 407, 408, 409 

Prajnatara 312, 315, 410 

Punyamitra 410 

Punyayashas 408, 409 

Pure Land 186, 187, 206, 395, 397 
see Land of Ultimate Bliss 

R 

Rahulata 408 

443 

People & Places Index 

Range of the Heavenly Kings 45 

S 

Sadaparibhuta Bodhisattva 177 

Sanakavasa 407 

Sanghanandi 408, 410 

Seng Ts'an 23, 24, 25, 137, 257, 350, 
410 

Shakra 299, 301 

Shakyamuni Buddha 5, 8, 17, 43, 183, 
192, 207, 210, 255, 303, 406, 408 
day of leaving home 39 
decay of robe 408 
former incarnation 177, 299, 301 
fourth Buddha 407 
prediction by 9 
robe and bowl 92 
rules 40 
spiritual powers 65 
transformation body 249 
transmission of mind seal 42, 154, 407 

Shao Chou 48, 51, 52, 261, 262, 266, 
284, 331, 377, 424, 425 

Shao Kuan 221, 262 

Shariputra 206, 207, 280 

Shen Hsiu 29, 35, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 
67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 78, 80, 84, 
95, 96, 109, 144, 251, 264, 337, 
338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 
345, 346, 347, 349, 354, 355, 356, 
364, 368, 369, 371, 372 

Shen Kuang 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20 

Shikhin Buddha 406 

Shravasti 182 

Shuang Feng Mtn. 59 

Song of Household Affairs 32 

Southern Neng and Northern Hsiu 337 

Ssu Ma Chiien 26 

444 

Ssu Ma, Emperor 26 
Sumeru Mtn. 

see Mount Sumeru 
Sung Mtn. 312, 314 
Sung Yun 19 

T 

Tung Ying 40, 44, 264 

Ta Chien 
Great Mirror 311 
Temple 52 

Ta T'ung 292, 293 

Ta YU Mtn. 101, 102, 264 

Tao Hsin 24, 25, 26, 27, 410 

Tao Sheng 137 

Three Kingdoms Period 48 

Ting Fu Pao 39, 40, 50 

Ts'ao Hou 47, 48, 261, 262 

Ts'ao Shu Liang 261 

Ts'ung Ling 19 

Ts’ao Hsi 43, 44, 46, 108, 201, 281 
Four Heavenly Kings 45 
Jnanabhaishajya drinking water 47 

Ts’ao Ts’ao, General 48 

Tsung Ch'ih 20 

Tung Ch'an Monastery 55, 59 

U 

Ucchusma 418 
Upagupta 407 

Vv 

Vasubandhu 410 
Vasumitra 407 
Vimalakirti 206, 207, 377 
Vipashyin Buddha 406 

People & Places Index 

Vishvabhu Buddha 406 Yuan Kung 10 
Yung Chia 217, 235, 247, 316, 317 
Ww 

Wang Hsiao Tzu 332 

Wei Ch't 51, 52 

Wei Hsien 331 

Wei T'ou Bodhisattva 20, 238 

Wen Chou 316 

Wen Yun 31, 267 
see also Fa Hai 

Western Paradise 183, 184, 185, 188, 
189, 190, 196, 197, 201, 352 
see also Land of Ultimate Bliss 

Wo Lun 335, 336 

Wu Chin Tsang 261, 262, 263, 264, 359 

Wu Hsiang 320 
see also Chen Chiao 

Wu of Liang, Emperor 169, 171, 172, 
173, 174, 180, 223, 255, 422 

Wu of the Northern Chou, Emperor 24, 
25, 26, 29, 48 

Wu of Wei, marquis 261 

Wu Tse T'ien 95, 372 

Wu Tse Tien 371 

Y 

Yajnadatta 252 

Yama, King 14, 17, 257 

Yang K'an 403 

Yeh She 10, 11, 24 
see also Fo T’o 

Yin Tsung 36, 37, 39, 43, 109, 110, 
111, 112 

Yu Ch’tian Temple 340, 363 

Yuan District 106 

Yuan | 27 

445