THE CREST JEWEL 
OF WISDOM. 

| Pacific School of Bine E 

A | 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 

https://archive.org/details/crestjewelofwisd0000shan 

+ 
Р - - 
z 
EE 
Р = 
Е 
x i 
y 
ж. > 
Pari 
№ Т 
= К <i > 
‘ 
y 
= i 

AQROOK LIBR; 
© Ry 

и PACIFIC SCHOOL 

OF RELIGION 

BR =. „тик = ы” 
CREST | ЕЕЕ ct WISDOM: ı 
Er Bonner 7 ES © „ы -. 

om 

* = тшй TH 
E د ایا‎ ONE 

` THE 
CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

(VIVEKACHUDAMANI) 
ATTRIBUTED TO 

SHANKARA ACHARYA 

TRANSLATED BY 

CHARLES JOHNSTON 

0022070 
PA К 1 
>” 99908 Seel 
ab 
Ре) 
PACIFIC ЖЛ 

Г.Р RELIG 
ma ту" гл 
ТНЕ 

QUARTERLY BOOK DEPARTMENT. > 
NEW YORK 

77792 MES 
SAD SNL 
EJA 

Copyright, 1925, by 
The Quarterly Book Department 

Published under the 
Auspices of 

THE 
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 

Founded at New York 
in 1875 by 
H. P. Blavatsky 
W.Q. Judge 

and others 

HEADQUARTERS, New YORK 

Its official organ is the 
THEOSOPHICAL QUARTERLY 
Price $1.00 per year 
Subscription Department 
P. O. Box 64, Station О 
New York, М.Ү. 

ЕТ” молит 

‘Sine 

= 
и IFA re bint. = 
5- ұза = 4 Е ed езгі ай 
Бе 0} ed H 
A ¥ Е == Р estat. Or wT 
к Ч ыы = (Habu bos 
| | MOV WH аталар" 2 
2 де А К | дЕ : 
A 
= Die Er re от 

еч, нә 7% ыы Ч a 
Queda іы. ЭР М m 
aa ee 
$ Adán УЯ 

N ©, 

. 
> 

ТНЕ 

CREST JEWEL ОЕ WISDOM 

INTRODUCTION 

Literally rendered, the title is The Crest Jewel 
of Discernment. Viveka is the winnowing of 
wheat from chaff, the discerning of spiritual 
reality, veiled by the mirage of the world’s ap- 
pearances. 

It is attributed to Shankara Acharya, greatest 
of Indian teachers after the Buddha, one who, like 
the Buddha, saw and knew the universe face to 
face, teaching the same essential wisdom, so that 
it was said of him, by his enemies, that he was a 
Buddha in disguise. For centuries The Crest 
Jewel has been accepted by the disciples and fol- 
lowers of Shankara as containing the authentic 
message of that great Master of wisdom. 

What was the Indian Master’s purpose in de- 
livering that message? It is clearly stated: The 
Crest Jewel is written for those who seek libera- 
tion. 

Liberation from what? Liberation from the 
tyranny of self; from the bondage of evil and 
darkness imposed by the tyranny of self; from 
the miserable apprehensions of self-concern, 
which blot out the beauty of life, the mystery of 
the divine fragments amid whom our life is cast, 
temporarily separated fragments of the universal 
Soul; from the storm-clouds of self-centred sin, 
which hide the awful holiness of the Spirit. 

111 

iv INTRODUCTION 

For those whose hearts burn with longing for 
liberation, the Indian Master delivers his mes- 
sage. 

Those who would profit by it must have gained | 
a certain measure of wisdom and power. They | 
must first, through the very stress and storm of | 
life, have fought their way to the conviction that 
spiritual reality alone is everlasting; that all else | 
is fugitive as a dream, passing like the shadow of | 
a cloud. It is not enough to have gained the 
tragic certainty that all things in this life are 
doomed to change, that meetings end in partings, 
that our earthly life is a house built on sand; | 
despairing pessimism does not fulfil the need of 
this first qualification. It is a part, but only 
the lesser, negative part. ‚There must be, be- 
sides, a splendid optimism, positive, affirmative; Я 
the conviction that there is a spiritual reality be- 
hind the veil of unenduring things; a conviction, 
deep i in the heart, fir mly held against all the evi- 
dence of appearances; a conviction for which the 
seeker will die, if need be, and die rejoicing, for 
he knows that this supreme reality can suffer no 
detriment. 

This firm assurance of spiritual reality is more 
than an intellectual tenet. It must be rooted 
in the heart and will, It must grow through de- 
votion. It must bear the fruit of right living.! 
This is the second qualification. The evidence 

INTRODUCTION У 

of its presence is genuine unselfishness, a positive 
turning away, a revulsion from self-seeking, 
whether it be the gross appetite for material suc- 

cess and flattered vanity, or the finer, more in-- 

sidious desire for like rewards in the unseen 
world after death. It is not the quality of the 
| reward, but the seeking for any reward for one- 
self, that is to be rejected and burned up. Who 
that hates self and its tyranny will wish to re- 
ward the self? 

From this rejection of self and all its works, 
six graces come. These six graces, taken to- 
gether, form the third qualification. The first is 
peace: peace from the misery of longing, from 
the sickly obsession of fear for one’s own for- 
tunes, from the gnawing of a vanity that, since 
it demands universal homage in a world of com- 
peting vanities, can never be satisfied; peace 
from the fever of desire, from the revulsion of 
satiety that shadows desire. 

In the peace of a heart which has cast out 
self, arises the ability to rule and use aright all 
the powers of our richly endowed human nature, 
powers so grossly distorted by the tyrant self 
and his evil exactions. Under the dominating 
tyrant, as under every corrupt and evil ruler, 
each power has become a petty tyrant, so that 
we have made a sin for every sense. When the 
tyrant is overthrown and cast out, there comes, 

KOS ) 

vi INTRODUCTION 

in the ensuing peace, the possibility of restoring 
order in the domain; of bringing each power 
back to service and obedience. 

The mystical silence will ensue, a silence of the | 
inner nature, when the discords of desire, the | 
bragging of vanity, the recriminations of self- 
love are stilled; a silence of the outer nature also, 
a ceasing from all flatteries and cowardly con- 
cessions, from the servile offices we have tend- 
ered to the powers of the world in payment of its 
sufferance and largess; a ceasing from idle cere- | 
monies that have been prompted only by the 
mean hope of winning reward for self in the un- 
seen world. 

The heart into which peace has entered, with 
the right ruling of all its powers in quietude and 
stillness, will thereby gather strength, courage, 
endurance; resting on the firm foundation of | 
ИРИНА ТӨ | reality, it will know itself capable of all | 
suffering, able to bear, without flinching, every 
pain, because, in rejecting self, it has cast out 
that which is cowed and subjected by pain. 
Where there is no self-love, there can be no fear 
of hell, neither any desire for selfish reward in 
heaven. When the tyrant is dethroned, there 
will be no more tribute for the tyrant. 

In the heart thus still, and full of courage and 
endurance, faith will burn, no longer a timid 
spark trembling near extinction, but a steady 

----- 

| 

INTRODUCTION vil 

flame, a beam of that everlasting light that 
shines beyond the heavens; a firm faith that 
there is divine wisdom, godlike compassion, that 

there are divine teachers, perfect_in courage and 
ешеси courage апа 

love, ready to impart that wisdom to all who, 

can receive and possess it. 

Шатше4 by this faith, all the powers will be 
brought together and directed to a single aim, in 
the true concentration, the steady, unrelaxing 
determination toward. spiritual..reality; the in- 
flexible effort to seek, and find, and obey, and 
love the Masters ar Ere от, whose near- 
ness the heart feels, though they are yet hidden 
from the sight. 

That one-pointed bending of the whole nature 
toward the divine Light-bringers grows and 
ripens into the fourth qualification: the steadily 
increasing fire of aspiration, which seeks nothing 
else, will be content with nothing else, counting 

ت ا مره 

this world well lost if only it may attain, and 

enter, and lose itself in that diyine world. What 
is required is this fiery determination of the whole 
being, the uncon uerable will to find, and love, 
and serve the іуіпе JOWers, as the one thing 
worth considering in the whole universe; the 
ne thing that gives meaning and value to the 
universe. 

Though from the beginning the footsteps of 
the aspirant have been guided by the Master 

vill INTRODUCTION 

who, in the divine order, stands above him in the 

spiritual world, yet it is also true that the dis- 

ciple must win the qualifications by his own ef- 

forts. The conviction of the supreme reality 

and worth of spiritual life must be his own on) 

viction. He must have learned to stand, self- 
cont 

rast sed his heart from the dross 
of self-seeking and self-indulgence. 

The disciple’s Е effort to 
do this, with his attainment of a certain measure 
of success, bring about changes in the texture } 
and quality of his inner "nature, in virtue of | 
which the power of spiritual attraction draws 
him closer to his Master. 

The task of the disciple is then to become one 
with his his Master in heart and d thought an and will, 
one ine ort and ‘and as a aspiration one in self- -forgetful- 
ness and service ot ‘the Eternal. The disciple 

` must enter step by step, through an inner blend- 
in ` 1 5, into the wisdom and power 
and, love of his te This he can do only by 
working t е works of his Master, | in ч things 
surrende a СПУ Saying in his heart and 
by his т his will, not mine, be done. 

Under the РЧ the > Master, through 

inner union with the Master’s consciousness and 
will, the disciple then sets himself to study and 

learn his own nature, human nature in its many 

= 

\ INTRODUCTION ix 
J 

A 

forms, the laws of life and Ri the world in which 
he dwells. 

First, he must study and understand his own 
complex nature; not only what he has been and 
is, but what he is destined to be, when he realizes 
his divinity. 

In The Crest Jewel, two parallel teachings are 
set forth regarding man’s nature, taken from 
two of the great Upanishads. 

There is, first, from the Mandukya Upanishad, 
the division of the four bodies: first, the physical 
body, with the consciousness and powers of the 
common run of humanity; second, the subtile 
body, destined to manifest the consciousness and 
powers of the disciple; third, the causal body, 
with the consciousness and powers of the adept; 
fourth, the divine being of the luminous Spirit, 
the Buddha, when the adept has become one with 
the Eternal. 

In The Crest Jewel, the natural body is spoken 
of at some length, with the illusions and fascina- 
tions which may ensnare the disciple through 
that body, and which must first be overcome and 
understood. 

There is even fuller consideration of the subtile 
body, profoundly important because it is ‚ the 
field of the disci Је? le’s battle. 

Tn the Ше history of the subtile body, there 
are two main stages. In the first, it is beset by 

——- 

x INTRODUCTION 

illusions and distorted by desires, which centre 
about the notions of “1” and “my”; the self- 
centred psychical ı nature, which is == вэс - of 
sin and error. 

As the sins and distortions of the lower psychic 
nature are conquered by the disciple’s ardent 
and ceaseless effort to conform his will and con- 
sciousness to the will and consciousness of his 
Master, at first dimly and obscurely appre- 
hended, but growing steadily clearer and more 
defined as the disciple continues to strive and to 
obey, the subtile body is gradually conformed 
and transformed; the being that has been deaf 
and blind, beset by illusions, begins to hear with 
spiritual ear ears, to see with ‚ spiritual eyes, to Tecog 
nize the Master close at hand, to strive towar 
the Master with ever growing love. A higher | 
Self becomes luminous, having a vesture of the | 
substance of meditation. The disciple has won | 
companionship with his Master. 

Of the causal body, the body of the adept, of 
its consciousness and powers, not much is said. 
The essence of them all is a greater power to 

‚ serve; deeper wisdom to discern, larger might to 

toil for the consummation of divine Humanity. 

‚ Other teachings attributed to Shankara tell us 
| that this vesture is the cause and underlying sub- 
| stance of the subtile and. physical bodies; it is 

that which persists through the cycle of births 

INTRODUCTION xi 

and deaths; that which sends forth the two outer 
bodies into rebirth, guiding them in the gather- 
ing of experience; that into which, at death, the 
harvested and winnowed experience is drawn, to 
be stored up as lasting treasure; in sum, the 
power which, illumined by the Spirit, guards and 
guides, through life and death and recurring life, 
the age-long cycle of spiritual becoming. 

These are the stepping stones, the stages of 
advance toward the Spirit, which is one with the 
universal Spirit, and at the same time individual, 
the splendid being of the glorified Master. This 
is the consummation, this the goa). 

There follows the parallel classification ol the 
five vestures, drawn from the Taittiriya Upani- 
shad. It will offer no difficulty, if we remember 
that the first two, the vesture formed of food and 
the vesture formed of vital breath, together 
make up the physical body; the vesture formed 
of mind, both feeling and thought, is the < subtile 
body. before its transformation, while the vesture 
formed of intelligence is the subtile body in the 
higher stage, cleansed and illumined by the 
inner light, standing in the presence of the Mas- 
| ter. The vesture formed of bliss is the causal 
body, the body which carries the power and 
consciousness of the adept. Above the five ves- 
tures, as above the three bodies, is the supernal 

Spirit, the supreme Self; of the Eternal, co- 

{ 

! 
4 

| 

xii INTRODUCTION 

eternal beam; individual, yet one with Divin- 
ity. 

In the consideration of this second description 
of our complex nature, the largest space is given, 
as before, to that part of the disciple’s being in 
which his immediate battle is waged, the vesture 
formed of mind, whose transmutation into the 
vesture formed of intelligence is the task before 
him. 

For mind is the cause of his bondage, and in 
turn of his liberation; when darkened by the 
powers of passion, it is the cause of bondage, 
and the cause of liberation when pure of passion 
and darkness. 

Or, to put it in other words, the lower mind, in- 
flamed by desire and drugged by sloth, is the 
cause of bondage to sin and sorrow; the higher 
mind, illumined by the Spirit, is the bridge to 
liberation. 

" The transformation of the mind, its liberation 

from the bondage of sloth an passion, its pro- | 

gressive illumination by the light of the Spirit, 
is the work immediately before the disciple, and 
is, therefore, the central theme of The Crest 
Jewel. 

The Master, in wise and eloquent words, with 
practical illustrations drawn from our common 
experience, reveals to the disciple all the secrets 
of the complex, separated self, and further re- 

ААЭ. 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

veals to him the steps by which he may rise to 
the Self which is without separateness. 

i The Master, in fact, leads the disciple up to, 

| and through, the first initiation which opens to 
him the arduous road to adeptship. There- 
after the disciple sees, and must faithfully fol- 
low, the small, old path stretching far away, 
the path the seers tread toward the goal of 
Divinity. 

І ol cc mili. 
ғ AMAS om G Мәлім 

СИТТ {р EÊ u 7 1 

> - ОР аяр үт) А ТҰТ! 
З майт ji 2 м мә 

- = р cn = АЎ М) 471: randy у nore 

<=" тоша Wi Н a һе бе ӨЙ í 
8 OE 
= ә 
5 А $ 
| dem ғ. 
Б = 
254 = h + чегін ы - $ 
а= o . + ly im? 
wi ara Aha 
~ dul liu ntl TLS 
“ 5 = 
{ ; хе Maia чаи 
| ы Ж Т We ‘ 52 MÈ ti 
| ісе) pre u 
p Ж и" уре Te plo ala 
a 22) айы) ИШ аЙ 
ا‎ 

THE 
Crest JEWEL ОЕ WISDOM 

INVOCATION 

To Him I make obeisance, who is the end of 
all wisdom, the goal of all attainment, the unseen 
Lord of the flock, the supreme bliss, the good 
Master. 

For living beings, human birth is hard to gain, 
then manhood, then holiness; harder is perfec- 
tion in the path of the law of wisdom; hardest to 
gain is illumination. Discernment between the 
Divine Self and that which is not the Self, fully 
realized union with the Eternal Self, liberation— 
this is not to be attained without holiness per- 
fected through a hundred myriad lives. 

These three things, hard to gain, come only 
through divine grace: manhood, desire for libera- 
tion, access to Masters. 

Gaining at length human life, hard to win, and 
manhood, and an understanding of the revealed 
teachings, he who strives not for liberation in the 
Divine Self, deluded in heart, self-destroying, 
slays himself through grasping at the unreal. 

1 

۰ 

2 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Who, then, is the very self of folly but he who, 
deluded, follows selfish purposes, after he has 
gained a human body and manhood hard to 
win? (5) 

Even though they recite “ie scriptures, and 
sacrifice to the gods, and fulfil all works, and- 
worship the divinities—without awakening to 
the unity of the Divine Self, liberation is not 
attained even in a hundred exons. i 

For the scripture says that there is no hope of 
immortality through riches, therefore it is clear 
that ritual works are not the cause of liberation. 

Therefore let the wise man strive hard for 
liberation, renouncing the lure of happiness in 
external things. Let him draw near to a Master, 
good and great, fixing his whole soul on the En 
pose of the Master’s teaching. 

Let him through the Divine Self raise up that 
self of his which is sunk in the ocean of recurring 
life and death, firmly ractising u uplifting through 
union, with Не: с... vision of the Опе. = 

eeking freedom from bondage to the world 
through renunciation in all works, let the wise 
strive who have learned the teaching, pressing 
toward the Divine Self. (10) 

Works make for the cleansing of the heart, 
but not for the attaining of the Real; the gaining 
of the Real comes through discernment—not 
even by myriads of works is it gained. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 3 

Through discernment of the Real it is per- 
ceived that the imagined serpent is only a 

‚торе; and thus the painful fear of the great 
serpent, conjured up by illusion, is finally de- 
stroyed: 

The certain knowledge of the goal comes only 
"through discernment awakened by right teach- 
ing, not through ablutions or gifts or a myriad 
retentions of the breath. 

The gaining of the fruit is the reward only of 
him who possesses the qualifications; circum- 
stances, such as place and time, merely co- 
operate in the result. 

Therefore, let him who would know the Real 
practise discernment, finding a Master who is a 
river of compassion, an excellent knower of the 
Eternal. (15) 

He who is full .of intelligence, illuminated, 
skilled in knowledge and wisdom, is fitted to 
teach the wisdom of the Divine Self; he wears 
the immemorial hallmark. 

And he is fitted to seek the Eternal, who has 
discernment, freedom from self-indulgence, 
quietude and the other virtues, and who ardently 
desires liberation. 

Here four qualifications are enumerated by 
those possessing wisdom. Where they are 
present, there is a firm foothold in the Real: 

where they are absent, there is failure. 

s 

& 

¢ 

4 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

THE FOUR QUALIFICATIONS 

First is counted Discernment between the 
Eternal and the non-eternal. This is followed 
by freedom from self-indulgence in the fruits of 
works. Then come the six virtues beginning 
with quietude. Then the ardent desire for 
liberation. 

The Divine Eternal is real, the world is illu- 
sion: a complete certainty of this is declared to 
be Discernment between the Eternal and the 
non-eternal. (20) 

senses; 
A'surrender of the allurement of all non-eternal 
things from the body up to the Formative Power, 
continually made through a realization of the 
faultiness of all objective things. 
Quietude is the holding of mind and heart 
steadily on the goal. Control is the mastering 

` of the powers of perception and action, stopping 

each in its runaway course. 

The excellent Cessation is the condition of 
refusing to lean on external things. 

Endurance is the bearing of all pains without 
rebelling against them, unconcerned and un- 
lamenting. (25) 

Faith is the firm conviction of the truth of the 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 5 

teaching and the word of the Master. Through 
this faith the righteous say that the Real is won. 

Concentration is the continual staying of the 
soul in the pure Eternal at all times, and not the 
caressing of imaginations. 

The ardent Desire for Liberation is the will to 
be rid of all the fetters forged by unwisdom, 
beginning with self-reference and ending with 
the body, through discernment of the real nature 
of the Divine Self. 
~ Where this is present even in a weak or mod- 
erate degree, increasing through ceasing from 
self-indulgence, through quietude and the other 
virtues, and through the grace of the Master, it 
will bear fruit. 

In him who has conquered self-indulgence, in 
whom the desire for liberation is full of fire, 
quietude and the other virtues are fruitful and 
attain the goal. (30) 

Where self-indulgence is unconquered, and the 
desire for liberation is weak, quietude and the 
other virtues are an illusion, like the mirage in 
the desert. 

Among all means of liberation, devotion, 
verily, is the most potent. The fixing of the 
heart on the true being of the Divine Self is 
declared to be devotion. 

Others say that devotion is the fixing of the 
heart on one’s own real Self. He who has 

N 

о ОЛІ JEWEL ЧР WIDDUIM 

attained to the qualifications already described 
is fitted to discern the real being of the Self. 

SEEKING THE MASTER 

Let him draw near to a Teacher who has 
attained to wisdom, from whom liberation from 
bondage may be learned, one who knows the 
holy teaching, who is perfect in purity, who is 
not moved by desire, who is wise in the wisdom 
of the Eternal; 

Who has entered into rest in the Eternal, who 
has won the great peace, like the flame when the 
fuel is consumed, who is an ocean of compassion 
that seeks no return, the friend of all who appeal 
for help. (35) 

Drawing near to the Teacher in reverent devo- 
tion, with the loving service of one who seeks the 
Eternal, and thus winning his good will, let him 
ask what he seeks to know concerning the true Self: 

Master, obeisance to thee, friend of the world 
bowed down, ocean of compassion, save me, 
sunk in the sea of life, bending on me thy stead- 
fast glance, which rains down righteousness and 
compassion; 

For I am burned by the flaming fire of pas- 
sional life, hard to quench, I am driven to and 
fro by the storms of contrary fate, I am full of 
fear. I come to thee for refuge; save me from 
death, for I know no other safety! 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 7 

4 The mighty ones who have attained to peace 
dwell in righteousness, bringing life to the world 
like the coming of spring; they, who have them- 
selves crossed the dread sea of passional life, aid 
others to cross it through compassion that seeks 
no return. 

It is the essence of the very being of those of 
mighty soul to seek to heal the sorrows of others, 
as the nectar-rayed moon of itself cools the earth, 
scorched by the fierce fire of the sun. (40) 

Pour out upon me thy words of immortal life, 
which bring the happiness of the sacred teaching, 
as they issue from the vessel of thy voice, clear, 
restoring, purifying, inspired by thine own 
experience of the essence of the joy of the Eter- 
nal; Master, I am consumed by the fiery flames, 
the scorching heat of this passional life! Happy 
are they on whom thine eyes rest even for а 
moment; they are thereby made acceptable and 
become thine own. 

How may I cross this ocean of passional life? 
What pathway is there for me, what way of 
safety? I know none. In thy compassion 
guard me, Master! Save me from the pain and 
destruction of this life set about with death! — 

THE MASTER'S RESPONSE 

The mighty soul, his eyes wet with tears of 
compassion, looking on the disciple speaking 

8 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

thus, who has appealed to him for help, who is 
burned by the flaming heat of the fires of this 
life beset by death, straightway sets him free 
from fear; 

Full of wisdom, in his compassion he begins to 
_ instruct in the truth the disciple who has come 
to him in reverent service, seeking liberation, 
who has rightly mastered the qualifications, 
whose heart has gained stillness, who has attained 
to quietude: 

Fear not, wise one! Thou art not in danger; 
there is a way to cross the ocean of this life beset 
by death, whereby the saints have gained the other 
shore. That way I shall reveal to thee. (45) 

There is a way of power, which destroys the 
terror of this life beset by death; by it crossing 
the wide sea of this world, thou shalt attain to 
the supreme joy; 

Through right understanding of the essence 
of “the” teaching of wisdom, the most excellent 
illumination is brought to me through which 
comes the destruction of the illimitable pain of 
life set about with death. 

The voice of the sacred teaching clearly de- 
clares that the means of liberation for him who 

| 
seeks liberation are faith, devoted. love, medita- 
tion, „union. He who 10 stands” firm in these, to 
him comes liberation from the bondage to the 

‚ body which is forged by unwisdom. 

CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 9 

This life beset by death comes from bondage 
to that which is not thy true Self, because thou 
knowest not thy oneness with the Supreme Self. 
The flame of illumination kindled by right dis- 
cernment between the false and the true Self will 
burn up the works of unwisdom, root and branch. 

THE DISCIPLE SPEAKS 

Master, hear in thy compassion! This ques 
tion I ask; hearing the answer from my Master’s 
lips, I shall gain my end: (50) 

What indeed is bondage? How does it come 
about? What is its support? How is one set 
free? What is that which is not the true Self? 
What is discernment between the false and the 
true? Let this be declared. 

THE MASTER ANSWERS 

Happy art thou who hast attained thy goal; 
through thee thy family is blessed, because 
through liberation from unwisdom thou seekest 
to become one with the Eternal. 

Sons and kindred may free a father from his 
debts; but other than а man’s self, попе can 
free him from bondage. 
` The pain caused by a burden weighing on the 
head may be relieved by others; but suffering 
from hunger and thirst can be removed by none, 
unless the man himself eat and drink. 

10 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

When the sick man rightly uses medicine, he is 
restored to health, but not through the right 
actions of another. (55) 

The true being of the Real must be seen by 
one’s own eyes illumined by clear wisdom; it is 
not enough that thy Teacher should see. The 
true form of the moon must be known through 
one’s own eyes; how can it be understood through 
the eyes of others? 

How could another than oneself untie the cords 
that bind through unwisdom, through desire and 
the fruit of works, even in a thousand million 
ages? 

Not by Yoga nor by Sankhya, not by works 
nor by knowledge, but only through awaking 
to the oneness of one’s true Self with the Eternal, 
does liberation come, and in no other way. 

The form and beauty of the lute and skill in 
making its strings to sound may bring delight 
to the multitude; they cannot establish the power 
of a monarch. 

° ` Well uttered speech, a waterfall of words and 
skill in setting forth the sacred texts and learning 
are for the delectation of the learned, but do not 
bring liberation. (60) 

When the supreme reality is not known, the 
reading of the scriptures is fruitless. Even 
when the supreme reality is known by the mind 
only, the reading of the scriptures is fruitless. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 11 

А network of words is like a mighty. forest, 
causing the mind to go astray; therefore the 
reality of the divine Self should be sought 
earnestly from one who knows the real. 

Unless he be healed by knowledge of the 
_Eternal, what profit is there for him who has 
been bitten by the snake of unwisdom, whether 
through the Vedas and the scriptures, or through 
charms and herbs? 

Sickness does not depart by speaking of 
medicine unless the medicine be drunk; libera- 
tion comes not through speaking of the Eternal 
without immediate experience of the Eternal. 

Without dissolving in thought the visible 
world, without knowing the reality of the divine 
Self, what liberation can men gain from outward 
words, whose fruit is mere sound? (65) 

Merely by declaring, “I am king,” without 

destroying the enemy, and without gaining the 
wealth of the kingdom, none can become 
king. 
¿Through right directions, through digging and 
removing the stones and earth above it, the 
buried treasure is brought forth, not by uttering 
the word, “Forth!” So through the teaching 
of one who knows the Eternal, through careful 
thought and meditation, is to be gained the pure 
truth of the divine Self, concealed by the working; 
of glamour, and not through subtle reasoning. 

S 

12 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Therefore wise men must earnestly strive 
themselves to win liberation from the bondage 
of the world beset by “death, as they would 
themselves use remedies for sickness. 

The excellent question which thou hast asked 
to-day, in accord with the sacred teachings, of 
deep import like a Sutra, should be asked by 
those who seek liberation. 

Give good heed, wise one, to what is declared 
by me; through hearing it, thou shalt in truth be 

_ freed from the bondage of the world of death. 

THE MEANS OF LIBERATION 

9 

The first cause of liberation is declared to be 
| complete detachment from all things that аге 
кт of the Eternal; then quietude, eontrol, en- 

durance; then the renouncing altogether of all 
works done through persona desire. (71) 

Then study of the scriptures, ‘thinking out their 
meaning, with prolonged, continuous medita- 
tion on the Real by the disciple; then gaining 
liberation from the bondage of wrong thinking, 
the wise man even here attains to the happiness 
of Nirvana. 

The discerning between the real Self and that 
which is not Self, which is now to be understood 
by thee, I shall straightway declare; hearing, 
understand it within thyself, 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 13 
he 
THE PHYSICAL BODY 

By the wise, that is called the gross body, 
which is made up of these substances called 
marrow, bone, fat, flesh, blood, skin, epidermis; 
consisting of trunk, chest, arms, feet, back, head, 
limbs and the divisions of limbs; $ с. 
It is known аз the seat of the delusion of “I” Я ß 
and “my.” Ether, air, fire, water and earth are sla 
the subtile elements. (75) % vu -$ 
When compounded with each other, they form 
the gross elements, which build up the gross 
body; they are the materials of objects perceived 9%, УГ 
Бу the five senses, as sound and the rest; their 
purpose is, to teach the soul through experience. 
They who, fascinated by these things of sense, 
are bound by the strong bonds of desire, hard to 
break, ascend and descend, carried downward, 
upward, forward by their own Karma as a head- 
long messenger. 
Each one fascinated through one of the five 
senses, by sound and the other powers, these 
five, deer, elephants, moths, fish, bees, go to 
their death and are dissolved in the five elements; 
how can man escape, who is fascinated by all 
five senses? 
Things of sense are more penetrating in the 
hurt they cause than the venom of the black 
serpent. The poison slays only him into whom 

14 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

it enters, but things of sense destroy through 
mere beholding. 

He only who is free from the great snare of 
sensuous desire, hard to escape from, builds for 
liberation, and not another, even though he 
know the six philosophies. (80) 

232 Those who falsely fancy themselves detached 
бү = қ Ж and seeking liberation, striving to reach the 

» əм „further shore of the ocean of passional life, seized 

бөз 411 “by the shark of their desire, sink in the midst of 
their journey, caught by the throat and swiftly 
carried downward. 

YU ws: Не who slays the shark called sensuous desire 
with the sharp sword of true detachment, gains 
the further shore of the ocean of passional life, 
carried forward without hindrance. 

Death is the end of him who sets forth un- 
timely on the rough way of sensuous life, with 
intelligence obscured; but he who goes forward 
guided by a loving, righteous Teacher, through 
union with his true Self gains his end and his 
reward. Know this to be the truth. 

Af thou hast the ardent desire for liberation, 
7 put sensuous desires away from thee like poison; 
| ceaselessly, reverently, love acceptance, com- 
passion, endurance, rectitude, quietude, control, 
as the essence of immortality. 

He who, neglecting the duty of each moment, 

the freeing of himself from the bondage caused 

CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 15 

by beginningless unwisdom, forgetting that the 
body exists for the soul, is wholly absorbed in 
feeding it, thereby slays his own soul. (85) 

He who wishes to find his true Self, yet is 
engrossed with the feeding of his body, seeks to 
cross the river grasping a crocodile with the 
thought that it is a log. 

Fascination by the body and its powers is the 
great death for him who is seeking liberation. 
He alone is worthy to seek the path of liberation, 
who is free from fascination. 

Slay fascination by the body, wife and chil- 
dren, that great death; conquering it, the saints 
go to that supreme home of the all-pervading 
deity. 

Formed of skin, flesh, blood, sinew, fat, mar- 
row, bone, full of waste and decay is this gross 
body, deserving condemnation. 

Built up of the elements mingled fivefold, 
through the Karma of previous lives, is this gross 
body, a house for the experience of the soul; its 
state is waking consciousness, perceiving gross 
objects of sense. (90) 

The personal life, finding delight in outward 
objects through the external senses, rejoicing in 
garlands, sandalwood and women, through the 
perceptive power of the Self, finds its activity in 
waking consciousness in the body. 

This gross body, through which the spirit of 

16 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

man engages in all outward life, know that it is 
but the house of the householder. 

The inherent tendencies of the gross body are 
birth, decay and death; its periods are the six 
ages beginning with childhood; its rules are 
differences of race and order of life, with their 
afflictions; it receives worship, dishonour and 
honour in all their forms. 

Its powers of perception are hearing, touch, 
sight, smell, taste, which make sensuous objects 
perceptible; voice, hands, feet, the powers that 
put forth and reproduce, are its powers of action, 
through which it engages in works. 

THE SUBTILE BODY 

Its interior powers are called mind (Manas), 
intelligence (Buddhi), the personal sense (Ahan- 
kara), and imagination (Chitta), with their 
activities. The function of mind is the gathering 
together and separating of impulses; the function 
of intelligence is to reach a judgment regarding 
what is perceived. (95) 

The function of the personal sense is the 
thought of “I” through the attribution of self- 
hood; the function of imagination is to hold the 
consciousness steady on its object. 

The vital breath consists of the forward breath, 
‘he downward breath, the distributive breath, 
the upward breath, the uniting breath; they are 

CREST JEWEL ОҒ WISDOM 17 

modified by funetion and form, as gold and water 
are modified. 

The subtile body, is said to be made up of these 
eight groups: voice and the other powers of 
action; hearing and the other powers of percep- 
tion; the forward breath and the other vital 
breaths; (еї and the other subtile elements; 
intelligence and the other interior powers; to- 
gether with unwisdom, desire and Karma. 

Hear concerning this body, which is called the 
subtile, and also the form body, and which is e 
composed of the five elements not commingled мча ny 
fivefold; it is the field of the experience of thee | 
fruit of Karma, through the imprints of ten- ` | 
dencies; it rests on the inherent sense of separate- 
ness; it is the vehicle of the real Self. 

Dream is its distinctive state, in which it 
grows through substance of its own building; 
when in this dream-consciousness it attains to 
the power to act, the intelligence, based on the 
manifold impressions made during the time of ». Б 
waking, shines forth. (100) (274 

For in this state a higher Self becomes lumin- ++ 07” 
ous, having a vesture of the substance of medita- a; 
tion; it is an independent witness, nor is it stained 
by the separate acts of the physical body. 

Because the subtile body possesses detach- 
ment, it is not stained by the acts of its vesture. 

This form body carries out all activities as the 

Gela 
Y Қ 

A 

18 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

instrument of the higher Self, the spiritual man; 
it is as the sharp tools in the hand of the car- 
penter. Therefore the Self is free from attach- 
ment. 

The characters of blindness, slowness or keen 
vision have their cause in the qualities or defects 
of the eye; so deafness and dumbness are char- 
acters of the ear or tongue, not of the Seer, the 
Self. 

Outbreathing, inbreathing, yawning, sneezing, 
the flow of saliva, circulation, are said by those 
who know, to be caused by the vital airs; hunger 

„ud thirst are caused by the life principle. 

The internal organ acts through the organs 
of sight and the other sense powers. Through 
the attribution of selfhood, the personal “I” is 
established and manifested (105) 

The personal “I” is to be known as the actor 
and as receiving experience; it is based on the 
attribution of selfhood; through union with the 
three potencies, goodness, passion, darkness, it 
experiences the three states of consciousness. 

When the objects of its experience flow with 
the current, the personality enjoys pleasure; 
when they go contrary to its wishes, it suffers 
pain. Pleasure and pain are characters of the 
personality, not of the true Self, which is being 
and bliss. 

For the object of experience is dearer because 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 19 

it serves the Self; it is not dear in itself. And 
the Self is of itself the dearest of all. 

Therefore the Self is being and bliss, nor has it 
any pain. That bliss of the Self which is 
experienced in dreamlessness, above objective 

life, is known in waking consciousness through 

revelation, through direct experience, through 
the experience of others, through logical reason- 
ing. 

THE POWER OF MAYA 

World Glamour, Maya, through which this 
whole world comes into being, is named the 
Unmanifest, the Power of the supreme Lord, 
beginningless Unwisdom, formed of the three 
potencies. The awakened understanding should 
grasp it by a study of its effects. (110) 

Maya is neither being nor non-being, пог in 
essence both; it is neither divided nor undivided, 
nor in essence both; it is neither with members 
nor without members, nor in essence both; it is 
most marvellous in its nature, and indefinable. 

The power of Maya is to be destroyed by 
awakening to the pure, undivided Eternal, as 
the illusion of the serpent by discerning the 
rope. Passion, Darkness, Goodness are known 
as its potencies; through their effects they are 
to be understood. 

Dispersion, which is the essence of action, is 

Yue 

20 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

the power of Passion; from this power springs 
the age- -old tendency to forward action; desire 

cause the moods of pain and sorrow in the mind. 

Lust, wrath, greed, fraud, cavilling, selfishness, 
envy, the lust of possession, are the terrible 
characters of Passion, from which this human 
activity springs; therefore Passion is the cause 
of bondage. 

Envelopment is the name of the power of 
Darkness, whereby a thing appears other than 
it ıs. This is the underlying cause of man’s 
cycle of birth and rebirth; it is the motive force 
of the activity of the power of Dispersion. (115) 

Though he be intelligent, learned, clever, keen 
in self-study, thoroughly well informed, a man 
cannot be wise if wrapped in this power of Dark- 
ness; what is raised up by illusion, he sees as 
real, he leans on qualities created by illusion. 
Alas for him; very overmastering is this power 
of Darkness, this mighty Envelopment. 

Failure to perceive real things, seeing things 
ıs the opposite of what they are, building up 
tancies, taking realities for fancies, these are 
modes of Dispersion; the power of Dispersion 
releases not him who is under the yoke of attach- 
ment; it sweeps him away continually. 

The qualities of Darkness are unwisdom, 
laziness, inertness, lethargy, folly, bondage to 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 21 

delusion; he who is under their yoke is wise in 
nothing; he is like a man asleep, like a log. 

Goodness, because of its purity, though 
mingled with these as water with water, yet builds 
for salvation; the ray of the true Self reflected in 
Goodness illumines the whole material world, 
like the sun. 

Where Goodness is mingled with the other 
potencies, these characters arise: self-respect, 
obedience to the commandments and the rules, 
faith, devotion, desire for liberation, godlike 
virtues, a complete turning from evil. (120) 

Of pure Goodness, the qualities are grace, 
experience of the true Self, supreme quietude of 
heart, acceptance, joy, a resting in the supreme 
Self, whereby is attained the essence of being 
and bliss. 

THE CAUSAL BODY 

Of the Unmanifest, which is defined by the 
three potencies, is formed the causal body of the 
Self; its free field of consciousness is dreamless- 
ness, in which the activity of the powers and the 
understanding are merged in one. | 

Dreamlessness is a form of consciousness in 
which every kind of mental perception is stilled, 
when the intelligence is withdrawn into the Self 
which is its source; where the Seer says: “I 
know nothing of the rumour of the world.” 

22: CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

The body, powers, vital airs, mind, personality, 
allforms, all objects, pleasure and pain, ether and 
the elements, the whole world up to and including 
the Unmanifest, all this is other than the Self. 

Maya and all the works of Maya, beginning 
with the Great One, Mahat, and ending with 
the body; know that all this is other than the 
Eternal, other. than the Self, like the mirage ın 
the desert. (125) 

THE SUPREME SELF 

I shall now declare to thee the true nature of 
the Supreme Self, knowing which, freed from 
bondage, a man gains final liberation. 

There is a certain eternal Self, on which the 
consciousness of selfhood rests; this is the wit- 
ness of the three fields of consciousness; this is 
other than the five vestures. 

This is he who perceives all things in waking, 
dreaming, dreamlessness; this is the true “I” 
which perceives the intelligence and its activities, 
whether they be good or evil. 

This is he who himself perceives all, whom 
none perceives; who illumines the intelligence 
and the other powers, whom none illumines. 

Who penetrates and upholds this universe, 
whom none penetrates nor upholds; from him 
this universe derives the light with which it is 
illumined. | (130) 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 23 

Through whose mere presence the body, 
powers, mind and intelligence turn each to their 
proper objects as though obeying its command. 

By whom, having as his essence eternal wis- 
dom, all the powers from the personality to the 
body, all objects, all pleasures and pains are 
seen as a jar is seen. 

This inner Self, the Spirit, the ancient, is the 
presence of primal, undivided joy; ever unchang- 
ing, consisting of pure wisdom, by whose com- 
mand voice and the life-breaths fulfil their 
parts. 

Here, verily, in the Self of Goodness, in the 
secret place of the soul, in the undivided firma- 
ment; rising like the dawn, this shines like the 
risen sun in the sky, by its radiance making this 
whole world shine. (134) 

Beholding all activities of the mind and per- 
sonal self, all motions of the body, the powers, 
the life-breaths, this neither strives nor changes, 
pervading them like the fire in the heated iron. 

This enters not into birth or death or growth, 
nor does he wane or change for ever; even when 
this frame falls into dissolution, the Self is not 
dissolved like the ether in the broken jar. 

Standing apart from the vicissitudes of the 
manifest world, in his own essence pure con- 
sciousness, illumining this infinite universe of 
things enduring and unenduring, himself un- 

24 CREST JEWEL OF. WISDOM 

changing, the supreme Self, in the fields of 
waking, dream and dreamlessness, shines as the 
true “Т,” as the immediate witness of the in- 
Е 
Do thou, with ое a mind, recognize this 
Self chin thyself, saying, “This is 1,” through 
the grace of understanding; éfoss the shoreless 
ocean of manifested life whose waves are birth 
and death, reaching thy goal, coming home to 
the being of the Eternal. ) 
} 
DARKNESS AND BONDAGE f 

\ The thought of “І” in what is not the Self 

brings the Spirit into bondage; this bondage, 
‘springing from unwisdom, brings on us birth and ` 
i death and weariness. He who identifies himself 
with his body, thinking the unenduring to be the 
real, and therefore feeds it, anoints it, guards it, 
is enmeshed in things of sense as the silkworm 
in the threads it spins. 

He who is deluded by Darkness sees reality in 
what is unreal; from lack of discernment arises 
the illusion of the serpent in the rope. He who 
is subject to this illusion suffers a multitude of 
sorrows; to take the unreal for the real is bon- 
dage. Friend, heed this. (140) 

The enveloping power of Darkness completely 
hides the Self with his infinite powers, which 
shine forth through the power of partless, eternal, 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 25 

undivided illumination, as the demon of eclipse 
conceals the sun’s rays. 

When the true Self of stainless radiance is 
concealed, the man, deluded, thinks of the body, 
which is not the Seif, as “I.” Then the far- 
reaching power of Passion, which is called Dis- 
persion, painfully binds him with the cords of 
lust and wrath. 

His perception of the true Self swallowed up 

by the voracious shark of great Delusion, he 

| 

entangles himself in manifold errors of under- 
standing through the cords of this power; in 
the shoreless ocean of birth and death, full of 
the poison of sensuous things, sinking or rising, 
he is carried about, confused, contemptible. 

As a cloud wreath, brought into being by the 
sun’s shining, spreads and conceals the sun, so 
the personal self, which comes into being through 
the Self, spreads and conceals the true Self. 

As on a foul day, when the lord of day is 
swallowed up by heavy clouds, fierce, chill blasts 
of wind afflict the clouds, so, when the true Self 
is enveloped in unbroken darkness, this keen 
power “of Dispersion visits the deluded man with 
many sorrows. (145) 

By these two powers, man’s bondage is brought 
about; deluded by them he goes astray, thinking 
the body is the Self. 

Of the tree of birth and death, Darkness is the 

26 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

root, the thought of the body as Self is the shoot, 
desire is the leaf, works are the sap, the life- 
breaths are the branches, the powers are the 
ends of the branches, sensuous things are the 
flowers, pain is the fruit, springing from mani- 
fold works; the separate self is the bird who eats 
the fruit. 
This bondage to that which is not Self, which | 

has its root in unwisdom, arising without a cause, 

beginningless, endless, brings upon the separate 
self a flood of sorrows, like birth and death, sick- | 

ness and decay. 

Not by weapons, nor scriptures, not by wind 
nor fire, can this bondage be loosed, nor by 
myriads of ritual acts, without the great sword 
of discerning know ledge, sharp and keén, through 

divine gr grace. an ы: (149) 
“Не who is п А of the truth of the sacred 

| teaching faithfully performs all duties; by this 

| comes self-purification ; when his intelligence is 

дала за) the vision of the supreme Self comes; 

THE FIVE VESTURES 

The Self, wrapped up in the five vestures, 
beginning with the vesture formed of food, 
which are brought into being by its own power, 
does not shine forth, as the water in the pond, 
covered by a veil of green scum. 

EA 

“HERG 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 27 

When the green scum is taken away, imme- 
diately the water shines forth pure, taking away 
thirst and heat, straightway becoming a source 
of great joy to man. 

When the five vestures have been stripped Ө, 
the Self shines forth риге, the опе essence of 
eternal bliss, beheld within, supreme, self- 
luminous. 

Discernment is to be made between the Self 
and what is not Self by the wise man seeking 
freedom from bondage; through this he enters 
into joy, knowing the Self which is being, con- 
sciousness, bliss. 

As the reed from the tiger grass, so separating 
from the congeries of things visible the hidden 
Self within, which is detached, not involved in 
actions, and dissolving all in the Self, he who 
stands thus, has attained liberation. (155) 

THE VESTURE FORMED OF FOOD 

The food-formed vesture is this body, which 
comes into being through food, which lives by 
food, which perishes without food. 

It is formed of cuticle, skin, flesh, blood, bone, 
water; this is not worthy to be the Self, eternally 
pure. 

The Self was before birth or death, and now is; 
how can it be born for the moment, fleeting 
unstable of nature, not unified, inert, beheld like 

28 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

ajar? For the Self is the witness of all changes 
of form. 

The body has hands and feet, not the Self; 
though bodiless, yet because it is the Life, 
because its power is indestructible, it is controller, 
not controlled. 

Since the Self is witness of the body, its 
character, its acts, its states, therefore the Self 
must be of other nature than the body. (160) 

A mass of wretchedness, clad in flesh, full of 
impurity and evil, how can this body be the 
knower? The Self is of other nature. 

Of this compound of skin, flesh, fat, bone and 
water, the man of deluded mind thinks, “ This 
is 1”; but he who is possessed of judgment knows 
that his true Self is of other character, in nature 
transcendental. 

The mind of the dullard thinks of the body, 
“This is Г’; he who is more learned thinks, 
“This is 1,” of the body and the separate self; 
but he who has attained discernment and is 
wise knows the true Self, saying, “1 am the 
Eternal.” 

Therefore, O thou of mind deluded, put away 
the thought that this body is the Self, this com- 
pound of skin, flesh, fat, bone and water; dis- 
cern the universal Self, the Eternal, changeless, 
and enjoy supreme peace. 

So long as the man of learning abandons not 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 29 

the thought, founded on delusion, that “This is 
1,” regarding the unenduring body and its pow- 
ers, so long there is no hope for his liberation, 
though he possess the knowledge of the Vedanta 
and its science. (165) 

As thou hast no thought that “This is the 
Self,” regarding the body’s shadow, or the 
reflected form, or the body seen in dream, or the 
shape imagined in the mind, so let not this 
thought exist regarding the living body. 

The thought that the body is the Self, in the 
minds of men who discern not the real, is the 
seed from which spring birth and death and 
sorrow; therefore slay thou this thought with 
strong effort, for when thou hast abandoned this 
thought the longing for rebirth will cease. 

THE VESTURE FORMED OF VITAL BREATH 

The breath-formed vesture is formed by the 
life-breath determined by the five powers of 
action; through its power the food-formed ves- 
ture, guided by the Self and sustained by food, 
moves in all bodily acts. 

Nor is this breath-formed vesture the Self, 
since it is formed of the vital airs, coming and 
going like the wind, moving within and without; 
since it can in no wise discern between right and 
wrong, between oneself and another, but is ever 
dependent. 

30 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

THE VESTURE FORMED OF MIND 

The mind-formed vesture is formed of the 
powers of perception and the mind; it is the 
cause of the distinction between the notions of 
“mine” and “I”; it is active in making a dis- 
tinction of names and numbers; as more potent, 
it pervades and dominates the former vesture. 

The fire of the mind-formed vesture, fed by 
the five powers of perception, as though by five 
sacrificial priests, with objects of sense lke 
streams of melted butter, blazing with the fuel 
of manifold sense-impressions, sets the person- 
ality aflame. (171) 

For there is no unwisdom except in the mind, ' 
for the mind is unwisdom, the cause of the 
bondage to life; when this is destroyed, all is 
destroyed; when this dominates, the world 
dominates. 

In dream, devoid of substance, it emanates 
a world of experiencer and things experienced, 
which is all mind; so in waking consciousness, 
there is no difference, it is all the domination of 
mind. 

During the time of dreamlessness, when mind 
has become latent, nothing at all of manifestation 
remains; therefore man’s circle of birth and death 
is built by mind, and has no permanent reality. 

By the wind a cloud is collected, by the wind 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 31 

it is driven away again; by mind bondage is 
built up, by mind is built also liberation. (175) 

Building up desire for the body and all objects, 
it binds the man thereby as an oxby a cord; after- 
wards leading him to turn from them like poison, 
thatsamemind, verily, sets him free from bondage. 

Therefore mind is the cause of man’s bondage, 
and in turn of his liberation; when darkened by 
the powers of passion it is the cause of bondage, 
and the cause of liberation when pure of passion 
and darkness. 

Where discernment and dispassion are dom- 
inant, gaining purity, the mind makes for libera- 
tion; therefore let the wise man who seeks libera- 
tion strengthen these two in himself as the first 
step. 

Mind is the name of the mighty tiger that 
hunts in the forest glades of sensuous things; 
let not the wise go thither, who seek liberation. 

Mind moulds all sensuous things through the 
earthly body and the subtile body of him who 
experiences; mind ceaselessly shapes the dif- 
ferences 6f body, of colour, of condition, of race, 
as fruits caused by the acts of the potencies. 

Mind, beclouding the detached, pure con- 
sciousness, binding it with the cords of the body, 
the powers, the life-breaths, as “1” and “my,” 
ceaselessly strays among the fruits of experience 
caused by its own activities. (181) 

М 

32 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Man’s circle of birth and death comes through 
the fault of attributing reality to the unreal, but 
this false attribution is built up by mind; this is 
the effective cause of birth and death and sorrow 
¿or him who has the faults of passion and dark- 
ness and is without discernment. 

Therefore the wise who know the truth have 
declared that mind is unwisdom, through which 
the whole world, verily, is swept about, as cloud 
belts by the wind. 

“Therefore purification of the mind should be 
undertaken with strong effort by him who seeks 
liberation; when the mind has been purified, 
liberation comes like fruit into his hand. 

Through the sole power of liberation uprooting 
desire for sensuous things, and ridding himself 
of all bondage to works, he who through faith 
in the Real stands firm in the teaching, shakes off 
the very essence of passion from the understand- 
ing. (185) 

The mind-formed vesture cannot be the higher 
Self, since it has beginning and end, waxing and 
waning; by causing sensuous things, it is the 
very essence of pain; that which is itself seen 
cannot be the Seer. 

THE VESTURE FORMED OF INTELLIGENCE 

The intelligence, together with the powers of 
intelligence, makes the intelligence-formed ves- 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 33 

ture, whose distinguishing character is actor- 
ship; it is the cause of man’s circle of birth and 
death. 

The power which is a reflected beam of pure 
Consciousness, called the understanding, is a 
mode of abstract Nature; it possesses wisdom 
and creative power; it thereby focuses the idea 
of “I” in the body and its powers. 

This “I,” beginningless in time, is the separate 
self, it is the initiator of all undertakings; this, 
impelled by previous imprints, works all works 

both holy and unholy, and forms their fruits. 

Passing through varying births it gains 
experience, now descending, now ascending; of 
this intelligence-formed vesture, waking, dream 
and dreamlessness are the fields where it ex- 
periences pleasure and pain. (190) 

By constantly attributing to itself the body, 
state, condition, duties and works, thinking, 
“These are mine,” this intelligence-formed 
vesture, brightly shining because it stands 
closest to the higher Self, becomes the vesture 
of the Self, and, thinking itself to be the Self, 
wanders in the circle of birth and death. 

This, formed of intelligence, is the light that 
shines in the vital breaths, in the heart; the 
Self who stands for ever wears this vesture as 
actor and experiencer. g 

The Self, assuming the limitation of the in- 

34 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

telligence, self-deluded by the error of the in- 
telligence, though it is the universal Self, yet 
views itself as separate from the Self; as the 
potter views the jars as separate from the clay. 
— Through the force of its union with the 
vesture, the higher Self takes on the character 
of the vesture and assumes its nature, as fire, 
which is without form, takes on the varying 
forms of the iron, even though the Self is for 
ever by nature uniform and supreme. 

THE DISCIPLE SPEAKS 

Whether by delusion or otherwise, the higher 
Self appears as the separate self; but, since the 
vesture is beginningless, there is no conceivable 
end of the beginningless. a (195) 

Therefore existence as the separate self must 
„be eternal, nor can the circle of birth and death 
‘have an end; how then can there be liberation? 
Master, tell me this. 

THE MASTER ANSWERS 

Well hast thou asked, O wise one! Therefore 
rightly hear! A false imagination created by 
error is not conclusive proof. 

Only through delusion can there be an asso- 
ciation with objects, of that which is without 
attachment, without action, without form; it is 
like the association of blueness with the sky. 

~ 

> 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 35 

The appearance as the separate self, of the 
Self, the Seer, who is without qualities, without 
form, essential wisdom and bliss, arises through 
the delusion of the understanding; it is not real; 
when the delusion passes, it exists no longer, 
having no substantial reality. 

Its existence, which is brought into being 
through false perception, because of delusion, 
lasts only so long as the error lasts; as the ser- 
pent in the rope endures only as long as the 
delusion; when the delusion ceases, there is no 
serpent. у (200) 

It is true that unwisdom and also its effects are 
beginningless; but, when wisdom arises, unwis- 
dom, even though beginningless, comes to an end. 

Like a dream on waking, utterly vanishing, 
root and all; even though beginningless, 16 is 
not everlasting, just as the previous non-existence 
of what comes into being, though beginningless, 
yet comes to an end. 

So that we see that previous non-existence, 
though without a beginning, yet has an end. 

It is the same with the appearance of the 
separate self, built up in the universal Self 
through the association of the understanding, 
and in nature contrary to it; this association is 
a false perception, caused by the understanding. 

It can only be ended through true wisdom, 
not by other means; and the Scriptures declare 

er 

30 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

that true wisdom is to know the oneness of the 

Eternal an and the Self. (205) 

lis is gained by true discernment between 

Self and what is not Self; therefore let there be 

iscernment between thie: true hidden Self and 
the manifested self. 

Just as even very muddy water shines as pure 
water when the mud clears away, so the Self 
shines forth bright, when darkness passes away. 

When the darkness of unreality ceases, the 
separate self clearly perceives the hidden Self; 
therefore the separate self must cast out utterly 
all egotism and delusion. 

Therefore this vesture formed of intelligence, 
since it is subject to change, and material, and 
circumscribed, is not the higher Self; since it is 
visible and transitory, this non-eternal cannot 
be the Eternal. 

THE VESTURE FORMED OF BLISS 

The vesture formed of bliss is a form lit up by 
a reflection of the eternal bliss, but not yet 
completely free from darkness; its nature is 
happiness and joy; in it, worthy desires receive 
their fruition. This vesture formed of bliss 
shines forth in the holy man reaping the reward 
of his good deeds, coming into being of itself, 
without effort, when he rejoices, wearing the 
garment of righteousness. (210) 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 87 

This vesture formed of bliss is fully revealed іп 
dreamlessness; it is partially revealed in dream- 
ing and waking, when the object of true desire 
is seen. 

Yet even this vesture formed of bliss is not 
the higher Self, because it is subject to limita- 
tion, a manifestation of objective Nature, an 
effect of righteous deeds, built up of the sum of 
good actions. 

When these five vestures are put aside, accord- 
ing to the Scriptures, the Witness, formed of 
illumination, remains after they are set aside. 

This is the Self, self-luminous, other than the 
five vestures; Witness in the three fields of 
consciousness, unchanging, unstained, to be 
known by the wise, through right self-identifica- 
tion, as eternal being, eternal bliss. 

THE DISCIPLE SPEAKS 

When these five vestures are set aside because 
they are non-eternal, I cannot see, О Master, 
that aught remains save universal non-being, 
or that anything remains to be known by him 
who would know the Self through right self- 
identification. (215) 

THE MASTER ANSWERS 

O wise one, thou speakest sooth! Thou art 
skilled in judgment! Egotism and the rest are 

| 

| 
38. CREST JEWEL ОЕ WISDOM RS 
mere changing forms; when they pass, this Self 
is left. 

He through whom all these are perceived, 
who himself is not perceived, him know as this 
Self, the Knower, through most subtile under- 
ine. 

Whatsoever is sche by anyone, is per- 

ceived by virtue of this Self as Witness; that 
which is unknown of any can not be called the 
Witness. 
This Being is his own Witness, since through 
himself he is perceived; therefore, he who is 
manifest through himself is the hidden Self, and 
no other. | 

This is he who is clearly manifest in waking, 
dreaming and dreamlessness, through his hidden 
nature ever shining as the real “I,” unchanging: 
it is he who beholds the personal self, the under- 
standing and all the powers with their manifold 
forms and changes; he shines, the Self, eternal 
bliss and consciousness; him know as Self, here 
in thy heart. (220) 

He who is deluded thinks that the sun’s image 
reflected in the water in a jar is the real sun; 
through a like delusion, the dullard believes that 
the reflection of consciousness contained in the 
vesture is “1.” 

When the jar and the water and the sun 
mirrored there are all put away, the true sun is 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 39 

perceived; in like manner the wise perceive the 
eternal Self reflected in the three fields of con- 
sciousness, the self-luminous. 

THE SELF IS THE ETERNAL 

Thus setting aside the body, the understand- 
ing, the reflected personal consciousness, and 
recognizing as his true Self the Seer hidden within 
the understanding, the partless Light which 
reveals all things, which is different from the 
existent and the non-existent; 

The eternal, the Lord, all-pervading, very 
subtile, which has neither within nor without, 
which stands alone; truly knowing that Self in 
his own being, a man is sinless, stainless, death- 
less. 

Sorrowless, become altogether bliss, the sage 
fears naught from any source. There is no path 
other than the knowledge of the true being of 
the Self, for him who seeks liberation, freedom 
кон the bondage of manifested Ше. (225) 

he knowledge that he is not separated from 
the Eternal is the cause of liberation, whereby 
the secondless bliss, the Eternal, is gained by 
those who are illumined. 

The wise man who is one with the Eternal 
returns not again to the circle of birth and 
death; therefore, let it be-truly understood that 
the Self is not separate from the Eternal. 

40 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

He wins the Real, the endless Wisdom, the 
pure Eternal, supreme, self-sustained, the one 
essence of everlasting bliss, at one with the hid- 
den Eternal, undivided. 

This is Being, the supreme, the весоп ез” 
since there is no reality apart from this; nor 
does aught else remain, when consciousness of 
the transcendental reality is gained. 

THE UNIVERSE IS THE ETERNAL 

For when all delusions of the understanding 
are cast away without remainder, then this 
whole universe, perceived as innumerable forms 
through unwisdom, becomes the Eternal only. 

The earthen jar, though it be moulded from 
earth, is not separate from the earth, since it is 
essentially earth. The form of the jar has no 
independent existence. What then is the jar? 
A name only, built up as an appearance. (231) 

The independent existence of the earthen jar 
cannot be perceived by anyone apart from the 
earth it is made of; therefore, the jar is built up, 
as an appearance; the earth, of which it essen- ` 
tially consists, is the reality, 

The manifested universe exists through the , 
Real, the Eternal, and is ever That alone, nor is 
there aught beside That; he who says that there 
is, is not free from delusion, he is like one talking 
in his sleep. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 41 

“The Eternal is this universe”: thus declares 
the word of the Scripture, the excellent Atharva 
Veda. Therefore, this universe is the Eternal 
only; nor has what is perceived any separate 
éxistence, apart from its source. 

If this transitory world be the Real, then 
there is no liberation through the Self, the holy 
Scriptures are without authority and the Lord 
speaks untruth; but those of great soul cannot 
admit these three things. (235) 

The Lord, who knows the reality of things, has 

declared: “Т am not contained in these things, | 

nor do beings dwell in Ме.” 

If this manifest universe were reality, it would 
be perceived in dreamlessness; but since nothing 
is then outwardly perceived, it is unreal, like the 
appearance “of a dream. 

‘Hence this world has no real existence apart 
from the higher Self; its separate existence is 
perceived through illusion, like the serpent and 
the rope. What reality is there in that which is 
conjured up? Only through error does the 
underlying Real thus appear. 

Whatever the deluded perceives in his delu- 
sion, is the Eternal only; the imagined silver is 
the pearl shell; in the same way forms are given 
to the Eternal, but whatever is imagined in the 
Eternal, is nothing but a name. 

Therefore, the Eternal is secondless Being, 

— 

42 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

consisting of pure illumination, stainless, full of | 
peace, beginningless, endless, changeless, formed | 
of everlasting bliss. (240) | 
When all the divisions caused by Glamour are 
cast aside, there shines forth somewhat eternal, 
‘steadfast, partless, immeasurable, unformed, 

\unmanifest, unnamed, everlasting, self-illumined. 

Those who are illumined know this as that in 
which knower, knowing and known are one, 
which is endless, above d'fferentiation, absolute, 
partless, pure consciousness, the highest Being. 

This supreme Self, the perfect Eternal, cannot 
be left nor taken; neither by mind nor speech 
can it be apprehended; it is immeasurable, be- 
ginningless, endless. 

SACRED TEXTS 

In the text of Seripture, “That thou art,” the 
Eternal and the Self are indicated by the words, 
“That” and “Thou”; when they are thus 
understood, the oneness of the Self and the 
Eternal is clearly seen. (244) 

The oneness of these two, thus defined and 
declared, is concealed by attributing to them 
contrary attributes, as in the case of the firefly 
and the sun, the king and the slave, the well 
and the ocean, the atom and Mount Meru. 

The seeming difference between the two is 
caused by the vestures which contain them, but 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 43 

these yestures are.themselyes unreal. Hear the 

truth: cosmie differences, beginning with the 
world of abstract forms, come into being through 
the Lord’s power of Glamour, Maya; the five 
vestures come into being through the separate 
self; 

When these vestures, which enwrap the Lord 
and the separate self are cast aside, there re- 
mains neither Lord nor separate self. The king 
has his kingdom, the vassal his village; when 
these are taken away, there is neither vassal 
nor king. 

The Scripture: “There is the teaching, ‘Not 
thus! not thus!’”’ of itself contradicts the duality 
imagined in the Eternal; through illumination 
in accordance with the teaching of Scripture, 
the distinction between the two is to be rejected. 

“Tt is not this, not this; since it is built up by 
imagination, it is unreal, like the rope seen as a 
serpent, like a dream”; thus repeatedly rejecting 
completely this visible world, the oneness of the 
Self and the Eternal will be realized. 

The two are to be defined according to their 
essential nature, in order that their undivided 
oneness of essence may be shown. Not by the 
derived meaning alone, nor by the literal mean- 
ing alone, but through the essence common to 
both, understanding will be gained. (250) 

By saying, “This man is Devadatta,” the 

44 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

identity is established by rejecting contrary’ 
attributes; in just the same way, in the Scrip-- 
tural teaching, “That thou art,” contrary | 
attributes are to be set aside. 

By recognizing that pure consciousness is the} 
essential character both of the Eternal and of! 
the Self, their unity of being is perceived by those? 
who are illumined. Thus in a hundred holy; 
texts is set forth the oneness of the Eternal and| 
the Self, their undivided being. | 

Following out the Scripture, “This Imperish- - 
able is neither gross nor fine, neither short пог: 
long,” in itself indefinable as the ether, set aside: 
false conclusions, and abandon thy preconcep-- 
tions, since all that is outwardly perceived is: 
mirage only; affirming ‘‘the Eternal am Т,” with 
purified intelligence, know thine own Self as part= 
less Light. 

THAT THOU ART 

Just as every jar and vessel made of earth is: 
held to be earth only, so all this, born of Being, 
having Being as its essence, is Being only, since 
there is nothing beyond Being; of a truth, 
“This is the Real, this the Self,” therefore, 
“That thou art,” the Eternal, full of peace, 
pure, undivided, supreme. | 

As in dream, the imagined space and time and 
objects and perceiver are all unreal, so also here 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 45 

‚ in waking, the world is conjured up by our un- 
wisdom; since this body, its powers and Ше- 
| breath, and the thought of it as “I” are all 
unreal, therefore, “That thou art,” the Eternal, : 
full of peace, pure, undivided, supreme. (255) 
That Eternal, which transcends birth and rule 
and race and clan, having nor name nor form 
‚ nor quality nor fault, dwelling beyond space and 
time and all things objective, “That thou art”; 
bring it to consciousness in {һу Self. 
| That Eternal, which cannot be attained by 
‚ апу speech, yet is attained by the pure vision of 
| illumination, a realm of pure consciousness, 
| beginningless substance, “That thou art”; bring ! 
it to consciousness in thy Self. E 
That Eternal, which rises above the six waves 
of human weakness (pain, delusion, age, death, 
hunger, thirst), which dwells in the heart of him 
who has attained to union, which cannot be 
discerned by thy powers or known by thy under- 
standing, flawless, “That thou art”; bring it to 
_consciousness in thy ВЕН 
"That Eternal, which, self-supported, is the 
support of the world built up through illusion, 
which is other than the existent or the non- 
existent, partless, which can be reached by no 
similitude, “That thou art”; bring it to con- 
sciousness in thy Self. 4 
‘That Eternal, which is free from birth and 

roda 

= 

= 

1 

_ thy Self. 

| 

| bring it to consciousness in thy Self. 

1 

| 

46 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

growth and change, waning and sickness and! 
death, everlasting, the cause that puts forth,, 
upholds, destroys the world, “That thou art”;; 
bring it to consciousness in thy Self. (260)! 
` That Eternal, wherein all difference ceases, , 
whose character never changes, still as a wave- 
less ocean, for ever free, in nature impartite, , 
“That thou art”; bring it to consciousness in’ 

That Eternal, which, being One, is the cause 
of many, the Cause that sets aside all other 
causes, itself apart from cause and what is: 
caused, “That thou art”; bring it to conscious-, 
ness in thy Self. : 

That Eternal, which is unchanging, mighty,, 
imperishable, other than that which perishes; 
and that which perishes not, supreme, ever-: 
lasting, eternal joy, stainless, “That thou art”; 
bring it to consciousness in thy Self. | 

That Eternal, the one which appears manifold, , 
through illusion, through change of name and 
form and character, itself changeless like the 
gold in many ornaments, “That thou art”; 

That Eternal, which shines alone, beyond the 
highest, hidden, of single essence, of the char-- 
acter of the supreme Self, eternal substance, 
wisdom, joy, endless, everlasting, “That thou 
art”; bring it to consciousness in thy Self. (265)) 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 47 

THE WAY OF LIBERATION 

Let the disciple bring this_meaning, thus 
declared, to consciousness_in his Self, through 
the recognized forms of reasoning, through in- 
tuition, putting doubt and confusion away; the 
meaning “of this text will become as evident 
as water held in the hand. 

Knowing this pure Being, which is perfect 
Light, dwelling in the Self, relying on the Self 
as a king on his army in battle, cause this mani- 
fest world to melt away in the Eternal. , 

“In the intelligence, in the heart, other than 
the existent or the non-existent, is the Eternal, 
the Real, supreme, secondless; he who, through 
the power of the Self, dwells in this heart, for 
him there is no more subjection to bodily life. 

\ Even though the truth be known, neverthe- 
less this impress: ‘‘I am the actor, the experienc- 
ег,” is deep-seated and powerful, as it is begin- 
ningless, the cause of circling birth and death. 
This impress is to be conquered by strong effort, 

mem 

through the vision of the Light in the Self. The 
sages have said that the attenuation of this 
impress is liberation. 

This false attribution of “Г” and “тау” to 
the body and its powers, which are not Self, 
must be conquered by the wise man through 

devotion to the true Self. (270) 

48 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

Recognizing the hidden Self as the true Self, 
Witness of the understanding and its activities, 
making real the thought, ‘ That am I” by right 

¡| conduct, slay the thought of self in that which 

is other than the Self. 

Ceasing to follow the way of the world, ceasing 
to follow the way of the body, ceasing to follow 
the way of tradition, set thyself assiduously to 
follow the Self. j 

When a man follows the way of the world, 

the way of tradition, the way of the body, true 
wisdom is not born within him. 

Those who know, declare that the harsh dom- 
ination of these three ways is the iron chain 
fettering the feet of him who seeks to escape 
from the prison house of recurring birth and 
Кез he who frees himself from this, attains 

liberation. 

Just as sandalwood, mingled with water and 
rubbed, drives all ill odours away, so the divine 

~ impress of the Master shines forth through 

strong effort, completely expelling the sayour 
of outer things. (275) 

The impress of the higher Self is hidden under 
the dust of countless evil desires that lurk within; 

|! cleared by the strong effort toward wisdom, it 

becomes manifest like the scent of sandalwood. 
The impress of the Self is entangled in the 
meshes of desire for what is not Self; through 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 49 

deyotion to the eternal Self these meshes are 
completely destroyed. | 
In measure ав the mind _obeys the hidden 
Ава. it frees itself from the impress of outer 
; when it has rid itself completely of outer 
ев, the realization of the Self arises, free 
from all impediments. 

THE FALSE SELF 

By constant obedience to the Self, the mind 
of him who seeks union is conquered and the 
impress of outer desires fades away; therefore, 
make an end of resting in the false self. 

Darkness is overcome by Passion and Good- 
ness; Passion is overcome by Goodness; im- 
perfect Goodness is overcome by perfect Good- 
ness; therefore, make an end of resting in the 
false self. (280) | 

Perceiving that the impulses of past acts 
nourish the personality, be steadfast, rely on 
valour, and with strong effort m make an end of 

| resting in the false self. 

Thinking, “I am not the separate self but the 
Eternal,” rejecting everything ‚ that is not the 
“ternal, make an end of resting in the false self, 
which is built up by the impetus of the impres- 
sions of desires. 

Knowing through the Seriptures, through 

right reasoning, through meditative experience, 

50 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

that thy true Self is the Self of all, make an end 
of resting in the false self, which is built up by 
the play of deceptive appearances. 

The saint is not at all concerned with getting 
and spending; therefore, ever grounded in the 
One, make an end of resting in the false self. 

To confirm the realization that thy Self is one 
with the Eternal, according to the knowledge 
of the oneness of the Eternal and the Self in- 
stilled by the Seripture, “That thou art,” make 
an end of resting in the false self. (285) 
‘Intent on dissolving completely the thought 
of “I” in this body, intending thyself steadily 
on this task, make an end of resting in the false 
self. 

So long as the persuasion that the separate 
self and its world are real, continues like a dream, 
‚ so long, O wise one, continue to make an end of 
| resting in the false self. 

THE TRUE SELF 

Without a moment's loss through dreams, or 
the sound of worldly opinions, or forgetfulness, 
seek the real Self within thyself. 
ba of flesh, formed from the bodies of father 
and mother, as though it were an outcast, accom- 
plish_ thy ‹ end, uniting thyself with the Eternal. 

Merging thyself in the higher Self, as the 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 51 

ether in the jar is one with the universal ether, 
losing the sense of separation, enter ever into 
—^ silence, О seeker after wisdom! (290) 

Becoming one with the self-luminous founda- 
tion of all, through the aspiration of the mani- 
fested Self, the great manifested world and the 
handful of clay alike are to be abandoned like 
a pot of dirt. 

Causing the thought of “I” built up in the 
body to merge in the Self, which is pure con- 
sciousness, being and bliss, putting of the 
limitation of form, become ever one with the 

' absolute Eternal. 

Knowing that “I am the Eternal,” in which 
the mirage of the world is seen like a city in a 
mirror, thou shalt be one who has attained his 
goal. 

Going to that which is the Real, essential 
Being, primal, secondless consciousness, bliss, 
without form or act, let this body of delusion 
be rejected, which the Self has assumed as an 
actor assumes a costume. 

By the universal Self the visible world is 
seen to be a mirage, nor is the separate self real, 
since it is seen to be transitory; how can the: 
thought that “I know all” stand with regard to 
this transitory self and its powers? (295) 

The fundamental Self is the Witness of the 
separate self and its powers, since its presence 1s 

52 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

always recognized, even in dreamless sleep. 
The Scripture declares that this hidden Self, 
which is other than the existent or the non- 
existent, is “unborn, everlasting. 

The Self who is unchanging is alone worthy 
to be the knower of all changes of things that 
change. The unreality of things that change, 
and of their changes, is clearly seen again and 
again, in thoughts and dreams and in deep 
sleep. 

BONDAGE TO THE BODY 

Abandon, therefore, self-attribution to this 
form of flesh, since the false self thus attribut- 
ing itself is built up by thought only; recogniz- 
ing as thine own Self that partless Wisdom which 
is un: altered by past, present or future, enter into 

“peace. | 

Cast away self-identification with race, clan, 
name, form, and stage of life, which rest on this 
vesture of decay; abandoning also the charac- 
ter of actor and experiencer associated with the 
personality, become that whose own being is 
partless bliss. 

There are other bonds of man, seen as causes 
of recurring birth and death, but the root of 
them all is the personal self, which first arises 
in consciousness. E (300) 

So long as the true Self is held in bondage by 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 53 

the evil spirit of the lower self, there can be no 

= > vestige of liberation, which is the very opposite 

of the lower self. 

Freed from the eclipsing demon of the lower 
self, he attains the true Self, which is being and 
bliss, self-luminous, as the full moon comes 
forth from the darkness of eclipse. 

But he ЫШ identifies himself with the body, 
thinking, “This am I,” is enchained by the 
| darkness and delusion. Ж the mind; when this 

|| is destroyed without a remnant, the true Self 

| is realized as the Eternal, free from all bond- 
age. 

THE LOWER SELF 

The treasure of the bliss of the Eternal is 
guarded by the very powerful and terrible ser- 
pent, the lower self, whose three heads are the 
formidable potencies of substance, passion and 
darkness, who lies coiled over the true Self; 
but when the three heads are cut off with a 
mighty sword called understanding, inspired by 
the holy Scriptures, uprooting the great serpent 
utterly, the wise man may enter into the fru- 
ition of the treasure which brings true happiness. 

So long as there remains even a vestige of 
virulent poison in the body, how can there be 
perfect health? So the lower self holds the seeker 
of union back from liberation, (305) 

54 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

By destroying the lower self completely, by 
putting an end to The many БУ delusive forms it 
creates, and by discerning the true hidden Self, 
realizing, “That am I,” the seeker finds the Real. 

Utterly reject the thought that “This am I,” 
regarding the active lower self, unstable in 
essence, the cause of the love of reward, which 
robs thee of rest in thy true Self; through 
the lower self, set up by delusion, comes the 
recurring cycle of birth and death, endlessly 
inflicting birth, death, decay and sorrow on 
thee, who art in reality the true hidden Self, 
whose form is joy. 

Thou art the true Self, ever one, pure con- 
sciousness, all-pervading, formed of bliss, of 
irreproachable glory, unchanging; there is no 
cause of thy bondage to birth and death except 
the domination of the “I.” 

~The lower self is the € enemy of the true Self, 
like a sharp thorn in the throat of him who eats; 
therefore, slaying it with the mighty sword of 
understanding, enter into the sovereignty of the 
true Self, the joy of thy heart’s desire. 

Therefore, ending the acts of the “I” and 
the other evil powers, casting away desire, gain- 
ing the transcendent good, dwell in silence, 
seeking to enter into the bliss of the true Self, 
putting away all sense of separateness in the 
universal Self, the Eternal (310) 

= 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 55 

Even when the potent “I” has been up- 
rooted, if it be evoked again by dwelling on it 
even for a moment in the imagination, it will 
‘come to life and cause a hundred distractions, 
like a storm-driven cloud in the season of the 
rains. 

Holding down the enemy, the “I,” let no 
opportunity at all be given to ЧИТ cination 
to dwell on sensuous things; for this gives new 
life to the “I” as water to a parched lemon 
tree. 

DYNAMIC MIND-IMAGES 

The personality: subject to desire is formed by 
identifying the self with the body; that which 
causes desire is distinct from this. Going be- 
yond oneself to seek union with sensuous things, 
through attachment to something apart from 
the Self, is the cause of bondage to the world. 

From the maturing of the act comes the matur- 
ing of the seed of future bondage; from the 
=. destruction of the act comes the destruction of 
‘the seed; therefore, let the act be stopped. 477 

From the maturing of the dynamic mind-&7 

image comes the act, and from the maturing of 
the act comes the dynamie mind-image; thus 
man’s cycle of birth and death continues and & 
ceases not. (315) 

In order to cut the bonds of recurring birth 

56 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

and death, let him who seeks for control burn 
up these two; the maturing of the dynamic, , 
mind-image comes from these two, imagination <) 
—> and outer act. Tobar 
“Waxing great through these two, it brings to 
birth the cycle of birth and death for the Self; 
ү and there is a way to destroy these three in all 
” conditions, always.“ i 
In all places, in all ways, in all things fixing 
the vision only on ernal, through the 
> strengthening 0 e dynamic impress of true 
Being, these three melt into nothingness. 
Through the destruction of the act comes the 
destruction of the imagining, and from this the 
> withering of the dynamic mind-image. When 
` the dynamic mind-image has withered away, 
this is liberation, this is called deliverance 
even in life. 
р. f When the dynamic impress of the Real breaks 
/ through and reveals itself, the mind-image of 
\ the “1” and the other powers melts away, as 

ее” 

before the brightness of {һе radiant sun the 
darkness melts away utterly. (320) 
Darkness and the works of darkness which 
ensnare unto evil disappear when the lord of day 
| ascends; therefore, when the essence of that 
| partless bliss is known, there is no longer any 
\ bondage, no longer the savour of pain. 
\ Rejecting all allurements of things seen, enter- 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 57 

ing into the One, the Real, the sphere of blessed- 

ness, qa, and alert without and within, let 

him e e until the bonds of former works pass 
away. анонимное ми — pao 
ADA 

RECOLLECTION 

Standing firm in the Eternal, let no negligent 

for n negligence 1: is death: thus spoke the Master 
Sanat Kumara. 

3 of recollection be permitted at any time, 

\ For him who seeks to know the true Self, there 

| 

717 

| 

is no evil like negligence; from it comes delusion, ~ 

from this comes the false “I,” from this comes 

1 bondage, from this destruction. € 

Е. 

Loss оѓ recollection overthrows even him 
who has attained to knowledge, if he turn toward 
sensuous allurements, even as an evil woman 
brings her paramour to destruction. (325) 

As the green scum on a pond, when pushed 
aside, does not so remain even for a moment, 
so Glamour wraps itself about even the wise 
man who looks back. 

If the imagination, falling back from its goal, 
be enmeshed even a little in eztena) things, it 

sea 

‘stairs. 
When the imagination enters into sensuous 

things, it builds up images of their qualities; 

% 

ы 

“з, 

\ 

= 
Є Whenever the seeker after wisdom makes а 
d 

EN complete success; therefore, be thou, intently 

58 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

from this building up comes desire; because of 
desire the man moves toward them. 

He thus loses hold of his true nature; and he 
who loses hold, falls downward. For him who has 
fallen, there is no rising again without great , 
loss. Let him, therefore, put_an end to this 
building up of images, which is a cause of every | 
evil. 

Therefore, for him who has discerned, who 
knows the Eternal in soul vision, there is пош 

) | death other than negligent loss of recollection. 
But he who is intently concentrated attains” 

centred in the true Self, with heedfulness. (330) 

“He who has TITO TETAS liberation in life is lib- 
erated when he puts off the body; but he who 
makes a division between himself and the true 
Self, falls under fear: thus saith the Scripture 
of the Yajur Veda. 

ivision, even no greater than an atom, in the 
infinite Eternal, what he beholds through negli- 
gent loss of een as separate from the | 
Eternal, becomes for him a source tof danger. |. 

He who identifies himself with sensuous things, | 
forbidden by a hundred texts of Seripture and 
sacred. tradition and by reason, falls into a host 
of sorrows upon sorrows; he who thus does 
what is forbidden, is a robber. З 

y == 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 59 

THE STEADFAST HEART 

He who sets his heart on the search for the 
Real, liberated, enters into the mighty power of 
the true Self, everlasting; but he who sets his 
heart on the unreal, falls; this is seen even in 
the honest man and the thief. 

The saint, rejecting pursuit of the unreal, 
the cause of bondage, should stand firm in the 
vision of the true Self, saying: ‘‘That Self am 
I”; this steadfast resting in the Eternal brings 
"Toy through realization of the true Self, and 
‘drives away the great pain caused by unwis- 
dom. (335) 

The fixing of the heart on sensuous things 
causes the increase of evil mind-images progres- 
sively as its fruit; knowing this through dis- 
cernment, and rejecting sensuous things, let 
him ever fix the heart on the true Self. 

From putting an end to sensuous allurements 
comes quietude of heart; in quietude of heart 
there is the vision of the Supreme Self; when 
the Supreme Self is seen clearly, there follows 
destruction of bondage to the world; therefore / 
the ending of sensuous allurements is the path 

1 ин 

Who, being learned, able to discern between 
the Real and the unreal, holding the proofs of 
Scripture, seeing the supreme goal, possessing 

60 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

knowledge, would, like a child, set up his rest 
on the unreal, the cause of his falling from the 
true Self? 

For him who is attached to the body. and 
its pleasures there is no liberation; he who is 
liberated has put away the service of the body 

) and its allurements. He who is asleep is not 
awake, and he who is awake is not asleep, 
since these two are of opposite natures. 

DELIVERANCE 

He who, through the Self discerning the Self 
within and without, in things moving and 
unmoving, firmly resting in the vision of the 
true Self, putting aside vesture after vesture, 
stands in undivided Being through the universal 
Self, he indeed has reached deliverance. (340) 

Through the universal Self comes the cause 
of deliverance from bondage; nothing is greater 

\ than oneness with the universal Self. When 
grasping after sensuous things ceases, this one- 
ness with the universal Self is attained by 
standing ever in the true Self. 

But how can grasping after sensuous things 
cease in him who identifies himself with the 
body, whose heart is set on the enjoyment of 
sensuous things, who is working the works of the 
body? It is to be accomplished by those who 
renounce the rewards that are sought through 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 61 

worldly duties and religious rites, who have 
taken their stand in the everlasting Self, who 

| know the Real, who seek the bliss of Being in 
| the Self, toiling with strong effort. 2- 

The Scripture: “He who is full of peace, lord 
of himself,” enjoins concentration in soul 
vision on the disciple who, fulfilling the teaching 
and all works, seeks union with the universal Self. 

THE UPHILL JOURNEY 

The destruction of the “1” established in its 
strength cannot be accomplished immediately 
even by the wise; except for those who stand 
unmoved in the soul vision which is beyond 
separateness, the dynamic mind-images repro- 
duce themselves endlessly. 

The power of distraction, made operative 
through the power which wraps in glamour, and 
working through the delusive thought of “I,” 
draws the man into distraction through the 
potencies of these. жеш; (345) 
The victory over the power of distraction is 
diffieult to gain until the power which wraps in 
glamour has been completely overcome. Let 
him destroy the power which wraps in glamour 
by discerning between the Seer and things seen, 
as clearly as water is distinguished from milk, 
and by the realization of the true Self. 

He is without doubt free from bondage when 

к. 

62 CREST JEWEL ОР WISDOM 

there is no distraction by the mirage of sensu- 
ous things; perfect discernment, born of clear 
vision, truly discriminating between the_Seer 
and things seen, cuts the bonds of delusion 
forged by Glamour, and thereafter the recur- 
ring cycle of birth and death ceases for him who 
has gained deliverance. 

The fire of discernment of the oneness of 
that which is above and that which is below, 

> burns up the thicket of unwisdom completely. 

For him who has attained to the realization of 
Unity, how can there be a seed of recurring 
birth and death? 

Through the vision of the one Real comes 
the end of the power which wraps in glamour; 
there follow the destruction of false perception 
and the end of sorrows caused by the distrac- 
tions which spring from it. 

These three perceptions arise together, as 
when the true character of the rope is seen; 
therefore, let the wise man know the reality of 
Being, for deliverance from his bonds. (350) 

The understanding enkindled by conscious- 
ness, as iron is enkindled by fire, takes the forms 
of the powers of perception and action; the 
result is the manifestation of the eae the 
power that enwraps, the power that distracts, 
the sorrow that ensues: a mirage like what is 
seen in delusion, in dream, in phantasy. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 03: 

Thence come all the modes of manifested 
Nature, beginning with the “I” and ending 
with the body, and all objects of desire; all 
are unenduring, since they change from moment 
to moment, but the true Self never changes. 

The higher Self is eternal, undivided, partless 
consciousness, one, witness of the ei 

“and all the powers, other than the manifest and 

the unmanifest, whose being is the ideal “Т,” 
the realm of hidden being and bliss. 

SOUL VISION 

Thus the wise man, discerning between the 
Real and the unreal, perceiving the truth through 
his own awakened vision, knowing himself as 
the true Self, partless illumination, set free from 
these things, enters into peace in the Self. 

Then are the heart’s knots of unwisdom for 
ever loosed, when the vision of the one true Self 
is gained through soul vision free from separate- 
ness. (355) 

The building up of “thou” and “1” and 
“this” in the higher Self, one and undivided, 
comes through the fault of the understanding; 
but when soul vision becomes radiant, this 
sense of separateness melts away through the 
firm grasp of real substance. 

The saint, who has entered into peace, con- 
trolled, ceasing from evil, all-enduring, gains 

64 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

for himself the eternal being of the universal 
Self; thereby burning up all sense of separate- 
ness born of the darkness of unwisdom, through 
likeness to the Eternal he dwells in joy, free 
from bondage to works and from the sense of 
separateness. 

They indeed possess soul vision who have 
dissolved outer things, the allurements of sense, 
imagination and the “I,” in pure consciousness; 
_they, verily, are free from the bonds and snares 
of the world, not they who merely repeat tales 
about the mystery. 

Through the difference of vestures, the one 
Self appears to be divided; when the vestures 
are stripped off, the Self is one; therefore, let 
the wise man dwell in soul vision free from 
separateness, that the vestures may pass away. 

Attached to the Real, the man goes to the 
being of the Real, through steadfastness in the 
one; so the larva, meditating on the bee, is 
transformed into the nature of the bee. (360) 

For the larva, putting away all other activ- 
ity, meditating on the bee, enters into the 
being of the bee; so the seeker for union, med- 
itating on the reality of the supreme Self, enters 
therein through steadfastness in the one. 

Exceeding subtile is the reality of the supreme 
Self, nor can it be perceived by gross vision; 
it is to be known through soul vision, exceeding 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 65 

subtile in its power, by those of noble heart 
and purified understanding. 

As gold refined in the furnace, putting away 
dross, comes to its own nature, so the heart, 
ridding itself through meditation of the dross 
of substance, passion and darkness, reaches 
the Real. 

When the heart, thus purified by diligent, 
unbroken meditation, is dissolved in the Eter- 
nal, then comes soul vision without separate- 
ness, experience of the essence of the undivided 
bliss of the Self. 

From this soul vision comes the destruction of 
all the knots of dynamic mind-images, the de- 
struction of all bondage through works; within 
and without, in all ways, for ever, the true Self 
is fully revealed even without striving. (365) 

Let him know that thinking is a hundred times 
better than hearing, that meditation is a hun- 
dred thousand times better than thinking, that 
soul vision without separateness is infinitely 
better than meditation. 

For it is certain that through soul vision 
without separateness the true being of the 
Eternal is attained, and not otherwise; through 
the unstable emotional nature, it is blurred and 
commingled with thoughts of other things. 

Therefore, enter in soul vision into the hid- 
den Self, with powers controlled, with heart in 

66 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

unbroken peace; dispel the darkness born of 
beginningless unwisdom through clear vision of 
the oneness of the Real. 

RIGHT RENUNCIATION 

The first door of union is restraint of voice, 
freedom from covetousness, expectation and 
desire, continuous devotion to the one goal. 

Steadfast devotion to the goal ends the allure- 
ment of the senses; control stills the imagina- 
tion; through peace, the impress of the “I” 
is dissolved. Through this, the seeker for union 
gains unbroken realization of the bliss of the 
Eternal; therefore, let the saint through strong 
effort gain mastery over the imagination. (370) 

Restrain voice in thyself, restrain thyself in 
the understanding, restrain the understanding 
in the witness of the understanding, restrain that 
in the universal Self, going beyond separateness, 
and thus enter into perfect peace. 

Absorbed in the activity of one or another 
vesture, be it body, life-breath, mind, or under- 
standing, the seeker for union takes on the na- 
ture of that power. 

When these are mastered, the saint finds the 
joy which comes with right cessation, perfect 
realization of the essence of being and bliss. 

Inward renunciation, outward renunciation 
belong to him who has ceased from self-indul- 

CREST JEWEL ОЕ: WISDOM 67 

gence; he who has ceased from self-indulgence 
renounces inwardly and outwardly through desire 
for liberation. 

He who has ceased from self-indulgence is 
able to renounce outer attachment to the things 
of sense and inner attachment to the “I” and 
the imagination, steadfast in the Eternal. (375) 

Know thou, O wise one, that ceasing from self- 
indulgence and iJlumination are for a man as 
the two wings of a bird. Without them he can- 
not ascend the climbing vine at whose summit 
is the nectar, nor by any other means can he 
gain it. 

THE PURE IN HEART 

To him who is utterly free from_self-indul- 
gen ce, soul vision comes; to him who has gained 
soul vision, illumination is_ confirmed; to him 
who has gained illumination of the Real, comes 
liberation from bondage; for him whose soul 

- is freed, there 18 experience of eternal joy. 

engenderer of j Joy more potent than ceasing from 

self-indulgence; if this be accompanied by the 
purified awakening to the divine Self, it will 
bestow on him kin _kingly _ dominion over, self, 
This is the door of the ever-young spirit of 
lasting liberation; therefore do thou, seeking 
what is beyond this world, ever follow after 

68 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

wisdom, in all things unallured, ever in the true 
elf, seeking the better way. 
Cut off hope from sensuous things which are 

Е l as poison, for this is the cause of death; giving | 

‘tp concern for birth, family and stage of life, 
free thyself utterly from ritual seeking after 
reward. Cast away the delusion of selfhood in 

in the true Self; for thou art the ae thou art 
other than the emotional mind, thou art in 
| truth the partless Eternal. жг; 

Bending heart and mind steadily toward іне 
Eternal аз the goal, keeping the outer powers 
in .their true place, steadfastly disregarding 
the concerns of the body, realizing the oneness 
of thy true Self with the Eternal, through 
likeness to the Eternal, through unified conscious- 
ness, drink the essence of the joy of the Eter- 
nal, for which there is no night, in thy true Self, 
for what profit is there in all else that is devoid of 
that nectar? (380) 

Casting aside all imaginings of that which is 
not the true Self, foul and causing sorrow, set 
thy imagination on that Self whose essence is 
bliss, the cause of liberation. 

THE TRUE SELF 

This self-shining, witness of all, is ever re- 
vealed in the vesture of wisdom; make this thy 

өм 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 69 

| _goal, which stands apart from the unreal, enter- 
ing into it through realization of thy true Self, 

free from all separateness. f д 

~ Invoking the true Self through unbroken 

effort, pure of all other purposes, let the dis- 
ciple discern that Self clearly through its essen- 
tial being. 
og Firmly holding to the true Self, casting away 
the “I” and its concerns, let him stand indiffer- 
ent above them, as though they were broken 
jars of clay. 

Lodging the purified inner powers in the being 
of the Self, the witness, who is pure illumina- 
tion, gaining steadfastness step by step, let 
him fix his vision on the fulness of the Eter- 
nal. (385) 
7 Let him fix his vision on the true Self, the 

undivided Real, in fulness like the ether, free 

from all vestures of body and powers, emotional 
mind and the thought of “I,” built up through 
ignorance of the real Self. 

"The space which is filled with a hundred ves- 
™sels, such as jars and pots of grain and rice, 

yet remains free and one, undivided by them; 

so the pure Supreme remains free from the | 

“Т? and its concerns, and is ever one. | 

From the Creator to the log, all vestures are 
mirage*only; therefore, let him behold his true 
Self in its fulness, standing in the опе Self. 

7% 

nn 

\ 

70 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Whatever is built up through illusion, is 
seen as the Real, no different from That, when 
discernment is gained; when the 'delusion is 

dissipated, it is seen that the imagined serpent | 
was no other than the rope; so the whole world | 

is seen to be no other than the true Self. 

Brahma is Self, Vishnu is Self, Indra is Self, 
Shiva is Self, all this world is Self; nothing is 
but Self. (390) 

Self is within, Self without, Self before and 
Self behind, Self on the right hand, Self on the 
left, Self above, Self below. 

As wave, foam, eddy, bubble are all in reality 
water, so from the body to the “I,” all is con- 
sciousness, consciousness is the one pure essence, 

This whole world of which we speak and think 
is Being only, for naught is but Being, resting 
beyond nature’s confines. What are all jars and 
pots and earthen vessels but clay? So he, drunk 
with the wine of Glamour, speaks of “thou” 
and BS Eo 

“When all acts of desire cease, naught remains 

but ” That,” says the Scripture, declaring that 
the Eternal is undivided, in order to destroy 
all false attribution. 

Like the ether, stainless, undivided, un- 
bounded, unperturbed, unchanging, free within 
and without, alone, one, is the Self, the supreme 

Eternal; what else is there to know? (395) 
li APC AO 

у 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 71 

I AM THE ETERNAL 

What more, then, remains to be said? The 
individual soul is the Eternal; from the world 
to the atom, all i is the Eternal, “the: Eternal alone 
"and secondless, according to the Scripture. SET 
аш n the Eternal,” thus illumined in thought, 
“casting away outer desires, they dwell in one- 
ness with the Eternal through the true Self 
which is ever consciousness and bliss. This, 
indeed, is sure. 

Slay in this vesture of decay the hopes aroused 
by the thought of “Т then slay them in the 
form-body shaped of air. That form of joy 
eternal, glorified in the Vedic hymns, that Self 
apprehending, stand in oneness with the Eternal. 

So long as he loves this body of death, the 
man remains impure; from his enemies come all 
the pains bound up with birth and death and 

sickness. But when he discerns the pure Self, 

of form benign, unwavering, then he is delivered 
from his enemies, according to the Scripture. 

"When all that is falsely attributed to the Self, 

is cast aside, there remains the Self, the supreme 
Eternal, perfect, secondless, at rest. 

When all | thought and imagination are centred 
in Being, in the higher Self, in the Eternal with- 
out separateness, then there remains of sep- 

arateness no more than an empty word. (400) 

e 

25688 جح 

| 
| 

72 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

THE ONE IE ETERNAL 

Built up of unreality is the false conception 

that t this is the real world. What division can 
there be in the one Substance, without muta- 
tion, shape or difference? 

What division can there be in the one Sub- 
stance, in which there is no distinction of seer, 
seeing, seen, without mutation, shape or differ- 
ence? 

What division can there be in the one Sub- 
stance, like the world-ocean infinitely full, 
without mutation, shape or difference? ` 

-What division can there be in the secondless, 
supreme Real, free from difference, wherein the 
cause of delusion melts away, as darkness melts 

` away in light? 

What trace can there be of division in the 

supreme Real, the very Self of unity? Even 

in en which is joy only, who has 

| ever found дуйно? (405) 

After the awakening to the supreme Real 
in the Self which is Being, the Eternal, undivided, 
this world no longer is, whether past, present 
or to:come; as there is no serpent in the rope, 
nor a drop of water in the river, when the 
mirage has been recognized. 

This duality is Glamour only; transcendent- 

ally ıs ıt non-dual: thus says the Seripture, 

. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 73 

and this is immediately experienced in dream- 
lessness. 

That the attribute has no being apart from 
the substance, has been perceived by the wise. 
The distinction is born of illusion, as in the 
serpent imagined in the rope. 

This distinction has its root in the imagina- 
tion; when the imagination ceases, it has no 
longer being. Therefore, concentrate the im- 
agination in the higher Self, whose form is 
hidden. 

THE VISION IN THE HEART 

In soul vision he who has gained wisdom 
recognizes within his heart that mysterious 
being which is perpetual illumination, formed 
of perfect joy, incomparable, immeasurable, 
ever free, in which is no desire, boundless as 
the ether, without parts, without sense of sep- 
arateness, as the perfect, the Eternal. (410) 

‘In soul vision he who has gained wisdom rec- 
ognizes within his heart that reality, void of 
the changes of the manifested world, of unimag- 
inable being, in essence equal, peerless, eternal 
mind, far above bondage, revealed by the 
sacred teachings, everlasting, revealed by us, as 

| _the perfect, the Eternal. 

In soul vision, he who has gained wisdom rec- 
ognizes within his heart that being, unfading, 

| 

74 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

undying, which by its very nature can know no 
setting, still as the ocean depths, beyond name, 
wherein potencies and changes have come to 
rest, immemorial, full of peace, the the one, as the 
perfect, the Eternal. 4797542 

Intending the i inner mind upon it, behold the 
Self in its own being, its partless ‘sovereignty, 
Cut thy bonds stained with the stains of the 

u 

| world, by strong effort_ make thy manhood 

fruitful. 

Come to consciousness of the Self dwelling 
within thyself, free from all disguises, which is | 
being, consciousness, bliss, undivided; so thou 
buildest no more for going out. 

THE BODY OF DEATH 

Freed from the burden of the body, cast aside 
as a corpse, seen as but the shadow of the man, 
a mere reflection, a fruit of works, he of mighty 
soul puts it on no more. (415) 

Drawing near to that being whose form is 
ever stainless illumination, joy, put far from 
thee this disguise, inert, impure; let it not even 
be remembered again, for to remember as an 
object of desire the thing that has been vomited, 
brings contempt. 

Burning this up root and all, in the fire, the 
Self of being, the Eternal beyond separateness, 
thereafter he, excellent in wisdom, stands as 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 75 

the Self, through the Self, which is pure illumi- 
nation, bliss. 

The body is knotted of the threads of former 
works, Ungarn the blood of kine; whether 

epart or remain, the knower of the Real 

дан it not, as his Ше dissolves іп the Self 
of bliss, the Eternal. 

Knowing the Self, the partless bliss, in its 
true being, desiring what, or with what motive 
will the knower of the Real pamper the body? 

THE FRUIT OF WISDOM 

But of him who has attained, free even in 
life, who has gained union, this is the fruit: 
to taste without and within the essence of being 
and bliss in the Self. ~ (420) 

Of ceasing from self-indulgence, illumination 
is the ‘fruit; of illumination, the silencing of de- 
‘sire. is the fruit; from realizing the bliss of the 
Self, peace is the fruit; this, verily, is the fruit 
of silencing desire. 

So long as the latter of these is unattained, 
the former has not borne its fruit. Supreme 
content, the peerless joy of the Self, is liberation. 

Not to be e perturbed by the griefs of the man- 
ifested world is the renowned fruit of wisdom. 
Nor, after һе has gained discernment, ‘will a 
man work again the many blameworthy works 
done 1 in the time of his delusion. | 

76 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

To be freed from the unreal is the fruit of 
wisdom; to be entangled in it is seen to be the 

| fruit of unwisdom. If there be not this dis- 

\ 
\ 

tinction between wise and unwise, as in the rec- 
ognition of the mirage, what then is the reward 
of the wise? 
When the heart’s knot of unwisdom is destroyed 
without remainder, how can the presence of 
objects be a cause of entanglement for him 
who is without desire? (425) 

Where no dynamic mind-image arises in the 
presence of objects of desire, this is the perfec- 
tion of freedom from self-indulgence; when the 
feeling of “I” no longer arises, this is the per- 
fection of illumination; when the being dis- 
solved in the Eternal returns | no more, this is 
the perteciion of silence. ЕСЕ 

Rich is he, to be honoured among beings, 
who, because he stands ever in the nature of 
the Eternal, is free in soul from the tyranny 
of outer cbjects, regarding as little as does a 
sleeping child the enjoyments deemed alluring 
by others, who views this world as a world 
ing “his soul, reaping the or of infinite holi- 
ness. 

That saint stands firm in wisdom who enjoys 
the bliss of being, for his Self is dissolved in the 
Eternal, he is changeless, risen above action. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 77 

That condition is said to be spiritual wisdom, 

/ | which is all consciousness without sense of 

separateness, plunged deep in the unity. of the 
Eternal and the Self stripped of every veil. 

FREE EVEN IN LIFE 

In whom this wisdom is well established, he 
is said to stand firm in wisdom. He whose 
wisdom thus stands firm, whose bliss is unbroken, 
by whom this world is well nigh forgotten, he 
is said to be free even in life. (480) 

He who, with soul dissolved, is yet awake, 
free from the bondage of waking life, whose 
illumination is without dynamic mind-images, 
he is said to be free even in life. 

In whom the circle of birth and. death has 
come to rest, who is individual though with- 
out separateness, whose imagination is free 
from imaginings, he is said to be free even in 
life. 

Even though the body remains, he regards it 
as a adom) he is without the thought of “I” 
and “ ту” В 87 is the hall mark of him who is | 
Tree ev even in life, IEEE 2 

— Не seeks not to delve into the past or to un- 
veil the future; he is the disinterested specta- 
tor: this is the hall mark of him who i is з free even 
in life, 

He regards as equal all things in this world full 

78 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

of_contrasts, with quality set against fault: this 
is the hall mark of him who is free even in 

ite (435) 

/ Whether good or evil fortune come, he regards 

[ it as equal іп the Self, remaining unchanged 

| by either: this is the hall mark of him who is 
free even in life. 

Because the saint’s heart abides savouring 

the bliss of the Eternal, he distinguishes not 

| between what is within and what is without: 

| this is the hall mark of him who is free even 

\ in life. ' 

\ Without the thought of “my” and “I” in 
what is to be done by the body and the powers, 
he stands as the disinterested spectator: he bears 
the hall mark of him who is free even in life. 

Who knows the Self is one with the Eternal, 
according to the power of the Scriptures, who 
is free from the bondage, of the world: he bears 
the hall mark of him who is free even in life. 

In whom no thought of “Т” arises regarding 
the body and its powers, nor does he араа 

سوس پو سے 

he is said be free even in life. (440) 

Who through wisdom discerns that there is 

no division between the hidden Self and the 

Eternal, nor between the Eternal and the man- 

| ifested world” he bears the hall mark of him who 
is free even in life. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 79 

WHEN THE ETERNAL IS KNOWN 

Who bears it with equal mind, whether he be 
honoured by the holy or afflicted by evil men: 
he bears the hall mark of him who is free even 
in life. 

Into whom flow all manifested things sent 
forth by the Supreme, as rivers of water enter 
the ocean’s treasure house, causing no change, 
because he and they are one Being, that saint 
has attained liberation. 

For him who has discerned the true being of 
the Eternal, the ancient circle of birth and death 
has ceased. If it remain, he has not discerned 
the being of the Eternal; it still lies beyond him. 

But if they say that birth and death still beset 
him because of the impetus of dynamic mind- 
images, this is not so; the dynamic mind-image 
loses its power through discernment of oneness 
with Being. (445) 

As the most lustful man’s desire ceases before 
his mother, so is it for the wise when the Eternal 
is known in fulness of bliss. 

THE MOMENTUM OF WORKS 

The Scripture says that even in him who 
has attained to meditation the conviction of the 
reality of outer things remains, because his former 
works are working themselves out. _ 

As long as pleasure and pain are felt, so long 

80 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

are former works working themselves out. The 
ripening of the fruit is because of former works; 
where there are no longer works, there is no fruit. 

From the discernment that “I am the Eter- 
nal,” works heaped up through hundreds оғ 
“millions of ages are dissolved, as dream-works 
on waking. 

Whatever be done in time of dream, whether 
good or manifest evil, after he is awake how can 
it visit him with heaven or hell?, (450) 

When he has come to know the true Self, which 
rises detached like the sky, he is no more en- 
tangled in future works for ever. 

As the ether enclosed in the jar is not tainted 
by the smell of the wine, so the true Self within 
the vesture is not tainted by the properties of 
the vesture. 

The momentum of works begun before the 
sunrise of wisdom does not cease without bear- 
ing fruit after wisdom is gained; it is like an 
arrow aimed and shot at a mark. 

The arrow shot with the thought that there 
is a tiger does not halt when it is seen to be a 
cow, but quickly pierces the mark because of 
\ \its impetus. 

Works already entered on retain their energy 
even in the case of those who have attained wis- 
dom; only through being experienced are they 
consumed. Former works, works accumulated, 

` CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 81 

and future works melt away in the fire of per- 
fect wisdom. They who perceive the oneness 
of the Eternal and the Self, and stand ever in 
the realization of that oneness, for them the 
three kinds of works exist no longer; they 
become the Eternal, free from limitations. (455) 

For the saint who stands in the Self, through 
the oneness of the Self with the perfect Eter- 
nal which is free from the qualities of the ves- 
tures, the myth of the reality of former works 
exists no longer, as for him who is awake the 
myth of bondage to things seen in dream no 
longer exists. 

For he who has awaked no longer keeps the 
thought of “I” and “тау” and “that” with 
regard to the dream body and the world belong- 
ing to it; he comes to himself simply by waking. 

He no longer wis wishes to gain the things of his 
dream, пог does he seek to grasp the dream 
world. But if he still pursues the things of the | 
mirage, it is certain he has not yet awaked from 
sleep. 

— He who dwells in the supreme Eternal stands 
ever in the Self, beholding nothing else; as is 
the memory of something seen in dream, so for 
the wise man are eating and other bodily acts. 

Though the body which is built up by former 
works continues to work out the works that 
are entered on, these works are not bound up 

82 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM ` 

with the beginningless Self, for the Self is not 
built up by works. (460) 

“Unborn, eternal, everlasting,” says the 
Scripture, which cannot speak in vain; there- 
fore, what building of works can there be for 
him who stands in the Self? 

Works entered on retain their force so long 
as the body is held to be the Self; but to think 

‚ of the body as the Self is false; therefore, let 
| works entered on be ‘renounced. 

Even the building of the body by former 
works is also an illusion; whence can come the 
reality of what is only imagined? How can there 
be the birth of what is unreal? 

How can there be the destruction of what has 
not been born? How can there be former works 
of what does not exist, if through wisdom the 

|| | effects of unwisdom are Kenn root and all? 

How does this body ЕСІКТЕ Scripture de- 

clares the development of works exists, to bring 
growth to those who are full of doubt and inert i in 
mind, through the per ception of external things, 
but not to establish in the wise the belief in the 
reality of the body and outer things. (465) 

THE ETERNAL 

The Eternal is complete, beginningless, end- 
less, changeless, one, secondless; in the Eter- 
nal there is no diversity. 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 83 

The Eternal i is the sum of being, the sum of 
consciousness, everlasting, the sum of bl bliss, 
without action, one, verily, and secondless; in 
The Eternal there is no diversity. 

The Eternal is the one hidden essence, full, 
unending, in all directions conscious, one, ver- 
ily, and secondless; in the Eternal there is no 
diversity. 3 

The Eternal cannot be diminished or excelled, 
the Eternal cannot be apprehended, nor does it 
need any support; it is one, verily, and second- 
less; in the Eternal, there is_no diversity. 

The Eternal is without qualities, without 
parts, subtile, without separateness, without 
stain, one, verily, and secondless; in the Eter- 
nal there is no.diversity. (470) 

The Eternal is in its nature indefinable, not 
to be reached by word or thought, one, verily, 
and secondless; in n the Eternal tl there is no diver- 
sity. Y 

~The Eternal is the riches of being, in itself 
perfect, pure, awakened, unlike aught else, 
one, verily, and secondless; in the Eternal there 
is no diversity. 

FINAL WORDS 

The mighty sages who have cast away passion, 
who have cast away sensual feasts, who have 
gained quietude and control, knowing the Real 

— 

84 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

in the supreme consummation, have reachec 
the highest joy through union with the Self. | 

Therefore, discerning this supreme reality о! 
the Self, in its own nature the sum of bliss, 
off the delusion built up by thine own thought: 
free thyself, attain, awake! 
` Through soul-vision which rests unwavering in: 
the Self, behold the reality of the Self with the 
eye of clear illumination; when the truth re- 
vealed by the Scripture has been perfectly 
discerned beyond all question, doubt will not 
return again. (475) 

In gaining the Self, which is truth, wisdom and 
the essence of joy, by freeing thyself from the 
bondage of the fetters of unwisdom, the Serip- 
ture, right reasoning and the word of the teacher 
are means of enlightenment, and the realization 
of the Self, inwardly attained, is a means of 
enlightenment. 

Freedom from bondage, joy, wholeness of 
thought and happiness must be known by 
oneself; the knowledge of others is only infer- 
ence. 

As the Masters who stand on the further shore 
and the Scriptures reveal, let the wise man 
cross over through that wisdom which comes 
through the divine grace of the Lord, the 
Logos. 

Through his own experience knowing his Self 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 85 

undivided, reaching the supreme attainment, 
jet him s stand in the Self, through the Self which 
is without separateness. 

“This is the meaning, this is the final word 
of the teaching of wisdom: the individual life 
is the Eternal, the whole world i is the Eternal; 
to be ‹ established without sense of separateness 
in the secondless Eternal is liberation; this 

too the Scriptures declare. (480) 

THE DISCIPLE ATTAINS 

| Attaining the supreme reality through the 
‚ Master’s words and the evidence of the Serip- 

tures, and gaining union with the Self, with heart 
| at rest, concentrated in the Self, his whole being 
| unwavering, the disciple rested in the Self. ~~ 
_ Then, intending his mind for a certain time 
| оп the supreme Eternal, rising, in perfect joy, 
he spoke these words: 

Thought has ceased, activity of desire has 
fallen away, through the oneness of the Eter- 
nal and the Self, through illumination; I know 
not this; I know naught other than this; what 
is it? how great? It is shoreless joy! 
| Not by word can it be spoken, пог by mind 
| can it be thought; the vast expanse of the ocean 
of the supreme Eternal is filled full with the 
nectar ‘of the bliss of the Self. Rejoicing like 
the rocky bed of a torrent suddenly flooded by 

86 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

the rains, drinking in each least drop, my па 
rejoices now in the јоу of the Self. 

Whither has the world gone? By whom taken 
away? Into what has it dissolved? No longer 
do I behold it: a mighty marvel! (485) 

What is to be put away? What is to be 
taken? What other is there, what distinction) 
in the mighty ocean of the Eternal, filled with: 
the nectar of partless bliss? 

Of the world. I no longer see or hear or know 
anything; I have become the Self, whose 
nature is being and bliss. 

Honour, honour to thee, Master, mighty- 
souled, liberated from bondage, most excellent, 
being, in thy nature the essence of eternal, second- 
less joy, mighty, a shoreless ocean of compassion. 

As he who, wearied by the heat of day, 
is refreshed by the abundant beams of the 
rising moon, so in an instant have I gained the 
dwelling of the Self, the partless majesty and 
joy, the imperishable. 

Rich am I, I have attained my end, I have 
gained liberation from the dragon of the 
world. (460) 

I am without attachment, without members, 
without distinguishing mark, without partition; 
I have attained to peace, I am infinite, I am 
stainless, immemorial. 

1 am neither he who acts, nor he who experi- 

| 

| 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 87 

ences, I am beyond change, beyond ceremonial 
rites; I am in essence purified intelligence, I 
am unconditioned, ever blest. 

I am other than he who sees, hears, speaks, 
acts, experiences; I am eternal, the innermost, 
beyond ritual acts, boundless, detached, the 
plenary awakened Self | 
Там not this, I am not that, but the radiance 
in both, supreme, made pure; empty within 
and without, yet filled, the secondless Eternal, 
in truth am I. 

The beginningless reality, like which there is 
naught else, far from the fictions of “thou” 
and “І” and “this” and “that,” the fine es- 
sence of eternal bliss, the truth, the secondless 
Eternal, verily, am I. (495) 

I am the divine ee who makes an end of 

am the arrap "I am x partless і intelligence, the 
supreme witness, for me there is no distinction} 
of “Lord” and “Т” and “mine.” 

I am established within all beings through the 
Self of wisdom, secure within and without; I 
am both he who experiences and what is experi- 
enced, whatever was seen as separate before, 

with the thought of “that.” 

- Within me, partless ocean of joy, manifold 

world-waves arise and sink again, driven to 
and fro by the winds of Glamour. 

88 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

As a mirage this bodily form and the finer 

vestures are built up, and the worlds are brought 
| into momentary being, just as in Time, which 
| is partless, continuous, the ages, the years and 
seasons are imagined. 

The superstructure injures not the firm 
foundation, whatever deluded; sinful men may 
build; nor does the mighty river of water in the 
mirage moisten even a span of the dry des- 
ert. (500) 

Like the shining ether, I endure through 
ages, like the sun I am marked by radiance, 
like the mountain I stand ever firm, I am shore- 
less like the ocean. 

As the clear sky is not bound by clouds, I 
am not bound by the body; how then can I be 
limited by its modes of waking, dreaming, dream- 
lessness? 

The vesture comes, the vesture goes, it works 
works and meets experience; the vesture withers 
and dies, but I remain, set firm like a mighty 
mountain. і ТАЛ j 

Not mine are manifesting and withdrawal, 
since I am ever of one form undivided; how 
could he, who is of the essence of the one Self, 
without crevice or division, full like the ether, 
be subject to pain? 

How can I be involved in righteous or unright- 
eous deeds, I, who am other than the powers 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 89 

that act, other than thought, without change, 
without form, partless, conscious of bliss? 
Thus the Scripture says: the Spirit is followed 
neither by good nor evil. (505) 

Whatever thing, hot or cold, fair or foul, 
may touch his shadow, does not in the least 
affect the man himself, who is other than it. 
“~The properties of what he witnesses do not 
arfect the witness, who is apart from them, 
disinterested; just as the properties of the 
house do not affect the lamp. 

As the sun which witnesses the act, as the fire 
which leads the conflagration, as the rope which 
holds what is raised, so is this Self of mine, 
dwelling on the summit. 

I am not he who acts nor he who causes 
acts, I am not he who experiences or causes 
experience, I am not he who sees nor һе who 
causes seeing, the Self am I, self-shining, second- 
less. 

The 5 Self stands steadfast like the sun; see- 
perturbed, men of deluded mind attribute the 
perturbation to the Self, saying: I act, I experi- 
ence, I am slain. (510) 

Whether this inert body traverse the water 
or the land, I am not touched by the properties 
of these, as the ether is not touched by the 
properties of the jar. 

90 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

All conditions, of actor or enjoyer, of evil or 
deluded, of inert or bond or free, are built up 
through the mind, and are not lasting realitiesin 
the Self, the supreme Eternal, alone, without a 
second. 

Let there be ten, a hundred, a thousand trans- 
formations of nature; what are these changes 
to me? The sky is not stained by the lowering 
cloud. | 

REVERENCE TO THE MASTER 

All that is perceived, from the unmanifest 
to the material world, is reflection only; like 
space, beginningless, endless, subtile is the 
secondless Eternal; that, verily, am I. 

Upholding all, illumining all things, cause of 
every form, penetrating all, yet untouched by 
all, eternal, pure, steadfast, without separate- 
ness is the secondless Eternal; that, verily, 
am I. (515) 

Wherein all differing appearances are merged 
without remainder, of concealed nature, not 
to be approached by thought, in essence truth, 
wisdom, bliss, formed of bliss is the secondless 
Eternal; that, verily, am I. 

Without act am I, without change, without 
division, without form, without separateness, 
eternal, underived, secondless. 

I am in essence the All, I am the All, I have 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 91 

transcended the АП, I am secondless, perfect, 
partless illumination, I am bliss, I am the 
inmost. 

This self-conquest, sovereignty, dominion, 
through my Master’s compassion, grace, might 
and favour, has been gained by me; obeisance 
to my gracious Master of mighty soul, obeis- 
ance to thee, and again obeisance. 

I was wandering in the great dream forest of 
birth, decay and death created by delusion, 
e by day аре, by many pains, stalked 
sion “awakening _ ше wahr my dream, thou, 
Master, hast become my saviour. (520) 

Reverence to the One, whatever it be! Rev- 
erence to that Light which shines universal, and 
to thee, king of teachers!” 

` THE MASTER’S FINAL WORD 

Beholding that excellent disciple bowed in 
obeisance, who had attained to the joy of the 
vision of the Soul, who had gained illumination, 
the lord of instructors, mighty-souled, heartily 
rejoicing, again addressed to him this final 
word: 

The world is the expression of the thought of 
the ‘Eternal, therefore all Being, everywhere, is 
‘the Eternal; thus behold it in all modes of 
being with serene understanding, illumined by 

92 CREST JEWEL ОЕ WISDOM 

the Higher Self. That Being which is everywhere 
beheld apart from form by. those possessing 
vision, what else can be the Soul’s garden of 
delight for the righteous knower of the Eternal? 

What wise man would rejoice in empty things, 
rejecting the experience of that essence of su- 
preme bliss? When the great, joy-bringing moon | 
is shining, who wishes to behold a pictured 
moon? 

For in experiencing an unreal object, there is 
no satisfaction nor any escape from pain; do 
thou stand satisfied, rejoicing, resting ever in 
the supreme Self, through the experience of 
that essence of secondless delight. (525) 

Ever beholding that supreme Self everywhere, 
resting thy thought in the secondless Self, let 
the time pass for thee, mighty-minded, in the 
experience of the bliss of the Self. 

Conceiving separateness in that partless Self 
of illumination, which is without separate- 
ness, is like building dwellings in the air; there- 
fore, gaining supreme serenity through the Self 
which is ever secondless joy, rejoice in silence. 

The Soul’s supreme tranquillity, brooding in 
silence, dissolves the unsubstantial buildings of 
the mind; from this, through the supreme 
Self, which is the Eternal, straightway comes 
joy in undivided bliss. 

There is no more excellent source of joy than 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 93 

silence free from all mind-images, for him who 
has discerned the true being of the Self, drinking 
in the essence of the joy of the Self. 

Whether walking, standing, sitting, lying 
down, or in whatever state, let the saint, pos- 
sessing wisdom, freely dwell, rejoicing in the 
supreme Self. (530) 

Neither place nor time nor posture nor posi- 
tion, nor any other rule, is the cause of release 
from bondage; for the sage of mighty soul, 
who has attained to the Real, the illumination 
of the supreme Self is the rule of life. 

What rule will avail, to know even an earthen 
pot, unless it be perceived? When it is per- 
ceived, there is clear understanding. 

The supreme Self shines forth ever perfect, 
when it is perceived; neither place nor time 
nor ritual purification is needed further. 

The realization that I am Devadatta needs- 
no certifying; so it is with the knowledge that 
J am the Eternal, for him who knows the 
Eternal. 

What illumination does he need, for whom the 
world other than the Self, light as chaff, is re- 
vealed by the radiance of the Eternal, as the 
whole world is revealed by the sun? (535) 

/ What can illumine that Light whence Vedas, 
scriptures, ancient histories, and even all things 
derive their value? 

94 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

HE WHO HAS ATTAINED 

This supreme Self, immeasurable, is self- 
luminous, of infinite power, the source of all 
experience. Knowing that supreme Self, and 
freed from bondage, the most excellent knower 
of the Eternal gains the victory. 

Things of sense neither wound him nor de- 
light him, he is no longer either allured or 
revolted by them; in the supreme Self he joys 
and rejoices ever, delighting in the essence of 
that unrivalled bliss. 

As a child, free from hunger and bodily pain, 
rejoices in his play, so the sage delights, happy, 
free from “my” and “I” 

His food comes to him freely, without anxiety 
or sorrow, he drinks from the clear stream, he 
moves unfettered everywhere, he rests light- 
hearted in the forest or the burying-ground, 
his vesture needs neither washing nor drying, 
wide space is his dwelling, the earth is his 
couch, all roads and pathways are open for 
his feet, so the sage rejoices in the supreme 
Eternal. (540) 

Dwelling in a body like the air-ships of the 
gods, he tastes boundless joys freely presented 
to him, the knower of the supreme Self is as a 
\ child obedient to a higher will; he is of form 
unmanifest, untouched by Trent! 

ж 

CREST JEWEL ОР WISDOM 95 

Clothed in space, or wearing a vesture, clothed 
in skin or in pure thought, as a madman or a 
child or a ghost, he walks the earth. 

Withdrawin; desire from things of desire, the 
silent sage walks їп in solitude, ever contented 
in the supreme Self, through the supreme Self 
he stands firm. 

Now as a madman, now a sage, now a glori- 
ous, great king, now a humble wanderer, now 
solitary as a serpent, now honoured, now lightly 
esteemed, now unknown, thus goes the sage, 
ever rejoicing in the highest bliss. 

Though without riches, yet ever content; 
though without a helper, yet of mighty power; 
though bereft, yet ever rejoicing; though af- 
flicted, full of joy. (545) 

Acting, though not himself the actor; reap- 
ing the reward, though not seeking enjoyment; 
possessing a body, though beyond the body; 
though hemmed in, yet going everywhere. 

Neither good nor evil, neither fair nor foul 
touch him, dwelling ever beyond the body, full 
of the vision | of the Eternal. y 

@asure and pain, things fair and foul, are 
for him who is in bondage to the natural or 
psychie body, falsely attributing selfhood to 
these; but for the silent seer, one with the 
supreme Self, whose bonds have fallen away, 
what fruit is any longer fair or foul? 

96 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Because the sun appears to be swallowed by 
the darkness of eclipse, they say it is swallowed, 
misled, not knowing the truth. 

So, though the knower of the Eternal be 
freed from the body and all bonds, those who are 
deluded see him as possessing a body, because 
they see the semblance of a body. (550) 

As a snake puts off its slough, he stands freed 
from the body, moving hither and thither before 
the breath of life. 

| As the tree is borne by the river to low land 
‘or high, the body is borne by destiny to those 
whose time for bodily experience has come. 

Because of the impulses engendered by former 
works which are being exhausted, he who has 
gained freedom from the body dwells as though | 
possessing a body, among those who are reap- 
ing experience; having attained, he dwells as a 
witness, silent, Ш.г the centre of a wheel mov- 
ing neither up nor down. 1 

Neither does he engage his powers in objects 
of perception, nor does he turn away from 
them, but stands as an onlooker; nor does he 

_desire at all the reward of any act, since his 
‘heart is filled with the nectar of the essence of 
| pure bliss. 

THE KNOWER OF THE ETERNAL 

He who stands firm in the supreme Self, 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 97 

seeking neither the seen nor the unseen, like 
Divinity, self-revealed, he is the most excellent 
knower of the Eternal. (555) 

Though living, yet ever free, his goal attained, 
that most excellent knower of the Eternal, 
when the vesture falls away, being the Eternal, 
enters the secondless Eternal. 

‘Like a man wearing an actor’s costumes of 
honour or dishonour, so, verily, that excellent 
knower of the Eternal is ever the Eternal and 
no other. 

Even before the coming of death, the body of 
the sage who has become one with the Eternal 
is consumed by the fire of the knowledge of the 
Eternal, as a withered leaf is consumed. 

For the silent sage who stands in the real 
Self which is the Eternal, through the Self 
which is formed of perfect, undivided bliss, 
there is no consideration of fit place or time or 
circumstance for sloughing off this vesture of 
skin and flesh and corruption. 

To be rid of the body and the ascetic’s water 
| pot and staff is not the true deliverance; to be 
rid of the heart’s | knot of unwisdom, that is 
deliverance. aoa И (560) 

What joy or sorrow is it to the tree, whether 
its leaf fall in a rivulet or a river, in a favoured 
field or a sacrificial enclosure? 

The destruction of the body, the sense-powers, 

98 CREST JEWEL ОЁ WISDOM 

the life-breath, the mind, is as the destruction 
of a leaf, a flower, a fruit; but the Self stands 
firm like the tree, the Self of true Being, formed 
of bliss. 

The sages say that the destruction of the 

"vesture of unwisdom is the revelation of the 

Real, the true Self, according to the Scripture, 

“the Self is a realm of pure illumination.’ 

“Imperishable, verily, is the Self,” the Өсгїр- 
ture declares, concerning the Self, revealing the 
Self as indestructible among things that perish. 

As stone and wood and grass and grain and 
straw are all burned and reduced to dust, so, 
verily, the body, the sense-powers, the Ше- 
breath, the mind, all that is manifest, burned up 
by the fire of wisdom, return to the nature of 
the higher Self. (565) 

As darkness, being of opposite nature, is 
dissolved in the radiance of the sun, so, verily, 
all that is manifest melts away in the Eternal. 

As the space of ether remains clear space 
when the earthen jar is destroyed, so, verily, 
when the vesture is dissolved, the Eternal is 

the Eternal. 

As milk poured into milk, oil into oil, water 
into water, blends in complete oneness, so, 
verily, the silent sage who knows the Self becomes : 

‚ one with the Self. 

Thus gaining bodiless liberation, pure Being, | 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 99 

undivided, the Being of the Eternal, the lib- 
“erated sage returns no more. 
7 Since the body of unwisdom is burned up 
` by the illumination of oneness with the real 
Self, and he has become one with the Eter- 
nal, how should he again come forth from the 
| Eternal? (570) 

THE ETERNAL REALITY 

Both bondage and liberation from.bondage are 
built up by Glamour, and have no true being in 
the Self; just as the appearance and disappear- 
ance of the fancied serpent have no real existence 
in the rope, which has remained unchanged. 

There is no veiling or enwrapping of the 
Eternal; since there is naught other than the 
Eternal, it cannot be veiled. If there were aught 
else, the single being of the Eternal would be 
forfeited, but the Scripture admits no duality. 

Vainly do the deluded attribute to the Real the 
bondage and liberation which belong only to the 
mind; just as the sun is hidden, when the ob- 
server is wrapped in cloud. But the Eternal re- 
mains secondless, detached Consciousness, one, 
everlasting. | 
“Тһе belief that the Real comes into being, or 
ceases to be, belongs to the mind, not to the 
eternal Reality. i 

Therefore, these two, bondage and liberation, 

100 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

are built up by Glamour, they are not in the real 
Self, which is partless, actless, serene, faultless, 
‘stainless; what division can there be in the 
secondless, supreme Being, one like space? (575) 

There is neither surcease nor origin, neither 
bondage nor perfecting, neither seeker for libera- 
tion nor liberated; this is the transcendental 
truth. p: 

Among the crest jewels of all the Scriptures, 
this is the ultimate mystery. This supreme 
mystery has been revealed to thee by me to- 
day; the sin of the Age of Darkness washed 
away, “thy mind set free from desire, I have 
led thee, seeking liberation, as my own child, to 
thy goal. 

THE MASTER’S BLESSING 

Hearing thus the word of the Master, humbly, 
and with obedient heart, he went forth, with the 
Master’s blessing, set free from bondage. 

- The Master also went forth straightway, his 
mind immersed in the ocean of being and bliss, 
bringing purity to the whole world. 

BENEDICTION 

Thus, through this dialogue of Master and dis- 
ciple, the revelation of the supreme Self has been 
made, to awake to joy the souls of those who 
seek liberation. (580). 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 101 

| From those who reverently accept this be- | 
nignant teaching, all the sins of the heart are cast | 
out, one by one; they have discarded worldly | 
pleasure, their е “have entered peace, self- | 
Tuled and seeking liberation, they rejoice in the 
nectar of the Scripture. 

To those who are wandering in the desert of 
the world, athirst, on the path of circling birth 
and death, weary, oppressed and worn by sorrow 
as by the sun’s fierce rays, may this teaching 
reveal the secondless Eternal, bringing joy, like 
an ocean of nectar near at hand; for this teaching 
of Shankara brings victory and leads to Nirvana. 

«О Шу» 
PACIFIC а 
ОР RELIGIOÊ 

APPENDIX 

APPENDIX 
I 

THE FOUR QUALIFICATIONS 

The title of honour, Acharya, added to the name 
of Shankara, means ““ Не who causes others to go 
forward.” To Shankara Acharya are attributed 
Commentaries on the Great Upanishads; on the 
Bhagavad Gita and Brahma Sutras, and also a series 
of shorter treatises in verse or prose, of which The 
Crest Jewel of Wisdom is one. In nearly all of 
these shorter treatises, the Four Qualifications are 
enumerated and defined, with only very slight 
differences of definition. The present com- 
mentator is inclined to believe that all these 
works attributed to Shankara embody his teach- 
ing, but were put into writing by his immediate 
disciples, each of whom followed and expressed 
his own individual character, while handing on 
the doctrine of his Master. Since all the 
treatises set forth or imply the Four Qualifica- 
tions, it seems certain that these Qualifications 
are an essential part of the method of that great 
Master; perhaps the most personal and charac- 
teristic part. We may think | of them as 
Shankara’ s Rule. 

The Four Qualifications are expounded, in the 
form of question ‘and answer, in the treatise 

105 

106 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

called Тайша Bodha, attributed to Shankara. They 
may be compared with parallel passages from | 
Western mystics, including the Zmitation of 
Christ by Thomas а Kempis, the Spiritual Guide 
by Miguel de Molinos, A Short Rule by the Ab- | 
bot Ludovicus Blosius of the Order of Saint | 
Benedict, and A Serious Call toa Devout and Holy 
Life by William Law, the Anglican mystic. We 
shall thus have a sufficiently representative view 
of the Western teachings which cover the same 
ground as Shankara’s Rule; by thoughtful com- 
parison, students will be able to extract the es- 
sence of the teaching in order to apply it in ргас- 
tice. [The editions to which reference is here 
made are: The Imitation, Rivingtons; Spiritual 
Guide, Methuen & Co.; A Short Rule, The Pater 
Noster Books; A Serious Call, Everyman’s Li- 
brary, Dent.] 

First Qualification: Discernment between the 
Eternal and the non-eternal. 

“The conviction that the Eternal is enduring, 
and that all else is unenduring” (Тайша Bodha). 

“A religious or a monk who does not strive per- 
fectly to die to the world, and to follow after God 
by true and sincere love, does not live up to his 
profession. Alas! how many, both men and 
women, now-a-days miserably deceive them- 
selves, for they clothe themselves in the monastie 
habit, take the vows of religion, and yet think 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 107 

little or nothing of the perfect life! On the con- 
‘trary they cleave tenaciously to created things, 
and seek them for their own pleasure instead of 
for God; they most earnestly desire outward 
comforts, and without fear pour out their souls on 
external things” (Blosius, A Short Rule, vii-viii). 

“ The spiritual beginner should diligently recall 
his mind to God and should reverently attend to 
His Presence in е: in every place, remembering that 
God is everywhere whole and undivided. He 
should also converse with God inwardly, sending 
forth to Him loving desires and burning aspira- 
tions. Putting aside all distracting multiplicity 
of created things, he should learn to fix his 
thoughts on One and cleave fast to One. This 

‘introversion,’ or dwelling w within his own soul, is 
of the very highest importance for him” (Short 
Rule, p. 26). 

“When shall I die to myself and to all created 
things? When shall nothing live within me but 
only Thou?” (ibid., р. 28). 

“For Thy sake I renounce all perishable 
things. I cast aside with contempt everything 
that is not Thee” (ibid., р. 48). 

“Whatever is not God care little for, and think 
it of not much importance to thee. This will 
help thee to attend to God and to live with Him 
in thine own soul with a freedom of mind unat- 
tached to anything” (ibid., p. 63). 

a 

+ 

108 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

“You will find that all the world preaches to 
an attentive mind; and that if you have but ears 

to hear, almost everything you meet teaches you 

\ some lesson of wisdom. 

“But now, if to these admonitions and in- 
structions, which we receive from our senses, 
from an experience of the state of human life; if 
to these we add the lights of religion, those great 
truths which the Son of God has taught us; _it 

‘will be then as much past all doubt, that there is 

but one happiness for man, as that there is but 
one God. 

“For since religion teaches us that our souls 
are immortal, that piety and devotion will carry 
them to an eternal enjoyment of God, and that 
carnal, worldly tempers will sink them into an 
everlasting misery with damned spirits, what 
gross nonsense and stupidity is it, to give the 
name of joy or happiness to anything but that 
which carries us to this joy and happiness in 
God!” (Law, Serious Call, рр. 150-1). 

Second Qualification: Freedom from self-indul- 
gence in the fruits of works. 

“Tt is a freedom from any wish for the feasts of 
this world or of paradise” (Tattva Bodha). 

“Cut up by the roots all that is of self within 
my soul” (Short Rule, р. 49). 

“For the love of Jesus Christ, who for thee has 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 109 

suffered the hardest things, renounce the pleasure 
of the senses. Be ready to do without 
even the delights of the spirit, according to the 
good pleasure and providence of God” (ibid., 
0797). 

“Know that he who would attain to the mys- 
tical science, must abandon and be detached 
from five things: 1, from creatures; 2, from 
temporal things; 3, Ж the very gifts of the 
Holy Spirit; 4, from himself; 5, he must be lost 
in God. This last is the completest of all, be- 
cause that soul only that knows how to be so 
detached, is that which attains to being lost in 
God, and thus alone knows how safely to find 
himself” (Molinos, Spiritual Guide, ш, 18). 

г “Tt is no hard matter to despise human com- 

ort, when we have that which is divine. It is | 
much and very much, to be able to lack both | 
human and divine comfort; and, for God’s | 
honour, to be willing cheerfully to endure desola- | 

tion of heart; and to seek oneself in nothing, nor 
to regard one's own merit” (Imitation, II, ix). 
“Learn now that there is no cure for desire, no 
cure for the love of reward, no cure for the misery 
of longing, save in the fixing of the sight and 
hearing upon that which is invisible and sound- 
less. Begin even now to practise it, and so a 
thousand serpents will be kept from your path. 
Live in the eternal” (Light on the Path; Karma). 

110 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Third Qualification: Quietude, Control, Сезза- 
tion, Endurance, Faith, Concentration. 

This ; group of Six Vi irtues, which make up the 
third qualification, is developed from a sentence 
in the Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad (4,4,23): 
“Therefore he who knows thus, possesses 
quietude, control, cessation, endurance, con- 
centration.”’ 

Quietude: “It is mastery over the mental- 
emotional nature” (Tattva Bodha). = 
“In fact, if only with earnest self- denial, this 
exercise of introversion and internal prayer be 
diligently persevered in, a man will at last be- 
come in mind pure, simple, unattached, free, 
raised above all passing things, and, cleaving 
` constantly to God, will attain to the highest point 
of perfection” (Short Rule, p. 29). 

“Know that although exterior solitude doth 
much assist for the obtaining of inner Peace, yet 
the Lord did not mean this, when He spake by 
His prophet, J will bring her into the wilderness, 
and speak comfortably unto her. But He meant 
the inner solitude, which together with the other 
conduces to the obtaining of the precious jewel 
of the inner Peace. Inner solitude consists in 
the forgetting of all creatures, in detachment, 
in a perfect abnegation of all purpose, desire, 
thought and will. This is the true solitude, 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 111 

wherein the soul reposes with a sweet and inward 
serenity, in the arms of the Highest Good” 
(Spiritual Guide, iii, 12). 

Control: “It is the mastery over the eyes and 
the other outward powers,” (Таша Bodha). 

“The soul must take care to be attached to no 
created thing, to nothing perishable, with any 
kind of badly ordered affection and love. Fare- 
well must be said to all that delights the senses; 
the pleasures of the flesh must be utterly re- 
nounced. Be therefore dead to the world, and 
as he that is dead is blind and deaf, do not desire 
or will to see or hear anything except in:as far as 
it is necessary, or at least useful, to see or hear 
it” (Short Rule, р. 3). 

“Most diligently keep guard over the eyes, the 

= and the tongue in order to shun things un- 

lawful, vain and useless. Great watchfulness 
land” os are needful in speaking, that too 
many words may be avoided and no unfitting 
ones used, Let thy speech be short, simple 
and calm. All the bodily me mbers should be 
‘carefully kept under restraint” (Short Rule, 
p. 58). 

“True quietness of heart therefore is gotten by 

| resisting our passions, not by obeying them. 

There is then no peace in the heart of a carnal 
man, nor in him that is given to outward things, 

112 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

but in the spiritual and devout man” (Imitation, 
I, vi). 

“Tf religion requires us sometimes to fast, and 
deny our natural appetites, it is to lessen that | 
struggle and war that is in our nature, it is tO 
render our bodies fitter instruments of purity, 
and more obedient to the good motions of Divine 
grace; it is to dry up the springs of our passions 
that war against the soul, to соо! the flame of our 
blood, and render the mind more capable of 
Divine meditations. So that although these 
abstinences give some pain to the body, yet they 
so lessen the power of bodily appetites and pas- 
sions, and so increase our taste of spiritual joys, 
that even these severities of religion, when prac- 
tised with discretion, add much to the comfort- 
able enjoyment of our lives” (Serious Call, р. 
127). 

Cessation: “The excellent Cessation is the con- 
dition: of refusing to lean on external things” 
(Crest Jewel). 

Mohini М. Chatterjee, translating the At- 
manatma Viveka, says: “Uparati (Cessation) is 
the abstaining on principle from engaging in any 
of the acts and ceremonies enjoined by the 
Shastras.” Elaborating this in an article en- 
titled ‘Qualifications for Chelaship,” published 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 113 

in A Guide to Theosophy (1887), Mohini said: 

“ The third qualification, known by the Brah- 
mins as ‘Uparati,’ is the renunciation of all 
formal religion and the power of contemplating 
objects without being in the least disturbed in the 
performance of the great task one has set before 
oneself. What is here expected of the aspirant 
for spiritual knowledge is that he should not al- 
low his sympathies and usefulness to be narrowed 
by the domination of any particular ecclesiastical 
system, and that his renunciation of worldly ob- 
jects should not proceed merely from an inca- 
pacity to appreciate their value.” 

In A Memoir of Father Dignam, a Jesuit, a let- 
ter is given in which he says: “1 am so anxious 
that you should never lose sight of first principles, | 
that your devotion should be to God’s will pure 
and simple; that prayers, and Communions and 
church-goings, are but creatures, are but means 
to an end, just as much as wine or money, and 
that some people are more in danger of inordinate 
affections to the former than the latter.” 

“The condition of refusing to lean on external 
things” of the Crest Jewel, naturally includes 
the condition of non-dependence upon rites and 
ceremonies and ritual, ‘‘Communions and church 
goings.” It is evident, however, that in some 
cases, as Mohini indicates, complete abstinence 

E The Theosophist many years ago, and reprinted 

> 

114 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

is necessary, just as a man who has been a glut- 
ton, or who has persuaded himself that he can- 
not sleep without a light burning in his room, can 
liberate himself only by means of enforced and 
total abstinence. The spiritual life of the dis- 
ciple, and his relation with his Master, is in no 
way dependent upon his church, or upon Brah- 
manical or other ceremonies. The outer ob- 
servances of a disciple are an expression of his 
obedience to his Master, for his Master’s pur- 
poses and not for his own. He remains com- 
pletely detached, while he labours with zeal and 
enthusiasm. 

Other meanings of Cessation are suggested in 
the following extracts: 

С 16 is bringing each power back into its own 
\ ргорег sphere” (Тайша Bodha). 

“Learn to despise outward things, and to give 

thyself to things inward, and thou shalt perceive 
\ the kingdom of God to be come in thee. 

“The inward man he often visiteth; and hath 
with him sweet discourses, pleasant solace, much 
peace, familiarity exceeding wonderful” (Imita- 
tion, П, 1). 

“To be truly solitary, the soul ought to forget 
all the creatures, and even herself; otherwise she 
will never be able to make any near approach to 
God. Many leave and forsake all things, but 
they do not leave their own liking, their own will, 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 115 

| and themselves; and hence the truly solitary ones 

are few. For if the soul does not detach herself 
from her own appetite and desire, from her own 
will, from spiritual gifts, and from repose even in 
Spiritual things, she never can attain to this high 
felicity of inner solitude” (Spiritual Guide). 

“You can make no stand against the assaults 
of pride, the meek affections of humility can have 
no place in your soul, till you stop the power of 
е world over you, and resolve against a blind 
obedience to its laws. 

“And when you are once advanced thus far, as 
to be able to stand still in the torrent of worldly 
fashions and opinions, and examine the worth 
and value of things which are most admired and 
valued in the world, you have gone a great way 
in the gaining of your freedom, and have laid a 
good foundaticn for the amendment of your heart. 

“For as great as the power of the world is, it is 
all built upon a blind obedience; and we need 
only open our eyes to get quit of its power” 
(Serious Call, p. 220). 

Endurance: “It is the bearing of all pains 
without rebelling against them, unconcerned 
and unlamenting”’ (Crest Jewel). 

“Tt is the power to endure heat and cold, 
pleasure and pain and all that comes from with- 
out” (Tattva Bodha). 

116 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

“Injuries, ridicule, calumnies, sorrows and 
losses, that come upon him by the permission of 
God, he must learn to bear humbly, without 
complaint or murmuring, believing with a full 
conviction of mind that they are sent by God. 

=. He should acknowledge in his heart that 
however much he may have to bear, and however 
deeply he may be humbled, he still deserves a 
greater humiliation on account of his iniquity 
and ingratitude to God” (Short Rule, р. 10). 

“Tn like manner resignation is more perfect 
in these souls because it springs from the internal 
and infused fortitude, which grows as the internal 
exercise of pure faith, with silence and resigna- 
tion, is continued” (Spiritual Guide, i, 16). 

“My son, be not dismayed by the painful 
labours which thou hast undertaken for me, 
neither be thou utterly cast down because of any 
tribulations which befall thee; but let my promise 
strengthen and comfort thee in all events. . 
Wait a little while, and thou shalt see a speedy 
end of thine evils” (Imitation, ІП, xlvii). 

“Thus was the Cross of Christ, in St. Paul's 
days, the glory of Christians; not as it signified 
their not being ashamed to own a Master that 
was crucified, but as it signified their glorying in 
a religion which was nothing else but a doctrine 
of the Cross, that called them to the same suffer- 
ing spirit, the same sacrifice of themselves, the 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 117 

same renunciation of the world, the same humil- 
ity and meekness, the same patient bearing of 
injuries, reproaches, and contempts, and the 
same dying to all the greatness, honours, and 
happiness of this world, which Christ showed 
upon the Cross” (Serious Call, р. 224). 

Faith: “Faith is the firm conviction of the 
truth of the teaching and the word of the Mas- 
ter” (Crest Jewel). 

“It is a firm confidence in the word of the 
teaching and the Teacher” (Tattva Bodha). 

7 “Consult with him that is wise and of sound 
judgment, and seek to be instructed by one bet- 
ter than thy self, rather than to follow thine own 
inventions” (Imitation, I, iv). 

“Tt is a great matter to live in obedience, to be 
under a superior, and not to be at our own dis- 
posing. . . . Go whither thou wilt, thou shalt 
find no rest, but in humble subjection under the 
government of a superior” (ibid, I, ix). 

“Му son, he that endeavoureth to withdraw 
himself from obedience, withdraweth himself 
from grace: and he who seeketh for himself 
private benefits, loseth those which are common. 

“He that doth not cheerfully submit himself 
to his superior, showeth that his flesh is not 
as “yet perfectly brought into subjection, but 
oftentimes struggleth and murmureth against 

1188 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

| him. . . . Because thou still lovest thyself in- , 

ordinately, thou art afraid to resign thyself wholly | 
to the will of others. . . . I became of all шеп. 
the most humble and the most abject, that thou. 
mightest overcome thy pride with my humility” 
(ibid., ПІ, xii). 

“I would it were so with thee, that thou wert. 
arrived at this, to be no longer a lover of thyself, , 
but to stand merely at my beck, and at his whom | 
I have appointed a father over thee; then thou: 
shouldst exceedingly please me, and all thy life: 
should pass away in јоу and peace” (ibid., ПТ, 
xxxii). 

“Nothing whatever should he prefer to obedi- : 
ence, remembering that perfect mortification of 
our own will is the most pleasing sacrifice we can 
offer to God” (Short Rule, р. 7). | 

“ But, my child, you belong to a greater family 
than mine; you are a young member of the family 
of this Almighty Father of all nations, who has 
ereated infinite orders of Angels, and number- 
less generations of men, to be fellow-members of 
one and the same society in Heaven. 

“You do well to reverence and obey my au- 
thority because God has given me power over 
you, to bring you up in His fear, and to do for 
you as the holy fathers recorded in Seripture did 
for their children, who are now in rest and peace 

‚ with God” (Serious Call, р. 240). 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 119 

Concentration: “Concentration is the con- 
tinual staying of the soul in the pure Eternal 
at all times, and not the caressing of imagina- 
tions” (Crest Jewel). 

“Tt is one-pointedness of thought and imagina- 
tion” (Tattwa Bodha). 

“T count not myself to have apprehended: but 
this one thing I do, forgetting those things which 
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things 
which are before, I press toward the mark”’ 
(Philippians, їп, 13-14). 

“Му son, I ought to be thy supreme and ulti- 
mate end, if thou desire to be truly blessed. 

I would therefore thou shouldst refer all 
| | things principally unto me, for І am He who have 
| ‘given all” (Imitation, ІП, ix). 

“О Lord, if only my will may remain right and 
firm towards thee, do with me whatsoever it shall 
please thee” (ibid., III, xvii). 
=" Direct thy whole attention unto this, to 
please me alone, and neither to desire nor to seek 
any thing besides me. 

“Tn giving thyself up with all thy heart to.the 
divine will, not seeking thine own interest either 
in great matters or in small, either in time or in 
eternity... . .” (ibid., ІП, xxv). 

/ “He that is wise and well instructed in the 
Spirit standeth fast upon these changing things; 
not heeding what he feeleth in himself, or which 

120 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

way the wind of instability bloweth; but that 
the whole intent of his mind may be to the right 
and the best end. 

“For thus he will be able to continue one and 
the same and unshaken, in the midst of so many 
various events directing continually the single 
eye of his intent unto me” (¿bid., ІП, xxxiii). 

Fourth Qualification: Desire for Liberation. 

“Тһе ardent Desire for Liberation is the will 
to be rid of all the fetters forged by unwisdom, 
beginning with self-reference and ending with the 
body, through discernment of the real nature of 
the Divine Self” (Crest Jewel). 

“Others there are who, being illuminated in 
their understandings, and purged in their affec- 
tion, do always pant after things eternal, are un- 
willing to hear of the things of this world, and 
serve the necessities of nature with grief; and 
these perceive what the Spirit of truth speaketh 
in them. 

“For He teacheth them to despise earthly, and 
to love heavenly things; to neglect the world, and 
to desire heaven all the day and night. . 

“Love desires to be free, and estranged from 
all worldly affections, that so its inward sight 
may not be hindered; that it may not be en- 
tangled by any temporal prosperity, or subdued 
by any adversity. . 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 121 

/ “Love watcheth, and, sleeping, slumbereth 
not. Though weary, love is not tired; though 
pressed, it is not straitened; though alarmed, it 
is not confounded: but as a lively flame and 
burning torch, it forces its way upwards, and 
securely passes through all” (Imitation, III, 
iv, м). 

— 

п 
SACRED TEXTS QUOTED 

Verses 
74-138, THE FOUR BODIES 

“Om: this syllable, this imperishable, is the 
All. Its expansion is what has been, what is, 
what shall be. All, verily, is Om. And whatso- 
ever else surpasses the three times, this also is 
Om. For all this is the Eternal, this is the 
Divine Self; and this Divine Self has four 
measures. 

Standing in waking, outwardly perceiving, of 
sevenfold form, with nineteen energies, experi- 
encing the gross, Common-to-all-men, this is the 
first measure. 

_ “Standing in dreaming, inwardly perceiving, 

” of sevenfold form, with nineteen energies, ex- 
periencing the subtile, the Radiant, this is the 
second measure. 

122 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

“Where entering into rest, he desires no de- 
sire, nor beholds any dream, this is dreamless- 
ness. Standing in dreamlessness, unified, a 
sphere of spiritual perception, formed of joy, 
experiencing joy, whose energy is spiritual con- 
sciousness, the Wise Seer is the third measure. 
He is Lord of all, he is all-knowing, he is the inner 
ruler, he is the source of all, the forth-going and | 
the indrawing of lives. 

“Nor outwardly perceiving, nor inwardly per- 
ceiving, nor perceiving in both ways, nor a 
sphere of spiritual perception, nor perception, 
nor non-perception; invisible, inapprehensible, 
ungraspable, indistinguishable, unimaginable, 
unindicable, whose essence is realization of one- 
ness with the Eternal, where forth-going is 
ended, still, benign, beyond duality, is held to 
be the fourth: this is the Divine Self, this is the | 
goal of wisdom.” hon 

(Mandukya Upanishad, 1-7.) 

151-213, THE FIVE VESTURES 

“Бо, verily, this man is formed of the essence 
of food; this is his head, this is his right side, this | 
is his left side, this is the basis whereon he 
stands firm. ... | 

“Within him, within this formed of the es- 
ence of food, there is another inner self, formed 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 123 

of life-breath; by it, this is filled. And he, 
verily, has the form of man; according to the 
human form of that, this has the form of man; 
the forward breath is’ his head, the distributive 
breath is his right side, the downward breath is 
his left side, the ether is himself, earth is the 
basis whereon he stands firm. . . . 

“Within him, within this formed of life- 
breath, there is another inner self, formed of 
mind; by it, this is filled. And he, verily, has 
the form of man; according to the human form 
of that, this has the form of man... . 

“Within him, within this formed of mind, 
there is another inner self formed of intelligence; 
by it, this is filled. And he, verily, has the form 
of man; according to the human form of that, 
this has the form of man; faith is his head, шг | 
eousness is his right 40 truth is his left side, 
union is himself, the ат is the basis й 
he ständs firm. 

“Within him, within this formed of intelligence, 
there is another inner self formed of bliss; by it, 
this is filled. And he, verily, has the form of 
man; according to the human form of that, this 
has the form of man; love is his head, joy is his 
right side, rejoicing is his left side, bliss is him- 
self, the Eternal is the basis hoon he stands 
firm.” 

AA 

(Тани Upanishad, 2, 2-5.) 

A seranti 

124 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

234, The Eternal 18 this universe : 

“The Eternal, verily, is this immortal; the 
Eternal before, the Eternal behind, to the right! 
and to the left, downward and upward extending; 
the Eternal, verily, is this universe.” 

(Mundaka Upanishad, 2, 2, 11.) 

236, I am not contained in these things, nor do 
beings dwell in Me: 

“By Me, whose form is unmanifest, was this 
whole world stretched forth; all beings are set in 
Me, but I am not contained in them. 

“Yet do not beings dwell in Me; behold My 
lordly power! І am the supporter of all beings, 
though I dwell not in beings; My Soul causes 
beings to Бе.” 

(Bhagavad Gita, 9, 4-5.) 

244, That thou art: 

“That soul is the Self of all that is, this is the 
Real, this the Self. That thou art, O Shve- 
taketu.” , 

(Chhandogya Upanishad, 6, 8-16.) 

248, There is the teaching, “Not thus! not 
thus |” 

“The form of this Spirit is as a saffron robe, 
as white wool, as the sheen of the burnished 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 125 

beetle, as a flame of fire, as the white lotus, as a 
swift lightning flash. Verily, as a swift light- 
ning flash is the splendour of him who knows 
this thus. 

“Here, now, there is the teaching ‘Not thus! 
not thus!’ For beyond this ‘not thus!’ there is 
nothing else. And so his designation is ‘the 
Real of the real.’ The lives, verily, are the real. 
Of them, this is the Real.” 

(Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, 3, 3, 6.) 

253, This Imperishable is neither gross nor fine, 
neither short nor long : 

“This; which knowers of the Eternal call the 
Imperishable, is neither gross nor fine, neither 
short nor long, neither glowing nor adhering, 
without shadow, without darkness, without air, 
without ether, unattached, without taste, smell, 
sight, hearing, voice, mind, without radiance, 
without life-breath, without mouth, without 
measure, without inside, without outside; this 
consumes naught, nor does any consume it.” 

(Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, 3, 8, 8.) 

293, The Eternal am 1 9 

“The Eternal, verily, was this in the begin- 
ning. It knew itself: ‘the Eternal am I. 

Ml 

126 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

Therefore, it became all that is. Then which- 
ever of the bright powers became awakened to 
this, he became That, so of the seers, so of men. 
Therefore, beholding That, the seer Vamadeva 
declared: ‘I was Manu and the sun.’ So is it 
now. Whoever thus knows, ‘the Eternal am I,’ 

becomes this All. The bright powers can not 

withhold him, for he becomes their Self.” 

(Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, 1, 4, 10.) 

296, Unborn, everlasting : 

' “That Seer is not born, nor dies; nor does He 
proceed from aught, nor has any become He. 
Unborn, everlasting, immemorial, the Ancient | 
is not slain when the body is slain.” 

(Katha Upanishad, 1, 2, 18.) 

“He is never born nor dies, nor will He, having | 
being, evermore cease to be; unborn, everlasting, 
immemorial, this Ancient is not slain when the 
body is slain.” 

(Bhagavad Gita, 2, 20.) 

323, For negligence is death : 

“T verily call negligence death, and likewise I 
call freedom from negligence immortality.” 

(Mahabharata, Sanat Sujatiya, 2, 2.) 

CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 127 

331, He who makes a division between himself 
and the true Self, falls under fear : 

“Tt is the great fear, the uplifted thunderbolt. 
They who have seen it, become immortal.” 

(Katha Upanishad, 2, 6, 6.) 

“He feared. Therefore, one who is alone 
fears. He then thought within himself: ‘Since 
there is naught other than I, what do I fear?’ 
Then, verily, his fear departed, for what should 
he have feared? It is from a second, verily, that 
fear arises.” 

(Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, 1, 4, 2.) 

343, He who is full of peace, lord of himself : 

“He who knows is therefore full of peace, 
lord of himself, he has ceased from false gods, he 
is full of endurance, he intends his will. In his 
soul he beholds the Бош” 

(Brihad Aran yaka Upanishad, 4, 4, 23.) 

394, When all acts of desire cease, naught re 
mains but That: 

“When all desires that were hid in the heart 
are let go, the mortal becomes immortal, and 
reaches the Eternal.” 

Er Aranyaka Upanishad, 4, 4, 6; Katha 
Upanishad, 2, 6, 14.) 

128 CREST JEWEL OF WISDOM 

447, His former works are working themselves 
out: 

“When the former works have worked them- 
selves out, he gains liberation even in life. 
Through lapse of time, the former works work 
themselves out.” 

(Muktika Upanishad, 1, 42-43.) 

% 

ь “сә 
т. 
| са 
| хх = 
И А A 
a > 
— ў 
ж | 
= 
= О 
Е 4 
4 
қ = 
* ў F 

0008888: 
| Tu 
De an 24 
а 

щадя 

ШИШ