spain 
bsprianriae 

1 

aes 

oer 

ArH ACh BE TAIN 
BOOK OF FHE DEAD 

Oxford University Press 
London Edinburgh Glasgow Copenhagen 
New York Toronto Melbourne Capetown 
Bombay Calcutta Madras Shanghai 
Humphrey Milford Publisher to the University 

THE TRANSLATOR (right) AND THE EDITOR 
IN GANGTOK, SIKKIM 

Described on page xvii 

1unx] asvd UO paqrszsaq, 

SW TOGOQHI OGY¥d AHL AO v49 GNy vS£ SOTTO’ 

THE TIBETAN 
BOOK OF THE DEAD 

; g 

The After-Death Experiences 
on the Bardo Plane, according 
to Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s 

English Rendering 

By 

W. Y. EVANS-WENTZ 
WEA, D.Lire, Bsc. 
Jesus College, Oxford; Author of 
“The Fairy-Faith in Celtic 

Countries’ 

With Foreword by Sir John Woodroffe 
jar 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD 
1927 

IN MEMORY OF 
MY DECEASED FATHER AND MOTHER 
I DEDICATE 
THIS BOOK TO MY TEACHERS 
BOTH SECULAR AND RELIGIOUS 
IN EUROPE AND AMERICA 
AND THROUGHOUT 
THE ORIENT 

‘Thou shalt understand that it is a science most profitable, and 
passing all other sciences, for to learn to die. Fora man to know 
that he shall die, that is common to all men; as much as there is 
no man that may ever live or he hath hope or trust thereof; but 
thou shalt find full few that have this cunning to learn to die... . 
I shall give thee the mystery of this doctrine ; the which shall 
profit thee greatly to the beginning of ghostly health, and to 
a stable fundament of all virtues.’— Orologtum Saptentiae. 

‘ Against his will he dieth that hath not learned to die. Learn 
to die and thou shalt learn to live, for there shall none learn to 
live that hath not learned to die.’”—Toure of all Toures: and 
Teacheth a Man for to Die. 

The Book of the Craft of Dying (Comper’s Edition). 

“Whatever is here, that is there ; what is there, the same is 
here. He who seeth here as different, meeteth death after death. 

‘By mind alone this is to be realized, and [then] there is no 
difference here, From death to death he goeth, who seeth as if 
there is difference here.’—Katha Upantshad, iv, 10-11 (Swami 
Sharvananda’s Translation). 

ieee, 

In this book I am seeking—so far as possible—to suppress 
my own views and to act simply as the mouthpiece of a Tibetan 
sage, of whom I was a recognized disciple. 

He was quite willing that I should make known his inter- 
pretation of the higher /amazc teachings and of the subtle 
esotericism underlying the Bardo Thédol, following the private 
and orally transmitted instructions which he as a young man 
had received when living the life of an ascetic with his late 
hermit-g¢ru in Bhutan. Being himself a man who possessed 
a considerable amount of Western learning, he took great 
trouble to enable me to reproduce Oriental ideas in a form 
which would be intelligible to the European mind. If, in 
amplification, I have frequently referred to Occidental parallels 
of various mystic or occult doctrines current in the Orient, 
I have done so largely because in my wanderings there, 
chiefly in the high Himalayas and on the Tibetan frontiers 
of Kashmir, Garhwal, and Sikkim, I had come across learned 
philosophers and holy men who have found or thought they 
had found beliefs and religious practices—some recorded in 
books, some preserved by oral tradition alone—not only 
analogous to their own, but so closely akin to those of the 
Occident as to imply some historical connexion therewith. 
Whether the supposed influence passed from East to West 
or from West to East, was not so clear to their minds. 
A certain similarity does, however, seem to attach to the 
culture of these geographically divided provinces. 

I have spent more than five years in such research, wandering 
from the palm-wreathed shores of Ceylon, and thence through 
the wonder-land of the Hindus, to the glacier-clad heights of 
the Himalayan Ranges, seeking out the Wise Men of the 
East. Sometimes I lived among city dwellers, sometimes 
in jungle and mountain solitudes among yogis, sometimes in 

3069 b 

x PREFACE 

monasteries with monks; sometimes I went on pilgrimages, 
as one of the salvation-seeking multitude. The Introduction 
—which in its unusual lengthiness is intended to serve as 
a very necessary commentary to the translation—and the 
annotations to the text record the more important results 
of this research, more especially in relation to Northern or 
Mahayana Buddhism. 

Nevertheless, I have been really little more than a compiler 
and editor of ‘The Tibetan Book of the Dead’. To the 
deceased translator—who combined in himself a greater 
knowledge of the Occult Sciences of Tibet and of Western 
Science than any Tibetan scholar of this epoch-—the chict 
credit for its production very naturally belongs. 

In addition to that greatest of all debts which the student 
ever owes to his preceptor, I acknowledge my indebtedness 
to each of my many good friends and helpers who have 
personally aided me herewith. Some of them are of one 
Faith, some of another; some are far away in Japan and in 
China, some in the land of my birth, America; many are in 
Ceylon and in India; a few are in Tibet. 

Here in England I think first of all of Dr. R. R. Marett, 
Reader in Social Anthropology in the University of Oxford, 
and Fellow of Exeter College, who ever since I first came up 
to Oxford, in the year 1907, has faithfully guided my anthro- 
pological research. Sir John Woodroffe, late a Judge of the 
High Court, Calcutta, now Reader in Indian Law in the 
University of Oxford, and the foremost authority in the West 
on the Yantras, has read through our translation, chiefly in 
relation to the character of the work as a ritual more or 
less Tantric, and offered important advice. I am also very 
grateful to him for the Foreword. 

To Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh, of Calcutta, Joint Honorary 
Secretary with Sir John Woodroffe of the Agamanusandhana 
Samiti, as to Sir E. Denison Ross, Director of the School of 
Oriental Studies, London Institution, and to Dr. F. W. Thomas, 
Librarian of the India Office, London, I am under a special 

PREFACE xi 

obligation for important constructive criticism on the book 
as a whole. To Major W. L. Campbell, British Political 
Representative in Tibet, Bhutan, and Sikkim during my 
sojourn in Gangtok, Iam indebted for much encouragement 
and scholarly aid, and for the gift of two valuable paintings 
prepared by his orders in the chief monastery of Gyantse, 
Tibet, to illustrate the symbolism of the Bardo Thédol text, 
and herein reproduced. To his predecessor and successor 
in the same post, Sir Charles Bell, I am also a debtor for 
important advice at the outset of my Tibetan research, when 
in Darjeeling. To Mr. E. S. Bouchier, M.A. (Oxon.), F. R. 
Hist. S., author of Syria as a Roman Province, A Short 
flistory of Antioch, &c., my heartiest thanks are due for 
the assistance which he has so kindly rendered in reading 
the whole of this book when in proof. 

Sardar Bahadur S.W. Laden La, Chief of Police, Darjeeling, 
who sent me to Gangtok with a Ictter of introduction to 
the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, the translator of the 
Bardo Thodol; Dr. Johan Van Manen, Secretary of the 
Asiatic Society, Calcutta, who lent me Tibetan books which 
proved very helpful while the translation was taking shape, 
and who afterwards contributed advice concerning transla- 
tions; and Dr. Cassius A. Pereira, of Colombo, Ceylon, who 
criticized parts of the Introduction in the light of Theravada 
Buddhism, are among many others to whom my thanks 
are due. 

Thus, under the best of auspices, this book is sent forth to 
the world, in the hope that it may contribute something to the 
sum total of Right Knowledge, and serve as one more spiritual 
strand in an unbreakable bond of good will and universal peace, 
binding East and West together in mutual respect and under- 
standing, and in love such as overleaps every barrier of creed 

and caste and race. 
W. Y. E-W. 

Jesus Cottece, OxForp, 
Easter, 1927. 

I. RENUNCIATION 

“Get thee away from life-lust, from conceit, 

From ignorance, and from distraction’s craze ; 

Sunder the bonds; so only shalt thou come 

To utter end of Ill. Throw off the Chain 

Of birth and death—thou knowest what they mean. 

So, free from craving, in this life on earth, 

Thou shalt go on thy way calm and serene.’—The Buddha. 
Psalms of the Early Buddhists, 1. Wi 

(Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Translation). 

Hl. VICTORY 

‘But anguish crept upon me, even me, 

Whenas I pondered in my little cell: 

Ah me! how have I come into this evil road. 

Into the power of Craving have I strayed! 

Brief is the span of life yet left to me; 

Old age, disease, hang imminent to crush. 

Now ere this body perish and dissolve, 

Swift let me be; no time have I for sloth. 

And contemplating, as they really are, 

The Aggregates of Life that come and go, 

I rose and stood with mind emancipate! 

For me the Buddha’s words had come to pass’.— 
Mittakali, a Brahmin Bhikbhuni. 

Psalms of the Early Buddhists, I, xliii 
(Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Translation). 

COME NTS 

PREFACE 
ILLUSTRATIONS 

FOREWORD: The Science of Death, by Sir John Woodroffe . 

INTRODUCTION 

I. 

II. 
iF 

The Importance of the ee Thodol . < ae fs 

The Symbolism 

The Esoteric Significance of the — Nine — of the 

Bardo . 

. The Esoteric Significance of the Five Elements 
. The Wisdom Teachings 

. The Death Ceremonies 

. The Bardo, or After-Death State 

. The Psychology of the Bardo Visions 

. The Judgement 

. The Rebirth Doctrine . 

. The Cosmography 

. The Fundamental Teachings Summarized 

. The Manuscript 

. The Origin of the Bardo Thédol . 
. The Translating and the Editing . 

BOOK ad 

THE CAlkaAl BARDO AND THE 
CHONYID BARDO 

THE OBEISANCES 

THE INTRODUCTION 

The Transference of the Censsneneess pees 
The Reading of this Thédol . 

The Practical Application of this Thodol By the Omsen . 

xiV CONTENTS 

Pak ol 

THE BARDO OF THE MOMENTS OF DEATH 

INSTRUCTIONS ON THE SYMPTOMS OF DEATH, OR 
THE FIRST STAGE OF THE CH/IKHAI BARDO: THE 
PRIMARY CLEAR LIGHT SEEN AT THE MOMENT 
OF DEATH 

INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING THE SECOND , STAGE 
OF THE CHIKHAI BARDO: THE SECONDARY 
CLEAR LIGHT SEEN IMMEDIATELY AFTER DEATH 

Peo vL 

THE BARDO OF THE EXPERIENCING 
OF GREATLY 

INTRODUCTORY INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING THE 
EXPERIENCING OF REALITY DURING THE THIRD 
STAGE OF THE BARDO, CALLED THE CHONYID 
BARDO, WHEN THE KARMIC APPARITIONS AP- 
PEAR . . 

THE DAWNING OF THE PEACEFUL DEITIES, FROM 
THE FIRST TO THE SEVENTH DAY : : 
The First Day 
The Second Day . 
The Third Day 
The Fourth Day 
The Fifth Day 
The Sixth Day 
The Seventh Day . 

THE DAWNING OF TIIE WRATHFUL DEITIES, FROM 
THE EIGHTH TO THE FOURTEENTH DAY . 
Introduction . 
The Eighth Day 
The Ninth Day 
The Tenth Day 
The Eleventh Day 
The Twelfth Day . 
The Thirteenth Day 
The Fourteenth Day 

THE CONCLUSION, SHOWING THE FUNDAMENTAL 
IMPORTANCE OF THE BARDO TEACHINGS 

89 

oF 

IolI 

TO4 
TO5 
108 
LIO 
IIl2 
TI5 
118 
126 

131 
131 
136 
138 
138 
139 
140 
141 
Le Fs) 

151 

CONTENTS 

BOOK II 

PAE S/DPA BARDO 

. THE OBEISANCES 
INTRODUCTORY VERSES 

PARI A 

THE AFTER-DEATH WORLD 

nt LBAKDO BODY: ITS BIRTH AND ITS SUPER- 
NORMAL FACULTIES : : 

GUARACTERISIMICS OF EXISTENCE IN THE INTER- 
MEDIATE STATE 5 > ae fe ee : 

THE JUDGEMENT 

THE ALL-DETERMINING INFLUENCE OF THOUGHT . 

THE DAWNING OF THE LIGHTS OF THE SIX ZOKAS. 

Pak 1! 

THE PROCESS OF REBIRTH 

THE CLOSING OF THE DOOR OF THE WOMB 
Method of Preventing Entry into a Womb 
The First Method of Closing the Womb-Door . 
The Second Method of Closing the Womb-Door 
The Third Method of Closing the Womb-Door . 
The Fourth Method of Closing the Womb-Door 
The Fifth Method of Closing the Womb-Door , 
THE CHOOSING OF THE WOMB-DOOR 
The Premonitory Visions of the Place of Rebirth 
The Protection against the Tormenting Furies . 
THE ALTERNATIVE CHOOSING: SUPERNORMAL 
BIRTH; OR WOMB-BIRTH . 
Supernormal Birth by Transference to a patie oe 
Womb-Birth: the Return to the Human World 

THE GENERAL CONCLUSION 

ESD 
155 

175 
176 
176 
TY 
178 
180 
18x 

183 
183 
185 

188 
189 
Igo 
193 

xvi CONTENTS 

THE APEEMiirs. 
I. THE INVOCATION OF THE BUDDHAS AND 
BODHISATTVAS 

Il. ‘THE PATH OF GOOD WISHES FOR SAVING FROM 
THE DANGEROUS NARROW PASSAGE-WAY OF 
THE SAKRDO : , . ‘ 

Ill. “THE ROOT VERSES OF THE SIX 2ARnDCS: 

IV. ‘THE PATH OF GOOD WISHES WHICH PROTECT- 
ETH FROM FEAR IN THE BARDO’ 

V. THE COLOPHON 

ADDENDA 

I YOGA 
II. TANTRICISM 
HI. MANTRAS, OR WORDS OF POWER 

IV. THE GURU AND SHISHYA il ae" AND 
INITIATIONS : 

V. REALITY 

VI. NORTHERN AND SOUTHERN BUDDHISM AND 
CHRISTIANITY ee : 

VIL. THE MEDIEVAL CHRISTIAN "JUDGEMENT 

INDEX 

197 

202 

205 

Web vstkATIONS 

I. THE TRANSLATOR AND THE EDITOR . preceding Plate II 

From a photograph of the Translator and the Editor in Tibetan dress, 
taken in Gangtok, Sikkim, during the year 1919. 

II. FOLIOS 35a AND 672 OF THE BARDO THODOL MS. 
Frontispiece 

A photographic reproduction (about two-thirds of the original size). 
In the original the illuminations are in colour (now much faded) 
painted on the folios (cf. p. 68). 

The painting on the upper folio illustrates, with the colours, 
emblems, and orientation in strict accord with the traditions of 
Tibetan monastic art, the description in the text of the united mandalas, 
or divine conclaves, of the Peaceful Deities of the First to the Sixth 
Day of the Bardo that dawn thus in one complete conclave on the 
Sixth Day (cf. pp. 118-26). In the central circle (Centre) is the 
Dhyani Buddha Vairochana, embraced by his shakt:, or divine spouse, 
the Mother of Infinite Space. In the next circle, each likewise 
embraced by his shat, are the four Dhyani Buddhas, who, with 
Vairochana, constitute the mazdala of the Five Dhyani Buddhas. In 
the outermost circle are typical Bodhisattvas and other deities who 
accompany the Five Dhyani Buddhas (cf. pp. 118-20); and in the 
four small outer circles the four female Door-Keepers of the complete 
conclave (cf. p. 120). 

The painting on the lower folio similarly illustrates, in colours, 
emblems, and orientation, the united mandalas of the Wrathful 
Deities of the Eighth to the Fourteenth Day that dawn thus in one 
complete conclave on the Fourteenth Day (cf. pp. 143-6). In the 
cruciform design at the centre are the three-headed Herukas of 
the Buddha, Vajra, Ratna, Padma, and Karma Order, each with his 
shakti, that dawn, mandala by mandala, from the Eighth to the 
Twelfth Day (cf. pp. 136-41). The outer circle contains repre- 
sentations of the various animal-headed deities that dawn on the 
Thirteenth and the Fourteenth Day (cf. pp. 141-6). In the four 
small outer circles are the Four Yoginis of the Door (cf. pp. 145-6). 

The translation of the text on the two folios is indicated by special 
markings on pages I20 and 144. 

Il]. EFFIGY OF THE DEAD PERSON ee mae One a8 
A reproduction (slightly reduced) of a copy of a Tibetan printed 
Chang-ku paper. 

3069 ¢ 

xviii ILLUSTRATIONS 

IV. THE GREAT MANDALA OF THE PEACEFUL DEITIES 
facing p. 118 

This and the companion illustration, number V, following, are 
photographic reproductions (about one-fourth of the original size) of 
two paintings in colour, on heavy cotton cloth, made in the chief 
monastery of Gyantse, Tibet, on the instructions of Major W. L. 
Campbell, to illustrate our Bardo Thddol translation (see Preface, 
p. xi). The colours, emblems, and orientations, as in the two 
manuscript illuminations described above, are in accord with the 
strict conventions of the religious art of Tibet. The correlations, too, 
between the text and the deities depicted, as brought out in the 
description of the two manuscript illuminations, also apply to these 
two more elaborate paintings. 

Innermost circle (representing the Centre of the orientation): at 
the centre, Vairochana (white) and shakt:, on lion throne (cf. pp. 105- 
6); at the top, Samanta-Bhadra (blue) and skakti; in subordinate 
circle on the left, Chenrazee (above), Mafijushri (below, on left), 
Vajra-Pani (below, on right); in subordinate circle on the right, 
Tson Khapa, a famous Tibetan guru (above), and his two chief 
shishyas (or disciples), Gendundub (below, on left), and Gyltshabje 
(below, on right). 

Lower circle (East): at the centre, Vajra-Sattva (blue), the reflex 
of Akshobhya, and shakti, on elephant throne ; Pushpa (above); Lasya 
(below) ; and Bodhisattvas (on left and right). Cf. pp. 108-9. 

Left circle (South): at the centre, Ratna-Sambhava (yellow) and 
shakti, on horse throne; Dhipa (above); Mala (below) ; and Bodhi- 
sattvas (on left and right). Cf. pp. 110-11. 

Upper circle (West): at the centre, Amitabha (red) and shahti, on 
peacock throne; Aloka (above); Gita (below); and Bodhisattvas 
(on left and right). Cf. p. 113. 

Right circle (North): at the centre, Amogha-Siddhi (green) and 
shakti, on harpy throne; Naivedya (above); Gandha (below); and 
Bodhisattvas (on left and right). Cf. pp. 115-6. 

Occupying the four corners of the great circle are the four chief 
Door-Keepers (cf. p. 120) of the Mandala, each pair on a fire- 
enhaloed lotus throne: upper left, Yamantaka (yellow) and shakt’, the 
Door-Keepers of the South; upper right, Hayagriva (red) and shakt:, 
the Door-Keepers of the West; lower right, Amrita-~-Dhara (white) 
and shakti, the Door-Keepers of the North; lower left, Vijaya (green) 
and shakti, the Door-Keepers of the East. At the bottom, in the 
centre, Padma Sambhava, the Great Human Guru of the Bardo Thédol 
Doctrine, in royal robes and pandit head-dress, holding a skull filled 
with blood, symbolical of renunciation of life, in his left hand, and 
a dorje, symbolical of mastery over life, in his right. At his feet lie 

ILLUSTRATIONS xix 

offerings: (1) the Zri-Ratna or Three Jewels of the Buddhist Faith, 
(2) a pair of elephant tusks, and (3) a branch of red coral. To the 
right of the Guru stands the Buddha of the Human Loka (yellow), 
Shakya Muni, holding a bhikkhu-staff and a begging-bowl; to the 
right, the Buddha of the Brute Lofa (blue) holding a book, symbolizing 
language and expression, or divine wisdom, which brute creatures 
* Tack. 

In the four corners are the four other Buddhas of the Six Lokas 
(cf. p. 121): upper left, the Buddha of the Deva Loka (white), 
holding a guitar, symbolizing excellence in arts and sciences and the 
harmony of existence in the world of the devas; upper right, the 
Buddha of the Asura Loka (green), holding a sword symbolizing 
the warlike nature of asuras; lower left, the Buddha of the Preta Loka 
(red), holding a box filled with all desirable objects to satisfy the 
cravings of the prefas; lower right, the Buddha of Hell (smoke- 
coloured), holding fire for consuming and water for purifying. 

Among other embellishments added by the artist are a sacred 
mirror (symbolizing form or body, which it reflects) near the trees on 
the left, and a sacred conch-shell trumpet of victory over the Sangsara 
(symbolizing sound) near the tree on the right; and, between the two 
Buddhas at the bottom, in two caves, yog7s, or holy men, in the 
Tibetan wilderness. 

At the top, in the centre, presiding over the whole mandala, Buddha 
Amitabha (red), on an enhaloed lotus and lunar throne holding 
a begging-bowl, with lotuses and the moon (white) on the left and 
lotuses and the sun (gold) on the right. 

V. THE GREAT MANDALA OF THE KNOWLEDGE-HOLD- 
ING AND WRATHFUL DEITIES ... . . facing p. 136 

Innermost circle: upper centre, Samanta-Bhadra (blue) and shaki, 
in wrathful aspect; lower centre (Centre), the Buddha Heruka (dark 
brown) and shakti (cf. p. 137); lower left (East), the Vajra Heruka 
(dark blue) and shai? (cf. p. 138); upper left (South), the Ratna 
Heruka (yellow) and shakii (cf. pp. 138-9); upper right (West), the 
Padma Heruka (reddish-brown) and shakti (cf. pp. 139-40); lower 
right (North), the Karma Heruka (dark green) and shakti (cf. pp. 140- 
1). Each pair of these deities are on a lotus and solar throne, 
enhaloed by flames of wisdom, and treading under foot mara beings 
(i.e. human beings, whose existence, being purely phenomenal, or 
karmic, is illusion, or maya), symbolizing the treading under foot of 
sangsaric (i.e. worldly) existence. At the bottom are offerings of the 
five sangsaric senses, symbolized by (1) two eyes, (2) two ears, 
(3) a tongue, (4) a heart (in the centre), and (5) a nose (above the 
heart); also of three blood-filled human skull-cups, held in position 

xX ILLUSTRATIONS 

by small human skulls, all of which symbolize renunciation of the 
world. 

Second circle: the Eight Kerimas (cf. pp. 142-3). 

Third circle: the Eight Htamenmas (cf. p. 143) and the Four 
Female Door-Keepers (cf. pp. 143-4). 

Outermost circle: the Twenty-Eight Various-Headed Mighty 
Goddesses (cf. pp. 144-5), four of whom are the Four Yoginis of 
the Door (cf. pp. 145-6). 

At the bottom, in the centre (Centre) the supreme Knowledge- 
Holding Deity, the Lotus Lord of Dance (red, for the five colours of 
text) and shakti. In the four corners, his four companion deities : 
lower left (East), the Earth-Abiding Knowledge-Holder (white) and 
shakti ; upper left (South), the Knowledge-Holder Having Power Over 
Duration of Life (yellow) and shakti; upper right (West), the Know- 
ledge-Holding Deity of the Great Symbol (red) and shakt’; lower 
right (North), the Self-Evolved Knowledge-Holder (green) and shakit. 
Each pair of deities of this mandala, that dawns intermediately 
(i.e. between the szandalas of the Peaceful Deities and the mandalas 
of the Wrathful Deities) on the Seventh Day (cf. pp. 126-8), are in 
peaceful aspect, on an cnhaloed lotus and lunar throne, performing 
a mystic dance which is Tantric. 

At the top, in the centre, presiding over the whole greater mandala, 
is Samanta-Bhadra (dark blue), the Adi-Buddha, and shakti (white), 
in peaceful aspect, on a lotus and lunar throne, enhaloed in rainbow 
colours, with lotuses and the moon (white) on his right and lotuses 
and the sun (gold) on his left. 

VI. THE TIBETAN JUDGEMENT . ..—st. facing p. 166 

A photographic reproduction (about one-fourth of the original size) 
of a monastic painting in colour, on heavy cotton cloth, made on the 
instructions of the editor, in Gangtok, Sikkim, by a Tibctan artist 
named Lharipa-Pempa-Tendup-La, to illustrate the Judgement (see 
P. 37). 

Occupying the central position is Dharma-Raja, the King of Truth, 
or Administrator of Truth and Justice, otherwise called Yama-Raja, 
the King and Judge of the Dead. He is the wrathful aspect of 
Chenrazce, the National Divine Protector of Tibet. The third eye ot 
spiritual insight is in his forehead. He stands enhaloed in flames 
of wisdom, on a solar throne supported by a lotus throne, treading 
under foot a mara form, symbolic of the maya (i.e. Jlusionary) nature 
of human existence. His head-dress is adorned with human skulls, 
and a serpent forms his necklace. His necklet is a human hide, the 
head of which protrudes from behind his right side, and a hand and 
foot hang down over the centre of his breast. A girdle of human 
heads surrounds his waist. His pavilion and the walls of his Court 

ILLUSTRATIONS xxi 

are adorned with the skull-symbols of death. His sword is the 
sword of spiritual power. The mirror in his left hand is the Mirror 
of Karma, in which are reflected every good and evil act (cf. p. 166) 
of each of the dead who are being judged, one by one. There is 
written on the mirror, in Tibetan, ‘Hri) the 67, or chief, mantra of 
Chenrazee. 

Directly in front of Dharma-Raja is the Monkey-Headed One, 
Sprehu-gochan (Tib. Sfre-hu-mgo-chan), otherwise called Shinje 
(cf. pp. 36-7), holding the scales, on one side of which are heaped-up 
black pebbles, the evil deeds, and, on the other, heaped-up white 
pebbles, the good deeds. On the right of Shinje stands the 
Little White God, emptying a sack of white pebbles; on the other 
side, the Little Black God, emptying a sack of black pebbles 
(cf. p. 166). 

Guarding the weighing are the Bull-Headed One, Wang-gochan 
(Tib. Glang-mgo-chan), holding another mirror of farma, and the 
Serpent-Headed One, Dul-gochan (Tib. Sbrul-mgo-chan), holding 
a scourge and a noose. 

A yellow deity, on the right of Dharma-RaAja, holding a writing- 
tablet and a stilus, and a brown deity, on the left, holding a sword and 
a noose, are the two Advocates. The yellow advocate is the defender, 
the brown advocate is the accuser. The six deities, five of whom are 
animal-headed, sitting in the Court of Judgement, three on either side, 
like a jury of subordinate judges, supervise the proceedings in order 
to ensure regularity of procedure and impartial justice (cf. pp. 35-7). 
The first above on the right holds a mirror of karma and a skull-cup 
of blood, the second a battle-axe and a skull-cup of blood, the third 
anoose, The first above on the left holds a battle-axe and skull-cup 
of blood, the second a small vase of blossoms in his right hand, the 
third a dorje and a skull-cup of blood. 

Near the gate on the left and the gate on the right stands one of the 
avenging furies who act as warders. There are ten Tibetans in the 
foreground of the Court awaiting judgement. The one with a conical 
head-dress (in red) is a red-cap /ama; the one with a round head- 
dress (in yellow) is a government official. The others are ordinary 
people. The three gates, through which the condemned enter the 
Hells below, are guarded by three animal-headed porters, each 
holding a noose. 

Issuing from the Court, at either side of the Judge, are the Six 
Karmic Pathways, leading to the Six Buddhas of the Six Zoéas, in 
whom the Pathways end, each Pathway and Buddha in appropriate 
colour (cf. p. 124 and Illustration IV). Traversing the Pathways are 
twelve of the dead who have recently been judged. The highest one, 
upon the left, on the white light-path approaching the Buddha of the 
Deva Loka, is a yellow-cap /ama; next to him is a government official 

xxii ILLUSTRATIONS 

on the yellow light-path approaching the Buddha of the Human Loka; 
the highest upon the right, on the green light-path approaching the 
Buddha of the Asura Loka, is a red-cap lama. 

In the Lower World, at the bottom of the painting, typical punish- 
ments in various Hells are depicted, none of which, however, are 
everlasting. On the left, in the upper corner, where two sinners are 
immersed in a glacial region, the Eight Cold Hells are suggested. 
Near the edge of the painting, on the opposite side, a sinner amidst 
flames suggests the Eight Hot Hells. The commission of any of the 
ten impious acts, deliberately and from selfish motives, leads to pur- 
gation in the Cold Hells; any of the same acts done through anger 
lead to purgation in the Hot Hells. 

Just below the Cold Hells is the Hell of the ‘Spiked Tree’ or ‘ Hill 
of Spikes’ (Tib. Shal-ma-i), in which an evil-doer has been quartered 
and affixed to the spikes. Beside it, in charge of a hell-fury, is ‘The 
Doorless Iron House’ (Tib. Lehags-khang-sgo-med). Next to this 
there are four /amas held under the mountainous weight of an 
enormous Tibetan sacred book; they are being punished thus for 
having in their earth-life hurried through and skipped passages when 
reading religious texts. The triangle, in which an evil-doer is fixed, 
symbolizes the terrible Avitchi Hell, wherein one guilty of a heinous 
sin, such as using sorcery to destroy enemies or deliberate failure to 
fulfil Tantric vows, endures punishment for ages which are almost 
immeasurable. Close to the triangle, a hell-fury is pouring spoonfuls 
of molten metal into a woman condemned for prostitution. The 
person ‘next to her, bowed under the weight of a heavy rock tied to 
his back, is being punished in that manner for having killed small 
living creatures like vermin or other insects. The sinner whom 
a hell-fury is holding stretched out on a floor of spiked iron while 
another hell-fury is preparing to hack him to pieces (cf. p. 166) has 
been found guilty of another of the ten impious acts. So also has 
been the woman who is about to be sawn in two lengthwise ; her sin 
has been murder. As in Dante’s Jnferno, other evil-doers, incapable, 
as our text explains, of succumbing to the process (cf. p. 166), are 
being cooked in the iron cauldron at the lower right-hand corner. 
Three hell-furies (one brown, one yellow, one blue in the original) 
are to be seen holding by the end of nooses and leading and dragging 
along (cf. p. 166) to appropriate punishments three of the dead who 
have just been cast into Hell. 

At the top of the picture, in the centre, on an enhaloed lotus and 
lunar throne, with the moon (white) at his right and the sun (gold) at 
his left, presiding over all, is Dorje Chang (blue), the Divine Guru of 
the Red-Hat School ot Padma Sambhava; for he is held to be the 
Ever-living and Spiritual Source whence continue to emanate, as in 
the days of the Buddha Shakya Muni, all the Esoteric Doctrines 

ILLUSTRATIONS xxiii 

underlying the Bardo Thédol, which are referred to on pages 133 to 
134 of our translation. 

EMS LENS 

1. THE INDIAN WHEEL OF THE LAW (Dharma-Chakra) 
on back of book 

From designs sculptured on the Sanchi Topes, dating from about 
500 B.C. to 100 A. D. 

2. THE LAMAICCROSSED DORJE ._._ on front cover of book 

Symbolical of equilibrium, immutability, and almighty power. 
(Cf. pp. 63, 1161.) 

3. THE TIBETAN WHEEL OF THE LAW (Ch’os-’k’or-bskor) 
sacing p. 119 
The Eight-Spoked Wheel (cf. p. 106), on a lotus throne and 
enhaloed by Flames of Wisdom, is representative of the Thousand- 
Spoked Wheel of the Good Law of the Buddha, symbol of the 
symmetry and completeness of the Sacred Law of the Dharma, or 
Scriptures. The design at the centre, called in Tibetan rgyan-’k’yil, 
composed of three whirling segments, symbolizes—as does the 
svastika at the centre of the Indian Wheel of the Law—the Sangsara, 
or ceaseless change or ‘becoming’. 

4. THE DORJE, THE LAMAIC SCEPTRE . . facing p. 137 

A type of the Thunderbolt of Indra, the Indian Jupiter, used in 
most /amaic rituals (cf. pp. 10, 108%, 137-8, 142-5), symbolical of 
dominion over sangsaric (or worldly) existence. 

1 It should be noted that each of the dead possesses a body suited to the 
paradise realm or hell-world in which karma brings about birth ; and that when 
any of the after-human-death states of existence ends there is again a death 
process and a casting off of a body (cf. pp. 155-8, and Book II passim). The 
Bardo is the intermediate state whence one may be reborn in this world in 
a human body, or in the ghost-world in a ghost body, or in one of the paradise 
realms, such as the deva-loka, in a god body, or in the asura-loka in an asura 
body, or in one of the hells in a body capable of enduring suffering and incapable 
of dying there until the purgation is complete. Following death in a hell, or in 
any other of the after-human-death states, the normal process is to be reborn on 
earth as a human being. The True Goal, as the Bardo Thédol repeatedly 
explains, is beyond all states of embodiment, beyond all hells, worlds, and 
heavens, beyond the Sangsdra, beyond Nature; it is called Nirvana (Tib. 
Myang-hdas), See Addenda, V, pp. 224-32. 

XXiv EMBLEMS 
5. THE MANTRA OF CHENRAZEE (Avalokiteshvara) 
facing p. 167 
In Ranja or Lantsa Indian characters of about the seventh century 
A.D. Lantsa characters, slightly modified, are used in Tibetan manu- 
scripts, commonly on title-pages. In Tibetan characters the sacred 
9. a NO 
Mantra is WANA % which means literally: ‘Om! The Jewel in 

the Lotus! Him!’ (Cf. pp. 134’, 149', 206.) 

PORE WO KD 
BY SIR JOHN WooDROFFE 

THE SCIENCE OF DEATH! 

‘Strive after the Good before thou art in danger, before pain masters thee 
and thy mind loses its keenness,’—Kularnava Tantra, I. 27. 

THE thought of death suggests two questions. The first 
is: ‘How may one avoid death, except when death is desired 
as in “ Death-at-will” (/chchhamrityu)?’ The avoidance of 
death is the aim when Hazhayoga is used to prolong present 
life in the flesh. This is not, in the Western sense, a ‘ yea- 
saying’ to ‘life’, but, for the time being, to a particular form 
of life. Dr. Evans-Wentz tells us that according to popular 
Tibetan belief no death is natural. This is the notion of 
most, if not of all, primitive peoples. Moreover, physiology 
also questions whether there is any ‘natural death’, in the 
sense of death through mere age without lesion or malady. 
This Text, however, in the language of the renouncer of fleshly 
life the world over, tells the nobly-born that Death comes to 
all, that human kind are not to cling to life on earth with 
its ceaseless wandering in the Worlds of birth and death 
(Sangsara). Rather should they implore the aid of the Divine 
Mother for a safe passing through the fearful state following 
the body’s dissolution, and that they may at length attain all- 
perfect Buddhahood. 

The second question then is: ‘ How to accept Death and 
die?’ It is with this that we are now concerned. Here the 
technique of dying makes Death the entrance to good future 
lives, at first out of, and then again in, the flesh, unless and 
until liberation (Vzrvaza) from the wandering (Saxgséra) is 
attained. 

1 As to the title of this Foreword, ‘The Science of Death’, see Thanatology, 
by Dr. Roswell Parks, in The Journal of the American Medical Association 
April 27, 1912. 

3069 d 

Xxvi FOREWORD 

This Book, which is of extraordinary interest, both as 
regards Text and Introduction, deals with the period (longer 
or shorter according to the circumstances) which, commenc- 
ing immediately after death, ends with ‘rebirth’. In the 
Buddhists’ view, Life consists of a series of successive states 
of consciousness. The first state is the Birth-Consciousness ; the 
last is the consciousness existing at the moment of death, or 
the Death-Consciousness. The interval between the two states 
of Consciousness, during which the transformation from the ‘old’ 
to a ‘new’ being is effected, is called the Bardo or intermediate 
state (Antarabhava), divided into three stages, called the 
Chikhat, Choinyid, and Sidpa Bardo respectively. 

This Manual, common in various versions throughout Tibet, 
is one of a class amongst which Dr. Evans-Wentz includes 
the Egyptian Book of the Dead, a guide for the use of the 
Ka or so-called ‘Double’, the De Arte Moriendit and other 
similar medieval treatises on the craft of dying, to which may 
be added the Orphic Manual called The Descent into Hades 
(cf. ‘He descended into Hell’) and other like guide-books for 
the use of the dead, the Pretakhanda of the Hindu Garuda 
Purana, Swedenborg’s De Coelo et de Inferno, Rusca’s De 
Inferno, and several other eschatological works both ancient 
and modern. Thus, the Garuda Purana deals with the rites 
used over the dying, the death-moment, the funeral cere- 
monies, the building up, by means of the Pretashraddha rite, 
of a new body for the Pre¢a or deceased in lieu of that 
destroyed by fire, the Judgement, and thereafter (ch. V) the 
various states through which the deceased passes until he is 
reborn again on earth. 

Both the original text and Dr. Evans-Wentz’s Introduction 
form a very valuable contribution to the Science of Death 
from the standpoint of the Tibetan Mahayana Buddhism of 
the so-called ‘Tantrik’ type. The book is welcome not 
merely in virtue of its particular subject-matter, but because 
the ritual works of any religion enable us more fully to com- 
prehend the philosophy and psychology of the system to 
which they belong. 

The Text has three characteristics. It is, firstly, a work on 

REINCARNATION v. RESURRECTION xxvii 

the Art of Dying ; for Death, as well as Life, is an Art, though 
both are often enough muddled through. There is a Bengali 
saying, ‘Of what use are Fafa and Tapas (two forms of 
devotion) if one knoweth not how to die?’ Secondly, it is 
a manual of religious therapcutic for the last moments, and a 
psychurgy exorcising, instructing, consoling, and fortifying by 
the rites of the dying, him who is about to pass on to another 
life. Thirdly, it describes the experiences of the deceased 
during the intermediate period, and instructs him in regard 
thereto. It is thus also a Traveller’s Guide to Other Worlds. 

The doctrine of ‘Reincarnation’ on the one hand and of 
‘Resurrection’ on the other is the chief difference between 
the four leading Religions—Brahmanism, Buddhism, Chris- 
tianity, and Islam. Christianity, in its orthodox form, rejects 
the most ancient and widespread belief of the Kziklos genesedn, 
or Sangsara, or ‘Reincarnation’, and admits one universe 
only—this, the first and last—and two lives, one here in the 
natural body and one hereafter in the body of Resurrection. 

It has been succinctly said that as Metempsychosis makes 
the same soul, so Resurrection makes the same body serve 
for more than one Life. But the latter doctrine limits man’s 
lives to two in number, of which the first or present determines 
for ever the character of the second or future. 

Brahmanism and Buddhism would accept the doctrine that 
‘as a tree falls so shall it lie’, but they deny that it so lies for 
ever. To the adherents of these two kindred beliefs this 
present universe is not the first and last. It is but one of an 
infinite series, without absolute beginning or end, though each 
universe of the serics appears and disappears. They also 
teach a series of successive existences therein until morality, 
devotion, and knowledge produce that high form of detach- 
ment which is the cause of Liberation from the cycle of birth 
and death called ‘The Wandering’ (or Sangsara). Freedom 
is the attainment of the Supreme State called the Void, 
Nirvana, and by other names. They deny that there is only 
one universe, with one life for each of its human units, and 
then a division of men for all eternity into those who are 
saved in Heaven or are in Limbo and those who are lost in 

xXviii FOREWORD 

Hell. Whilst they agree in holding that there is a suitable 
body for enjoyment or suffering in Heaven and Hell, it is not 
a resurrected body, for the fleshly body on death is dissolved 
for ever. 

The need of some body always exists, except for the non- 
dualist who believes in a bodiless (Vzdeha) Liberation (AZuki2) ; 
and each of the four religions affirms that there is a subtle 
and death-surviving element—vital and psychical—in the 
physical body of flesh and blood, whether it be a permanent 
entity or Self, such as the Brahmanic Adma, the Moslem 
Ruh, and the Christian‘ Soul’, or whether it be only a complex 
of activities (or Standha), psychical and physical, with life as 
their function—a complex in continual change, and, therefore, 
a series of physical and psychical momentary states, succes- 
sively generated the one from the other, a continuous trans- 
formation, as the Buddhists are said to hold. Thus to none 
of these Faiths is death an absolute ending, but to all it is 
only the separation of the Psyche from the gross body. The 
former then enters on a new life, whilst the latter, having lost 
its principle of animation, decays. As Dr. Evans-Wentz so 
concisely says, Death disincarnates the ‘soul-complex’, as 
Birth incarnates it. In other words, Death is itself only an 
initiation into another form of life than that of which it is the 
ending. 

On the subject of the physical aspect of Death, the attention 
of the reader is drawn to the remarkable analysis here given of 
symptoms which precede it. These are stated because it is 
necessary for the dying man and his helpers to be prepared for 
the final and decisive moment when it comes.!_ Noteworthy, 
too, is the description of sounds heard as (to use Dr. Evans- 
Wentz’s language) ‘the psychic resultants of the disintegrating 
process called death’. They call to mind the humming, rolling, 
and crackling noises heard before and up to fifteen hours after 
death, which, recognized by Greunwaldi in 1618 and referred 
to by later writers, were in 1862 made the subject of special 
study by Dr. Collingues. 

* Cf. Tantraraja, ch, xxv, vv. 83-100, dealing with signs of approaching 
death, Yantrik Texts, edited by Arthur Avalon, vol. xii. 

CONSCIOUSNESS TRANSFERENCE xxix 

But it is said that the chain of conscious states is not always 
broken by death, since there is Phowa, or power to project 
consciousness and enter the body of another.!' Indian occul- 
tism speaks of the same power of leaving one’s body (Svech- 
chhotkranti), which, according to the 7antraraja (ch. XXVII, 
vv. 45-7, 72-80), is accomplished through the operation 
(Vayudharana) of the vital activity (or Vayu) in thirty-eight 
points, or junctions (arma), of the body. How, it may be 
asked, does this practice work in with the general doctrine or 
‘reincarnation’? We should have been glad if Dr. Evans- 
Wentz had elucidated this point. On principle, it would seem 
that in the case of entry into an unborn body such entry may 
be made into the M/a¢rix in the same way as if it had occurred 
after a break of consciousness in death. But in the case of 
entry into beings already born the operation of the power or 
Siddhi would appear to be by the way of possession (Avesha) 
by one consciousness of the consciousness and body of another, 
differing from the more ordinary case by the fact that the 
possessing consciousness does not return to its body, which 
ex hypothcsz is about to die when the consciousness leaves it. 

If transference of consciousness is effected, there is, of course, 
no Lardo, which involves the break of consciousness by death. 
Otherwise, the Text is read. 

Then, as the breathing is about to cease, instruction is given 
and the arteries are pressed. This is done to keep the dying 
person conscious with a consciousness rightly directed. For 
the nature of the Death-consciousness determines the future 
state of the ‘soul-complex’, existence being the continuous 
transformation of one conscious state into another. Both in 
Catholic and Hindu ritual for the dying there is constant 
prayer and repetition of the sacred names. 

The pressing of the arteries regulates the path to be taken 
by the outgoing vital current (Pra@za). The proper path is 
that which passes through the brahmarandhra, or Foramen 
of Monro. This notion appears to have been widely held (to 
quote an instance) even in so remote and primitive a spot as 
San Cristoval in the Solomon Islands (see Threshold of the 

1 Cf. Tantnk Texts, vol. vii, p. 23, the Buddhist Shrichakra-sambhara Tantra. 

XxX FOREWORD 

Pacific, by C. E. Fox). The function of a holed-stone in 
a Dolmen found there (reminiscent of the Dolmen @ dalle percée 
common in the Marne district of Western Europe, in South 
Russia, and in Southern India) is ‘to allow the free passage 
to its natural seat, the head, of the dead man’s adaro, or 
“ double” ’. 

According to Hindu belief (see Pretakhanda of Garuda 
Purana) there are nine apertures of the body which are the 
means of experience, and which, in the divine aspect, are the 
Lords (Natha) or Gurus. A good exit is one which is above 
the navel. Of such exits the best is through the fissure on the 
top of the cranium called Brahmarandhra. This is above 
the physical cerebrum and the Yoga centre called ‘Lotus of the 
Thousand Petals’ (Sahasraéra Padma), wherein Spirit is most 
manifest, since it is the seat of Consciousness. Because of 
this, the orthodox Hindu wears a crest-lock (SAzkAd) at this 
spot; not, as some have absurdly supposed, so that he may 
thereby be gripped and taken to Heaven or Hell, but because 
the Shzkha is, as it were, a flag and its staff, raised before and 
in honour of the abode of the Supreme Lord, Who is Pure 
Consciousness itself. (The fancy-picture in a recent work by 
C. Lancelin, La Vie posthume, p. 96, does not show the 
aperture of exit, which is given in Plate 8 of the second 
edition of Arthur Avalon’s Serpent Power, p. 93.) 

Whatever be the ground for the belief and practice of 
primitive peoples, according to Yoga doctrine, the head is the 
chief centre of consciousness, regulating other subordinate 
centres in the spinal column. By withdrawal of the vital 
current through the central or Swshumna ‘nerve’ (na@di), the 
lower parts of the body are devitalized, and there is vivid 
concentrated functioning at the cerebral centre. 

Exotericism speaks of the ‘Book of Judgement’. This is 
an objective symbol of the ‘Book’ of Memory. The ‘reading’ 
of that ‘Book’ is the recalling to mind by the dying man of 
the whole of his past life on earth before he passes from it.” 

1 Cf. A. Avalon’s Tanirik Texts, vol. viii, p. 2. 

* That such a review of earth-life is experienced by the dying has been 
frequently attested by persons who had begun to die, as, for example, in 
drowning, and then been resuscitated,—W, Y. E-W. 

tos CLEAR SVIGHT OF THE VOID Xxxi 

The vital current at length escapes from the place where it 
last functioned. In Yoga, thought and breathing being inter- 
dependent, exit through the Brahmarandhra connotes previous 
activity at the highest centre. Before such exit, and whilst 
self-consciousness lasts, the mental contents are supplied by 
the ritual, which is so designed as to secure a good death, and, 
therefore (later on), birth-consciousness. 

At the moment of death the empiric consciousness, or con- 
sciousness of objects, is lost. There is what is popularly called 
a ‘swoon’, which is, however, the corollary of super-conscious- 
ness itself, or the Clear Light of the Void; for the swoon is 
in, and of, the Consciousness as knower of objects (Viana 
Skandha). This empiric consciousness disappears, unveiling 
Pure Consciousness, which is ever ready to be ‘discovered’ by 
those who have the will to seek and the power to find It. 

That clear, colourless Light is a sense-symbol of the form- 
less Void, ‘beyond the Light of Sun, Moon, and Fire’, to use 
the words of the Indian Gita. It is clear and colourless, but 
mayik (or ‘form’) bodies are coloured in various ways. For 
colour implies and denotes form. The Formless is colourless. 
The use of psycho-physical chromatism is common to the 
Hindu and Buddhist Zaztras, and may be found in some 
Islamic mystical systems also. 

What then is this Void? It is not absolutely ‘nothingness’. 
It is the Alogical, to which no categories drawn from the 
world of name and form apply. But whatever may have 
been held by the Madhyamika Bauddha, a Vedantist would 
say that ‘ Being’, or ‘Is-ness’, is applicable even in the case 
of the Void, which is experienced as ‘is’ (astz). The Void is 
thus, in this view, the negation of all determinations, but not 
of ‘Is-ness’ as such, as has been supposed in accounts given of 
Buddhist ‘Nihilism’; but it is nothing known to finite ex- 
perience in form, and, therefore, for those who have had no 
other experience, it is no-thing. 

A description of Buddhist Mahayana teaching which is at 
once more succinct and clear than, to my knowledge, any 
other, is given in the Tibetan work, The Path of Good Wishes 
of Samanta Bhadra, which I have published in the seventh 

xxxii FOREWORD 

volume of Zantrik Texts (p. xxi et seg.) and here summarize 
and explain. 

All is either Sangsdra or Nirvana. The first is finite 
experience in the ‘Six Worlds’ or Loka—a word which means 
‘that which is experienced’ (Lokyante). The second, or 
Nirvana, is, negatively speaking, release from such experience, 
that is from the worlds of Birth and Death and their pains. 
The Void cannot even be strictly called Mzrvaua, for this is 
a term relative to the world, and the Void is beyond all 
relations. Positively, and concomitantly with such release, it 
is the Perfect Experience which is Buddhahood, which, again, 
from the cognitive aspect, is Consciousness unobscured by the 
darkness of Unconsciousness, that is to say, Consciousness 
freed of all limitation. From the emotional aspect, it is pure 
Bliss unaffected by sorrow; and from the volitional aspect, it 
is freedom of action and almighty power (Amogha-Siddhz). 
Perfect Experience is an eternal or, more strictly speaking, 
a timeless state. Imperfect Experience is also eternal in the 
sense that the series of universes in which it is undergone is 
infinite. The religious, that is practical, problem is then how 
from the lesser experience to pass into that which is complete, 
called by the Upanishads ‘the Whole’ or Pirna. This is 
done by the removal of obscuration. At base, the two are 
one—the Void, uncreated, independent, uncompounded, and 
beyond mind and speech. If this were not so, Liberation 
would not be possible. Man is in fact liberated, but does not 
know it. When he realizes it, he is freed. The great saying 
of the Buddhist work the Prajza-Paramita runs thus : ‘ Form 
(Ripa) is the Void and the Void is Form.’! Realization of 
the Void is to be a Buddha, or ‘ Knower’, and not to realize 
it is to be an ‘ignorant being’ in the Sangsara. The two 
paths, then, are Knowledge and Ignorance. The first 
path leads to—and, as actual realization, is—Nzrvana. The 
second means continuance of fleshly life as man or brute, 
or as a denizen of the other four Zokas. Ignorance in the 
individual is in its cosmic aspect Maya, which in Tibetan 
(sGyuma) means a magical show. In its most generic form, 

1 See Tantrik Texts, vol. vii, p. 33. 

STATE OF LIBERATION Xxxili 

the former is that which produces the pragmatic, but, in 
a transcendental sense, the ‘ unreal’ notion of self and other- 
ness. This is the root cause of error (whether in knowing, 
feeling, or action) which becomes manifest as the ‘Six Poisons’ 
(which Hindus call the ‘Six Enemies’) of the Six ZLokas of 
Sangsara (of which the Text gives five only)—pride, jealousy, 
sloth (or ignorance), anger, greed, and lust. The Text con- 
stantly urges upon the dying or ‘dead’ man to recognize in 
the apparitions, which he is about to see or sees, the creatures 
of his own mdayd-governed mind, veiling from him the Clear 
Light of the Void. If he does so, he is liberated at any stage. 

This philosophical scheme has so obvious a resemblance to 
the Indian Mayavada Vedanta that the Vaishnava Padma 
Purana dubs that system ‘a bad scripture and covert Buddh- 
ism’ (mayavadam asachchastram prachchhannam bauddham). 
Nevertheless, its great scholastic, ‘the incomparable Shang- 
karacharyya’, as Sir William Jones calls him, combated the 
Buddhists in their denial of a permanent Self (Atma), as also 
their subjectivism, at the same time holding that the notion of 
an individual self and that of a world of objects were pragmatic 
truths only, superseded by and on the attainment of a state 
of Liberation which has little, if anything, to distinguish it 
from the Buddhist Void. The difference between the two 
systems, though real, is less than is generally supposed. This 
is a matter, however, which it would be out of place to discuss 
further here. 

However this may be, the after-death apparitions are ‘real’ 
enough for the deceased who does not, as and when they 
appear, recognize their unsubstantiality and cleave his way 
through them to the Void. The Clear Light is spoken of in 
the Bardo Thodol as such a Dazzlement as is produced by an 
infinitely vibrant landscape in the springtide. This joyous 
picture is not, of course, a statement of what It is in itself, 
for It is not an object, but is a translation in terms of 
objective vision of a great, but, in itself, indescribable joyful 
inner experience. My attention was drawn, in this con- 
nexion, to a passage in a paper on the Avatamsaka Sutra 
(ch. Xv), by Mr. Hsu, a Chinese scholar, which says, ‘The 

3069 € 

XXXIV FOREWORD 

Bodhisattva emits the light called “Seeing the Buddha” in 
order to make the dying think about the Tathagata and 
so enable them to go to the pure realms of the latter after 
death’. 

The dying or deceased man is adjured to recognize the 
Clear Light and thus liberate himself. If he does so, it 
is because he is himself ripe for the liberated state which 
is thus presented to him. If he does not (as is commonly 
the case), it is because the pull of worldly tendency (Sangskara) 
draws him away. He is then presented with the secondary 
Clear Light, which is the first, somewhat dimmed to him by 
the general Maya. If the mind does not find its resting- 
place here, the first or Chikhat Bardo, which may last for 
several days, or ‘for the time that it takes to snap a finger’ 
(according to the state of the deceased), comes to an end. 

In the next stage (Chinyid Bardo) there is a recovery 
of the Death-Consciousness of objects. In one sense, that 
is compared with a swoon, it is a rewakening. But it is 
not a waking-state such as existed before death. The ‘soul- 
complex’ emerges from its experience of the Void into a state 
like that of dream. This continues until it attains a new 
fleshly body and thus really awakes to earth-life again. 
For this world-experience is life in such a body. 

When I first read the account of the fifteen days following 
recovery from the ‘swoon’, I thought it was meant to be 
a scheme of gradual arising of limited consciousness, ana- 
logous to that described in the thirty-six Zattvas by the 
Northern Skaivagama and its Tantras, a process which is given 
in its ritual form in the Tantrik Bhitashuddhi rite and in Laya 
or Kundalint Yoga. But on closer examination I found that 
this was not so. After the ending of the first Bardo the 
scheme commences with the complete recovery, without inter- 
mediate stages, of the Death-Consciousness. The psychic 
life is taken up and continued from that point, that is from 
the stage immediately prior to the ‘swoon’! Life im- 
mediately after death is, according to this view, as Spiritists 
assert, similar to, and a continuation of, the life preceding it. 

1 Cf. Yogavashishtha, CLx, Vv. 41. 

AFTER-DEATH EXISTENCE XXKV 

As in Swedenborg’s account, and in the recent play Outward 
Bound, the deceased does not at first know that he is ‘dead’. 
Swedenborg, who also speaks of an intermediate state, says 
that, except for those immediately translated to Heaven or 
Hell, the first state of man after death is like his state in the 
world, so that he knows no other, believing that he is still in 
the world notwithstanding his death.! 

Two illustrations may be given of the doctrine of the 
continuity and the similarity of experience before and im- 
mediately after death. In India, on the one hand, there 
are reports of hauntings by unhappy ghosts or Prezas, which 
hauntings are said to be allayed by the performance of the 
Preta Shraddha rite at the sacred town of Gaya. On the 
other hand, I have heard of a case in England where it was 
alleged that a haunting ceased on the saying of a Requiem Mass. 
In this case, it was supposed that a Catholic soul in Purgatory 
felt in need of a rite which in its earth-life it had been taught 
to regard as bringing peace to the dead. The Hindu ghost 
craves for the Hindu rite which gives to it a new body in 
lieu of that destroyed on the funeral pyre. These souls do 
not (in an Indian view) cease to be Hindu or Catholic, or lose 
their respective beliefs because of their death. Nor (in this 
view) do those who have passed on necessarily and at once 
lose any habit, even though it be drinking and smoking. But 
in the after-death state the ‘whisky and cigars’ of which we 
have heard are not gross, material things. Just as a dream re- 
produces waking experiences, so in the after-death state a man 
who was wont to drink and smoke imagines that he still does 
so. We have here to deal with ‘dream-whisky’ and ‘ dream- 
cigars’ which, though imaginary, are, for the dreamer, as 
real as the substances he drank and smoked in his waking 
state.” 

1 De Coelo, ed. 1868, 493-7. 

2 The editor has heard of a European planter who, having died in the 
jungles of the Malabar country of South-west India, was buried there by the 
people. Some years afterwards, a friend of the planter found the grave care- 
fully fenced in and covered with empty whisky and beer bottles. At a loss to 
understand such an unusual sight, he asked for an explanation, and was told that 
the dead sahib’s ghost had caused much trouble and that no way had been 

e€ 2 

XXXVI FOREWORD 

Subsequently, the deceased becomes aware that he zs ‘ dead’. 
But as he carries over with him the recollection of his past 
life, he, at first, still thinks that he has such a physical body 
as he had before. It is, in fact, a dream-body, such as that 
of persons seen in dreams, It is an imagined body, which, 
as the Text says, is neither reflected in a mirror nor casts 
a shadow, and which can do such wonders as passing through 
mountains and the like, since Imagination is the greatest 
of magicians. Even in life on earth a man may imagine 
that he has a limb where he has none. Long after a man’s 
leg has been amputated above the knee he can ‘feel his toes’, 
or is convinced that the soles of his feet (buried days before) 
are tickling. In the after-death state the deceased imagines 
that he has a physical body, though he has been severed 
therefrom by the high surgery of death. In such a body 
the deceased gocs through the experiences next described. 

In the First Bardo the deceased glimpses the Clear Light, 
as the Dharma-K aya, called by Professor Sylvain Lévy the 
‘Essential Body’. This, which is beyond form (Avipa), is 
the Dharma-Dhatu, or Matrix of Dharma-substance, whence 
all the Blessed Ones, or Zathagatas, issue. This is the body 
of a Buddhain Wirva#a. The second body, or Sambhoga-K aya, 
has such subtle form (Ra#pavan) as is visible to the Bodhisattvas, 
and is an intermediate manifestation of the Dharma-Dhatu. In 
the third body, or Wzrmdana-K aya,the Void, or State of Buddha- 
hood, is exteriorized into multiple individual appearances 
more material, and, therefore, visible to the gross senses of 
men, such as the forms in which the manifested Buddhas 
(for there are many and not, as some think, only one, or 
Gautama) have appearcd on carth. If the deccased recognizes 
the Clear Light of the First Bardo, he is liberated in the 

discovered to lay the ghost until an old witch-doctor declared that the ghost 
craved whisky and beer, to which it had long been habituated when in the flesh 
and which were the real cause of its separation from the fleshly body. The 
people, although religiously opposed to intoxicants, began purchasing bottled 
whisky and beer of the same brands which the sath was well known to have 
uscd, and, with a regular ritual for the dead, began sacrificing them to the ghost 
by pouring them out upon the grave. Finding that this kept the ghost quict 
they kept up the practice in sclf-defence.—W. Y. E-W. 

PATHS [O) LIBERATION XXXVii 

Dharma-Kaya. Inthe Second Bardo Liberation is into the 
Sambhoga-K aya (the passage touching the Paradise Realms is 
not, I think, meant to conflict with this); and in the Third 
Lardo Liberation is experienced in the Nivmana-K aya. 
During the Second and Third Bardo the deceased is in the 
Maytk-world (or world of forms), and if Liberation is then 
attained it is with form (Aapavan). The deceased being thus 
in the world of duality, we find that from this point onwards 
there is a double parallel presentation to his consciousness. 
There is firstly a Virvauic line, comprising the Five Dhyani 
Buddhas of the Sambhoga-K aya,symbolized by various dazzling 
colours, with certain Divinities, peaceful and wrathful, emanating 
from them; and, secondly, a Saxgsaric line, consisting of the 
Six Lokas. These latter, with one exception (if it be one and 
not due to corruption of text, viz. the association of the smoky 
or black light of Hell with the blue Vajra-Sattva), have the 
same colour as their Nzrva@uic counterparts, but of a dull 
hue. With the Zokas are given their ‘Poisons’, or the 
sinful characteristics of their inhabitants. The ‘soul-complex’ 
is then adjured, on the one hand, to seek Liberation through 
the compassionate grace of the Vzrvauic line of Buddhas and 
Devatas (Divinities), and, on the other hand, to shun the 
particular Loka (World) which is concomitantly presented 
to his mental vision. With these Buddhas, Devatds, and 
Lokas are associated certain Nidanas (Causal Connexions), 
Skandhas (Constituent Factors), material elements, and the 
colours of the latter. This account appears to have suffered 
from corruption of the Text. Thus the Vidazas and Skandhas 
are not complete. Logically, Viana Skandha should go 
first with Vatrochana, and Nama-ripa with Vajra-Sattva. 
Only four out of the five elements are mentioned. Ether, 
which is omitted, should be associated with Vatrochana and 
Vijiana. The colours of the elements accord with those 
given in the Hindu Zaztras except as regards ‘air’, to 
which is assigned a green colour, appropriate for Asuric 
jealousy, though it is not that of the Hindu colouration, which 
is smoky grey. Again, the order of the Six Lokas is not 
the usual one, viz. first the better Lokas, of Devas, Asuras, 

XXXViIil FOREWORD 

and Men, and then the Lokas of Ghosts (Pretas), Brutes, and 
Hell. Each Zoka is characterized by its ‘ poison’ or besetting 
sin, but, of these, five only are mentioned. The editor has, 
however, referred to corruption in the Text in some of these 
matters, and others I have noted on a careful analysis of the 
translated Text. 

The peaceful Devatas follow on the sixth and seventh day, 
and the wrathful Devatdés on the eighth and subsequent days. 
The latter are of the terrific type, characteristic both of the 
Buddhist and Hindu Shakta Tantras, with their Bhatravas, 
Bhatravis, Dakinis, Yoginis,and so on. Hinduism also makes 
this distinction in the nature of Divinities and interprets the 
wrathful orders as representative of the so-called ‘ destructive’ 
power of the Supreme Lord and of his lesser manifestations ; 
though, in truth, ‘God never destroys’ (za devo nashakah 
kvachit), but withdraws the Universe to Himself, 

But Power, which thus dissolves the world, is ever terrible 
to those who are attached to the world. All bad action 
(Adharima), too, is dissolvent; and, according to the Text, 
the deceascd’s evil Karma in the Sangsara is reflected in the 
Nirvauic \ine in its forms as Divinities of the Lower Bardo, 
who so terrify the deceased that he flees from them and sinks 
therefore more and more into such a state as will eventually 
bring him birth in one or other of the Zokas. 

The Peaceful Devatds are said to issue from the heart, and 
the Wrathful from the head. I do not, however, think that 
this statement necessarily lets in the Yoga doctrine of the 
‘Serpent Power’ and the Six Centres, which the editor has 
shortly set out in Part II of the Addenda, assuming (a matter 
of which I have no personal knowledge) that the Tibetans both 
practise this Yoga and teach it in its Indian form. I myself 
think that the mention of the heart and head does not refer 
to these places as Yoga-centres, but possibly to the fact that 
the Peaceful Deities reflect, as stated in the Text, the love of 
the deceased which springs from his heart. 

I make a reservation also as regards the subject of Mantras, 
dealt with in Part III of the Addenda. No doubt the Tibetans 
employ Sanskrit Mantras, but such Mantras are often found in 

STATE WHEN SEEKING REBIRTH = xxxix 

a sadly corrupt form in their books—a fact which suggests 
that the Tibetans feel little appreciation of the supposed sound- 
value of Mantras. But whether their theory on this subject 
is the same in all respects as that of the Hindus I cannot say.! 
The Hindu theory, which I have elsewhere endeavoured to 
elucidate (cf. Garland of Letters), is still on several points 
obscure; the subject being perhaps the most difficult of any 
in Hinduism. Even though Tibetan Buddhism may have 
Mantra-Sadhané, the presentment of it is likely to differ as 
much as does the general substance of these two Faiths. 
About the fifteenth day, passage is made into the Third 
Bardo, in which the deceased, if not previously liberated, 
seeks ‘Rebirth’. His past life has now become dim. That 
of the future is indicated by certain premonitory signs which 
represent the first movements of desire towards fulfilment. 
The ‘ soul-complex’ takes on the colour of the Zoka in which 
it is destined to be born. If the deceased’s Karma leads 
him to Hell, thither he goes after the Judgement, in a subtle 
body which cannot be injured or destroyed, but in which 
he may suffer atrocious pain. Or he may go to the 
Heaven-world or other Zoka, to return at length and in 
all cases (for neither punishment nor reward are eternal) 
to earth, whereon only can new Karma be made. Such 
return takes place after expiation of his sins in Hell, or the 
expiration of the term of enjoyment in Heaven which his 
Karma has gained for him. If, however, the lot of the 
deceased is immediate rebirth on earth, he sees visions of 
mating men and women. He, at this final stage towards the 
awakening to earth-life, now knows that he has not a gross 

1 Just as the Tibetans took over Zantricism from India, so, as the well-known 
Tibetan Biography of Jetstin Milarepa (Tibet’s most famous Yogt and Saint), 
for example, makes clear, they appear also to have derived various systems of 
Yoga from India, including Laya or Kuudalint Yoga. While it is undoubtedly 
true that many Mantras likewise derived from India have grown hopelessly 
corrupt in the Tibetan language itself, the practice of Laya or Kundalint Yoga 
by Tibetans seems to have been kept fairly pure, largely through oral trans- 
mission from guru to guru vather than through written records, except for 
Tibetanized terminologies and methods of application. Certain Tibetan treatises 
on Yoga which the editor possesses, both in the original and in English transla- 
tion, suggest this, -W. Y. E-W. 

x FOREWORD 

body of flesh and blood. He urgently desires to have one, 
in order that he may again enjoy physical life on the earth- 
world. 

The Freudian psycho-analyst will find herein a remarkable 
passage supporting his doctrine of the aversion of the son 
for the father. The passage says that, if the deceased is 
to be born as a male, the fecling of its being a male 
comes upon the knower, and a feeling of intense aversion 
for the father and attraction for the mother is begotten, 
and vice versa as regards birth as a female. This is, 
however, an old Buddhist doctrine found elsewhere. Pro- 
fessor De la Vallée Poussin cites the following passage: 
‘L’esprit troublé par désir d’amour, il va au lieu de sa 
destingée. Méme trés éloigné, il voit, par Poeil né de la force 
de l’acte, le lieu de sa naissance; voyant la son pere et sa 
mere unis, il concgoit désir pour la mére quand il est mile, 
désir pour le pére quand il est femelle, et, inversement, haine’ 
(Bouddhisme: Etudes et Matériaux, Abhidharmakosha, iii. 15, 
p. 25). The work cited also contains other interesting details 
concerning the embryo. (Sce, too, the same author's La 
Théorie de douze causes.) 

At length the deceased passes out of the Bardo dream- 
world into a womb of flesh and blood, issuing thence once 
more into the waking state of carth-experience. This is 
what in English is called Re-incarnation, or Re-birth in the 
flesh. The Sanskrit term is Sangsdra, that is, ‘rising and 
rising again’ (Punarutpatti) in the worlds of birth and death. 
Nothing is permanent, but all is transitory. In life, the 
‘soul-complex’ is never for two consecutive moments the 
same, but is, like the body, in constant change. ‘There is 
thus a serics (Sazténa) of successive, and, in one sense, 
different states, which are in themselves but momentary. 
There is still a unifying bond in that each momentary state is 
a present transformation representative of all those which are 
past, as it will be the generator of all future transformations 
potentially involved in it. 

This process is not interrupted by death. Change continucs 
in the Skandhas (or constituents of the organism) other than 

CONTINUITY OF TRANSFORMATION xi 

the gross body which has been cast off and which undergoes 
changes of itsown. But there is this difference: the after-death 
change is merely the result of the action of accumulated past 
Karma and does not, as in earthly life, create new Karma, 
for which a physical body is necessary. (Buddhism, Hinduism, 
and Christianity are in agreement in holding that man’s destiny 
is decided on Earth, though the last differs from the first two, 
as explained above, on the question whether there is more 
than one life on Earth.) There is no breach (Uchchheda) 
of consciousness, but a continuity of transformation. The 
Death-Consciousness is the starting-point, followed by the 
other states of consciousness already described. Karma at 
length generates a fully-formed desire or mental action. This 
last is followed by the consciousness taking up its abode 
in a suitable matrix, whence it is born again as a Birth- 
Consciousness. What is so born is not altogether different 
from what has gone before, because it is the present trans- 
formation of it; and has no other independent existence. 
There are thus successive births of (to use Professor de 
la Vallée Poussin’s term) a ‘fluid soul-complex’, because the 
series of psychic states continues at intervals of time to 
enter the physical womb of living beings. It has been said 
by the authority cited (Way to Nirvana, p. 85) that the 
birth-consciousness of a new celestial or infernal being makes 
for itself and by itself, out of unorganized matter, the body 
it is to inhabit. Therefore the birth of such beings will 
follow immediately after the death of the being which is 
to be reborn as an infernal or celestial being. But the 
case is said to be different, as a rule, where there is to be 
‘reincarnation’, that is ‘rebirth’ in the flesh. Conception 
and birth then presuppose physical circumstances that may 
not be realized at the moment of the death of the being to 
be ‘re-incarnated’. In these cases and others it is alleged 
that the dying consciousness cannot be continued at once 
into the birth-consciousness of a new being. The Professor 
says that this difficulty is solved by those Schools which, 
maintaining the intermediary existence (Antardbhava), hold 
that the dying consciousness is continued into a short-lived 

xii FOREWORD 

being called Gandharva, which lasts for seven days, or seven 
times seven days (cf. the forty-nine days of the Bardo). This 
Gandharva creates, with the help of the conceptional elements, 
an embryo as soon as it can find opportunity. This doctrine, 
if it has been rightly understood, is apparently another and 
cruder version of the Bardo doctrine. There cannot, in any 
philosophic view of the doctrine of Karma, be any ‘hold up’ 
of what is a continuous life-process. Such process does 
not consist of independent sections waiting upon one another. 
And so a ‘soul-complex’ cannot be ready to reincarnate 
before the circumstances are fit for it. The law which deter- 
mines that a being shall incarnate is the same as that which 
provides the means and conditions by, and under, which the 
incarnation is to take place. Nor is the body of the infernal 
or celestial being gross mattcr. This is clear from the present 
Tet. 

Dr. Evans-Wentz raises again the debated question of 
the transmigration of human ‘souls’ into sub-human bodies, 
a process which this Text, exoterically viewed, seems to 
assume, and which is, as he points out, the general Hindu 
and Buddhist belief. It seems to be an irrational, though 
it may be a popular, belicf that a human ‘soul’ can per- 
manently inhabit a sub-human body as its own. For the 
body cannot exist in such disagreement with its occupant. 
The right doctrine appears to be that, as man has evolved 
through the lowest forms of being (Hinduism speaks of 
8,400,000 graded kinds of births culminating in man),' so by 
misconduct and neglect to use the opportunity of manhood 
there can, equally, be a descent along the ‘downward path’ 
to the same low forms of being from which humanity has, with 
difficulty, emerged. The Sanskrit term Durlabham, meaning 
‘difficult to get’, refers to this difficulty of securing human 
birth. But such descent involves (as Dr. Evans-Wentz says) 
the loss of the human nature and the enormous lengths of 
time of a creation epoch. 

If the series (Santana) of conscious states are determined 

1 As plants, aquatic animals, reptiles, birds, quadrupeds, simian forms, 
and man. See Brihad Vishnu Purana. 

WORKINGS OF KARMA xliii 

by the past Karma, it may be asked how that liberty of 
choice exists which the whole Text assumes by its injunctions 
to the deceased to do this or to avoid that. No doubt even 
in one individual there are diverse tendencies (Sangskara). 
But the question still remains. If the Karma ready to ripen 
determines the action, then advice to the accused is useless. 
If the ‘soul’ is free to choose, there is no determination by 
Karma. Hinduism holds that, notwithstanding the influence 
of Karma, the Atma is essentially free. Here the answer 
appears to be twofold. Apart from what is next stated, 
the instructions given may, by their suggestions, call up 
that one of several latent tendencies which tends towards 
the action counselled. Further, this system allows that one 
‘soul’ can help another. And so there are prayers for, and 
application of merits to, the deceased, just as we find in 
Hinduism the Pretashradddha, in Catholicism the Reguiem 
Mass, and in Islam the Moslem’s Fatiza. In this and other 
matters one mind can, it is alleged, influence another otherwise 
than through the ordinary sense channels whether before or 
after death. There is also a tendency to overlook collective 
Karma and its effects. An individual is not only affected 
by his own Karma, but by that of the community to which 
he belongs. A wider question arises as to the meaning of 
the Re-incarnation Doctrine itself, but this is not the place to 
discuss it. 

There are many other points of interest in this remarkable 
Book, but I must now stop and let the reader discover them 
for himself. I would like, however, to add a word as to the 
manner of its making. The Text has been fortunate in finding 
as its editor Dr. Evans-Wentz, whose knowledge of, and 
sympathy with, his subject has enabled him to give us a very 
comprehensible account of it. He, in his turn, was fortunate in 
his teacher, the translator, the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup 
(Tib. Zla-va-bsam-hgrub), who, when I first met him, was 
Chief Interpreter on the staff of His Excellency Lonchen Satra, 
the Tibetan Plenipotentiary to the Government of India. He 
was also attached to the Political Staff of His Holiness the 
Dalai Lama on the latter’s visit to India. At the time of 

xliv FOREWORD 

his premature and greatly regretted death Lama Kazi Dawa- 
Samdup was Lecturer in Tibetan to the University of Calcutta. 
These, and the other appointments which the translator held, 
and to which Dr. Evans-Wentz has referred, sufficiently 
establish his high competency both in Tibetan and English. 
He had also, I may add, some knowledge of Sanskrit, which 
I found of much use in discussing with him the meaning of 
terms used in Tibetan-Buddhist doctrine and ritual. I can, 
then, speak personally of his attainments, for I saw a good 
deal of him when he was preparing for me a translation of 
the Tibetan Shrichakrasambhara Tantra, which I have 
published as the seventh volume of the series of Tanirik 
Texts (Luzac & Co.). I can, likewise, from my own 
knowledge, associate myself with what Dr. Evans-Wentz 
has said as to this remarkable man. May their joint work 
have the success it deserves, and so encourage Dr. Evans- 
Wentz to publish some at least of the other Texts which 
he tells me he has in store. 
JOHN WOODROFFE. 

Oxrorp, 
October 3, 1925. 

ik ODpUCTION+ 

‘The phenomena of life may be likened unto a dream, a phantasm, a bubble, 
a shadow, the glistening dew, or lightning flash; and thus they ought to be 
contemplated.’—The Buddha, in The Immutable Sutra. 

I. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE BARDO THODOL 

AS a contribution to the science of death and of the existence 
after death, and of rebirth, The Tibetan Book of the Dead, 

1 This Introduction is—for the most part—based upon and suggested by 
explanatory notes which the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, the translator of 
the Bardo Thédol, dictated to the editor while the translation was taking shape, 
in Gangtok, Sikkim. The Lama was of opinion that his English rendering of 
the Bardo Thédol ought not to be published without his exegetical comments on 
the more abstruse and figurative parts of the text. This, he thought, would not 
only help to justify his translation, but, moreover, would accord with the wishes 
of his late guvu (see p. 80) with respect to all translations into a European 
tongue of works expository of the esoteric lore of the Great Perfectionist 
School into which that guru had initiated him. To this end, the translator’s 
exegesis, based upon that of the translator’s guru, was transmitted to the editor 
and recorded by the editor herein, 

The editor’s task is to correlate and systematize and sometimes to expand the 
notes thus dictated, by incorporating such congenial matter, from widely 
separated sources, as in his judgement tends to make the exegesis more 
intelligible to the Occidental, for whom this part of the book is chiefly intended. 

The translator felt, too, that, without such safeguarding as this Introduction is 
intended to afford, the Bardo Thédol translation would be peculiarly liable to 
misinterpretation and consequent misuse, more especially by those who are 
inclined to be, for one reason or another, inimical to Buddhistic doctrines, or to 
the doctrines of his particular Sect of Northern Buddhism. He also realized 
how such an Introduction as is here presented might itself be subject to adverse 
criticism, perhaps on the ground that it appears to be the outcome of a philoso- 
phical eclecticism. However this may be, the editor can do no more than state 
here, as he has stated in other words in the Preface, that his aim, both herein 
and in the closely related annotations to the text itself, has been to present the 
psychology and the teachings peculiar to and related to the Bardo Thédol as he 
has been taught them by qualified initiated exponents of them, who alone have 
the unquestioned right to explain them. 

If it should be said by critics that the editor has expounded the Bardo Thédol 
doctrines from the standpoint of the Northern Buddhist who believes in them 
rather than from the standpoint of the Christian who perhaps would disbelieve 
at least some of them, the editor has no apology to offer; for he holds that 
there is no sound reason adducible why he should expound them in any other 
manner. Anthropology is concerned with things as they are ; and the hope of 

3069 B 

2 INTRODUCTION 

called, in its own language, Bardo Thédol (‘Liberation by 
Hearing on the After-Death Plane’),! is, among the sacred 
books of the world, unique. As an epitomized exposition of 
the cardinal doctrines of the Mahayana School of Buddhism, 
it is of very great importance, religiously, philosophically, and 
historically. As a treatise based essentially upon the Occult 
Sciences of the Yoga Philosophy, which were fundamental in 
the curriculum of the great Buddhist University of Nalanda, 
the Oxford of ancient India, it is, perhaps, one of the most 
remarkable works the West has ever received from the East. 
As a mystic manual for guidance through the Otherworld of 
many illusions and realms, whose frontiers are death and 
birth, it resembles The Egyptian Book of the Dead sufficiently 
to suggest some ultimate cultural relationship between the 
two; although we only know with certainty that the germ of 
the teachings, as herein made accessible to English readers, 
has been preserved for us by a long succession of saints and 
seers of the God-protected Land of the Snowy Ranges, Tibet. 

Il. THE SYMBOLISM 

The Bardo Théodol is unique in that it purports to treat 
rationally of the whole cycle of sangsaric (i.e. phenomenal) 
existence intervening between death and birth ;—the ancient 
doctrine of karma, or consequences (taught by Emerson as 
compensation), and of rebirth being accepted as the most 
essential laws of nature affecting human life. Often, however, 
its teaching appears to be quite the antithesis of rational, 
because much of it is recorded in an occult cipher. Dr. L. A. 
Waddell has declared, after careful research, that ‘the Jamas 

all sincere researchers into comparative religion devoid of any religious bias 
ought always to be to accumulate such scientific data as will some day enable 
future generations of mankind to discover Truth itself—that Universal Truth in 
which all religions and all sects of all religions may ultimately recognize the 
Essence of Religion and the Catholicity of Faith. 

1 Mr. Talbot Mundy, in his interesting Tibetan romance Om, in making 
reference to this title, The Tibetan Book of the Dead, has taken it to be a very 
free translation of Bardo Thédol. It should not, however, so be taken; it has 
been adopted because it seems to be the most appropriate short title for convey- 
ing to the English reader the true character of the book as a whole. 

THE SYMBOLISM 3 

have the keys to unlock the meaning of much of Buddha’s 
doctrine which has been almost inaccessible to Europeans.’ ! 

Some of the more learned Jamas, including the late Lama 
Kazi Dawa-Samdup, have believed that since very early times 
there has been a secret international symbol-code in common 
use among the initiates, which affords a key to the meaning 
of such occult doctrines as are still jealously guarded by 
religious fraternities in India, as in Tibet, and in China, 
Mongolia, and Japan. 

In like manner, Occidental occultists have contended that 
the hieroglyphical writings of ancient Egypt and of Mexico 
seem to have been, in some degree, a popularized or exoteric 
outgrowth of a secret language. They argue, too, that a 
symbol-code was sometimes used by Plato and other Greek 
philosophers, in relation to Pythagorean and Orphic lore; 
that throughout the Celtic world the Druids conveyed all 
their esoteric teachings symbolically ; that the use of parables, 
as in the sermons of Jesus and of the Buddha, and of other 
Great Teachers, illustrates the same tendency; and _ that 
through works like Aesop's Fables, and the miracle and mystery 
plays of medieval Europe, many of the old Oriental symbols 
have been introduced into the modern literatures of the West.” 

1L. A. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamatsm (London, 1895), p. 17. 

2 There is some sound evidence for supposing that one source of the moral 
philosophy underlying certain of the Aesop’s Fables (and, also, by way of com- 
parison, of the Indian Panchatantra and Hitopadesha) may yet be shown to have 
been such primitive Oriental folk-tales about animals and animal symbols as 
scholars now think helped to shape the /a@taka Tales concerning the various 
births of the Buddha (cf. The Jataka, ed. by E. B. Cowell, Cambridge, 1895- 
1907). Similarly, the Christian mystery plays contain symbolism so much akin 
to that found in mystery plays still flourishing under ecclesiastical patronage 
throughout Tibet and the neighbouring territories of Northern Buddhism as to 
point to another stream of Orientalism having come into Europe (cf. Three Tibetan 
Mysteries, ed. by H. 1. Woolf, London, n.d.). The apparent Romanist canoniza- 
tion of the Buddha, under the medieval character of St. Jehoshaphat, is an 
additional instance of how things Eastern seem to have become things Western 
(cf. Baraldm and Yéewdséf, ed. by E. A. W. Budge, Cambridge, 1923). Further- 
more, the once very popular medieval work De Arte Moriendi (cf. The Book 
of the Craft of Dying, ed. by F. M. M. Comper, London, 1917), of which there 
are many versions and variants in Latin, English, French, and other European 
languages, seems to suggest a still further infiltration of Oriental ideas, concern- 
ing death and existence after death, such as underlie both the Tibetan Bardo 

4 INTRODUCTION 

Be this as it may, it is certain that none of the great systems 
of ancient thought, nor even vernacular literatures, have 
always found the ordinary work-a-day language of the world 
adequate to express transcendental doctrines or even to bring 
out the full significance of moral maxims. 

The lamb, the dragon (or serpent), the dove above the altar, 
the triangle enclosing the all-seeing eye (common to Free- 
masonry as well), the sacred fish-symbol, the ever-burning 
fire, or the image of the risen sun upon the receptacle for the 
consecrated wafer in the Roman Mass, the architectural sym- 
bols and the orientation of church and cathedral, the cross 
itself, and even the colours and designs of the robes of priest 
and bishop and pope, are a few of the silent witnesses of the 
survival in the modern Christian churches of the symbolism of 
paganism. But the key to the interpretation of the inner 
significance of almost all such Christianized symbols was 
unconsciously thrown away: uninitiated ecclesiastics, gathered 
together in heresy-seeking councils, having regarded that 
primitive Christianity, so deeply involved in symbolism, called 
Gnosticism, as ‘ Oriental imagery gone mad’, repudiated it as 
being ‘heretical’, whereas from its own point of view it was 
merely esoteric. 

Similarly, Northern Buddhism, to which symbolism is so 
vital, has been condemned by Buddhists of the Southern 
School for claiming to be the custodian of an esoteric doctrine, 
for the most part orally transmitted by recognized initiates, 
generation by generation, direct from the Buddha—as well as 
for teaching (as, for example, in the Saddharma-Pandarika) 
recorded doctrines not in agreement with doctrines contained 

Thédol and the Egyptian Book of the Dead ; and, in order to show this, a few of 
the most striking passages, found in the De Arte Moriend: cycle, which parallel 
textually certain parts of the Bardo Thédol, have been added in foot-notes to the 
Bardo Thédol translation from Mr. Comper’s excellent edition in The Book of 
the Craft of Dying. 

Buddhist and Christian Gospels (Philadelphia, 1908), a pioneer study of the 
remarkable parallelism which exists between the texts of the Wew Testament 
and the texts of the Buddhist Canon, by Mr. A, J. Edmunds, suggests, likewise, 
that one of the most promising fields of research, as yet almost virgin, lies in 
a study of just such correspondences between Eastern and Western thought and 
literature as is suggested in this note. 

‘ESOTERIC BUDDHISM’ 3 

in the 77-Pitaka (Skt. Tri-Pitaka), the Pali Canon. And 
yet, though the Southern Buddhist commonly assumes that 
there cannot be any buta literal interpretation of the Buddha’s 
teachings, the Pali Scriptures contain many parables and 
metaphorical expressions, some of which the /a@mas regard as 
symbolical and confirmatory of their own esoteric tradition, 
and to which they thus claim to hold—perhaps not without 
good reason—the initiate’s key. 

The /amas grant that the 77-Pitaka (‘Three Pitakas, or 
Baskets’ [of the Law]) are, as the Southern Buddhist holds, 
the recorded Word (or Doctrine) of the Ancients, the 7era- 
vada; but they claim that the Pztakas do not contain all the 
Word, that the Pztakas lack much of the Buddha’s yogic 
teachings, and that it is chiefly these teachings which, in many 
instances, have been handed down esoterically to the present 
day. ‘Esoteric Buddhism’, as it has come to be called— 
rightly or wrongly—seems to depend in large measure upon 
‘ear-whispered ’ doctrines of this character, conveyed accord- 
ing to long-established and inviolable rule, from guru to 
shishya, by word of mouth alone. 

The Pali Canon records that the Buddha held no doctrine 
secretly ‘in a closed fist’ (cf. Maha Parinibbana Sittanta, 
Digha Nikaya Il), that is to say, withheld no essential 
doctrine from the members of the Sazgha (Priesthood), just as 
no guru nowadays withholds a doctrine necessary for the 
spiritual enlightenment of his initiated or accepted disciples. 
This, however, is far from implying that all such teachings 
were intended to be set down in writing for the uninitiated 
and worldly multitude, or that they ever were so recorded in 
any of the Canons. The Buddha Himself wrote down nothing 
of His teachings, and His disciples who after His death 
compiled the Buddhist Scriptures may not have recorded 
therein all that their Master taught them. If they did not, 
and there are, therefore, as the /amas contend, certain un- 
written teachings of the Buddha which have never been taught 
to those who were not of the Sazgha, then there is, un- 
doubtedly, an extra-canonical, or esoteric, Buddhism, An 
esoteric Buddhism thus conceived is not, however, to be 

6 INTRODUCTION 

regarded as in any wise in disagreement with canonical, or 
exoteric, Buddhism, but as being related to it as higher 
mathematics are to lower mathematics, or as being the apex 
of the pyramid of the whole of Buddhism. 

In short, the evidence adducible gives much substantial 
support to the claim of the Jamas, to whom we refer, that 
there is—as the Bardo Thodol appears to suggest—an un- 
recorded body of orally transmitted Buddhistic teachings 
complementary to canonical Buddhism.? 

Ill. THE ESOTERIC SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FORTY-NINE DAYS 
OF THE BARDO 

Turning now to our text itself, we find that structurally it 
is founded upon the symbolical number Forty-nine, the square 
of the sacred number Seven ; for, according to occult teachings 
common to Northern Buddhism and to that Higher Hinduism 
which the Hindu-born Bodhisattva Who became the Buddha 
Gautama, the Reformer of the Lower Hinduism and the 
Codifier of the Secret Lore, never repudiated, there are seven 
worlds or seven degrees of Maya? within the Sangsara,’ con- 
stituted as seven globes of a planetary chain. On each globe 
there are seven rounds of evolution, making the forty-nine 
(seven times seven) stations of active existence. As in the 

1 It is probably unnecessary for the editor to remind his friends who profess 
the Theravada Buddhism of the Southern School that, in preparing this Intro- 
duction, his aim has necessarily been to present Buddhism chiefly from the 
standpoint of the Northern Buddhism of the Kargyutpa Sect (see page 79), by 
which the Bardo Thédol is accepted as a sacred book and to which the translator 
belonged. Although the Southern Buddhist may not agree with the Bardo 
Thédol teachings in their entirety, he will, nevertheless, be very apt to find 
them, in most essentials, based upon doctrines common to all Schools and Sects 
of Buddhism ; and he may even find those of them with which he disagrees 
interesting and possibly provocative of a reconsideration of certain of his own 
antagonistic beliefs, 

2 Maya, the Sanskrit equivalent of the Tibetan Gyama (Sgyiima), means 
a magical or illusory show, with direct reference to the phenomena of Nature. 
In a higher sense, in Brahmanism, it refers to the Shakti of Brahman (the 
Supreme Spirit, the Ain Soph of Judaism). 

8 The Sanskrit term Sangsdra (or Samsara), Tibetan Khorva (Hkhorva), 
refers to the phenomenal universe itself, its antithesis being Nirvana (Tib. 
Myang-hdas), which is beyond phenomena (cf, pp. 67-8). 

THE ESOTERICISM 7 

embryonic state in the human species the foetus passes through 
every form of organic structure from the amoeba to man, the 
highest mammal, so in the after-death state, the embryonic 
state of the psychic world, the Knower or principle of con- 
sciousness, anterior to its re-emergence in gross matter, ana- 
logously experiences purely psychic conditions. In other 
words, in both these interdependent embryonic processes— 
the one physical, the other psychical—the evolutionary and 
the involutionary attainments, corresponding to the forty-nine 
stations of existence, are passed through. 

Similarly, the forty-nine days of the Bardo may also be 
symbolical of the Forty and Nine Powers of the Mystery of 
the Seven Vowels. In Hindu mythology, whence much of 
the Bardo symbolism originated, these Vowels were the 
Mystery of the Seven Fires and their forty-nine subdivisional 
fires or aspects. They are also represented by the Svastika 
signs upon the crowns of the seven heads of the Serpent 
of Eternity of the Northern Buddhist Mysteries, originating 
in ancient India. In Hermetic writings they are the seven 
zones of after-death, or Bardo, experiences, each symbolizing 
the eruption in the Intermediate State of a particular seven- 
fold element of the complex principle of consciousness, thus 
giving the consciousness-principle forty-nine aspects, or fires, 
or fields of manifestation }. 

The number seven has long been a sacred number among 
Aryan and other races, Its use in the Revelation of John 
illustrates this, as does the conception of the seventh day 
being regarded as holy. In Nature, the number seven governs 
the periodicity and phenomena of life, as, for example, in the 
series of chemical elements, in the physics of sound and colour, 
and it is upon the number forty-nine, or seven times seven, 
that the Bardo Thodol is thus scientifically based. 

1 As regards the esoteric meaning of the Forty-nine Days of the Bardo, 
compare H. P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine (London, 1888), i. 238, 411 ; ii. 
617, 627-8. The late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup was of opinion that, despite 
the adverse criticisms directed against H. P. Blavatsky’s works, there is adequate 
internal evidence in them of their author’s intimate acquaintance with the higher 
lamaistic teachings, into which she claimed to have been initiated. 

8 INTRODUCTION 

IV. THE ESOTERIC SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FIVE ELEMENTS 

Likewise, in a very striking manner, the esoteric teachings 
concerning the Five Elements, as symbolically expounded 
in the Bardo Thédol, parallel, for the most part, certain of 
the teachings of Western Science, as the following inter- 
pretation, based upon that made by the translator himself, 
indicates: 

In the First Round of our Planet, one element alone— 
Fire—was evolved. In the fire-mist, which, in accordance 
with the sarmic law governing the Sangsara, or cosmos, 
assumed a rotary motion and became a blazing globular body 
of undifferentiated primeval forces, all the other elements lay 
in embryo. Life first manifested itself clothed in robes of 
fire; and man, if we conceive him as then existing, was incar- 
nate—as the Salamanders of medieval occultism were believed 
to be—in a body of fire. In the Second Round, as the 
Element Fire assumed definite form, the Element Air sepa- 
rated from it and enwrapped the embryonic Planet as a shell 
covers anegg. The body of man, and of all organic creatures, 
thereupon became a compound of fire and air. In the Third 
Round, as the Planet, bathed in the Element Air and fanned 
by it, abated its fiery nature, the Element Water came forth 
from the vaporous air. In the Fourth Round, in which the 
Planet still is, air and water neutralized the activities of their 
Parent Fire; and the Fire, bringing forth the Element Earth, 
became encrusted with it. Esoterically, the same teachings 
are said to be conveyed by the old Hindu myth of the 
churning of the Sea of Milk, which was the Fire-Mist, whence 
came, like butter, the solid earth. Upon the earth, so formed, 
the gods are credited with having fed; or, in other words, 
they, hankering after existence in gross physical bodies, 
became incarnated on this Planet and so became the Divine 
Progenitors of the human race. 

In the Bardo, on the first four days these Four Elements 
manifest themselves, or dawn upon the deceased, in their 
primordial form, although not in their true occult order.! 

? It is held, too, that whereas from the Five Dhyani Buddhas, as in our text, 

THE ESOTERICISM 9 

The Fifth Element, Ether, in its primal form, symbolized as 
‘the green light-path of the Wisdom of Perfected Actions’, 
does not dawn, for, as the text explains, the Wisdom (or 
Bodhic) Faculty of the consciousness of the deceased has not 
been perfectly developed. 

The Ether Element, like the aggregate of matter (sym- 
bolical of the fire-mist), is personified in Vairochana, He 
Who in Shapes makes visible all things. The psychical attri- 
bute of the Ether Element is—to render the /amaic conception 
in the language of the psychology of the West—that of the 
subconsciousness; and the subconsciousness, as a transcen- 
dental consciousness higher than the normal consciousness in 
mankind, and as yet normally undeveloped, is—as the vehicle 
for the manifestation of the Bodhic Faculty—believed to be 
destined to become the active consciousness of the humanity 
of the Fifth Round. The memory-records of all past ex- 
periences throughout the many states of sazgsdric existence 
being latent in the subconsciousness, as the Buddha’s own 
teachings imply (see pp. 40-41), the Fifth Round races in 
whom it becomes active will thus be able to recall all their 
past existences. In place of faith or mere belief, Man will 
then possess Knowledge, will come to know himself in the 
sense implied by the Mysteries of ancient Greece; he will 
realize the unreality of sangsdric existence, attaining Enlighten- 
ment and Emancipation from the Sexgsara, from all the 
Elements ; and this will come as a normal process of human 
evolution. It is, however, the aim in all schools of Indian 
and Tibetan Yoga alike—as in the Lardo Thoédol—to outstrip 
this tedious process of normal evolution and win Freedom 
even now. 

In the body of man as he is—in our present Fourth 
emanate the five elements—ether, or aggregate of matter (Vairochana), air, or 
aggregate of volition (Amogha-Siddhi), fire, or aggregate of feelings (Amitabha), 
water, or aggregate of consciousness (Vajra-Sattva, esoterically as a reflex of 
Akshobhya), and earth, or aggregate of touch (Ratna-Sambhava)—from the Adi- 
Buddha (from whom, according to the Adi-Buddha School, the Five Dhyani 
Buddhas themselves emanate) emanates the sixth element, which is mind 
(manas). Vajra-Sattva, as an esoteric deity, sometimes occupies (as does 
Vairochana)—according to the School and ritual—the place of the Adi-Buddha, 
and is then synonymous with him, 

3069 C 

10 INTRODUCTION 

Round—there are four kingdoms of living creatures: (1) those 
of the Element Fire, (2) those of the Element Air, (3) those of 
the Element Water, and (4) those of the Element Earth. 
Over this collective life of innumerable myriads of lives man 
is king. If he be a Great King, filled with the transcendent 
consciousness of the triumphant Yogz (or Saint), to him the 
countless multitude of his elemental subjects severally reveal 
themselves in their true nature and place in his hand the 
Sceptre (symbolized by the Tibetan dovje, or thunderbolt) of 
Universal Dominion over Matter. Then, indeed, is he Lord 
of Nature, becoming in his turn Ruler by Divine Right, 
a Chakravartin, or Universal Emperor, God and Creator.! 

V. THE WISDOM TEACHINGS 

Also involved in symbolical language there are, as funda- 
mental occult doctrines of the Bardo Thodol, what the trans- 
lator called The Wisdom Teachings; and these—which are 
essential Mahayana doctrines—may be outlined as follows: 

The Voidness.—In all Tibetan systems of yoga, realization 
of the Voidness (Tib. Stong-pa-iid—pron. Tong-pa-hid: Skt. 
Shinyata) is the one great aim; for to realize it is to attain 
the unconditioned Dharma-K aya, or ‘ Divine Body of Truth’ 
(Tib. Chos-sku—pron. Ché-Ku), the primordial state of un- 
createdness, of the supramundane Bodhic All-Consciousness— 
Buddhahood. Realization of the Voidness (Pali, Su##ata) is 
the aim of Theravadists too. 

The Three Bodies.—The Dharma-K Gya is the highest of the 
Three Bodies (Tib. Sku-gsum—pron. K a-sum: Skt. Tri-K aya) 
of the Buddha and of all Buddhas and beings who have Perfect 
Enlightenment. The other two bodies are the Sambhoga-K aya 
or ‘Divine Body of Perfect Endowment’ (Tib. Longs-spyod- 
rzogs-sku—pron. Long-chod-zo-ku) and the Nirmana-K aya or 

* Manu, in The Laws (xii. 10-11), says: ‘He, whose firm understanding 
obtains a command over his words, a command over his thoughts, and a command 

over his whole body, may justly be called a Triple-Commander. 

‘The man who exerts this triple self-command with respect to all animated 
creatures, wholly subduing both lust and wrath, shall by those means attain 
Beatitude.’—(Cf, trans, by Sir William Jones.) 

THE WISDOM TEACHINGS i 

‘Divine Body of Incarnation’ (Tib. Spral-pahi-sku-—pron. Tul- 
pat-ku). 

The Dharma-Kaya is symbolized—for all human word- 
concepts are inadequate to describe the Qualityless—as an 
_infinite ocean, calm and without a wave, whence arise mist- 
clouds and rainbow, which symbolize the Sambhoga-Kaya; 
and the clouds, enhaloed in the glory of the rainbow, con- 
densing and falling as rain, symbolize the Mzrmana-K aya 

The Dharma-K aya is the primordial, formless Bohdz, which 
is true experience freed from all error or inherent or acci- 
dental obscuration. In it lies the essence of the Universe, 
including both Saugsaéra and Nirvana, which, as states or 
conditions of the two poles of consciousness, are, in the last 
analysis, in the realm of the pure intellect, identical. 

In other words, the Dharma-K aya (lit. ‘Law Body’) being 
Essential Wisdom (Sodhz) unmodified, the Sambhoga-K aya 
(lit. ‘Compensation Body’, or ‘Adorned Body’) embodies, 
as in the Five Dhyani Buddhas, Reflected or Modified 
Wisdom, and the Virmdnua-Kaya (lit. ‘Changeable Body’, 
or ‘ Transformed Body’) embodies, as in the Human Buddhas, 
Practical or Incarnate Wisdom.® 

1 Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh (see our Preface, p. x) has added here the 
following comment: ‘The word Dharma is derived from the verb-root Dhri, 
meaning ‘to Support’ or ‘to Uphold’, Dkarma is that which upholds or 
supports the Universe, as also the individual. Dharma is in mankind Right 
Conduct, the result of True Knowledge. Truth according to Brahmanism is 
the Brahman, is Liberation—Moksha, Nirvana. Sambhoga is the Life of 
Enjoyment. Mixmdna is the Process of Building. In the Brahmanic scheme, 
Dharma is the first thing needed. Then comes Artha (i.e. Wealth, or 
Possessions), which corresponds with Wirmaza. After this comes Sambhoga ; 
and the last is Moksha, or Liberation.’ 

2 ‘Whatever is visible and invisible, whether Sangsara or Nirvana, is at 
base one (that is, Shinyala|, with two Paths [Avidyd, Ignorance, and Vidya, 
Knowledge] and two ends [Sangsdra and Mirvana).’ ... ‘The Foundation 
of all is uncreated and independent, uncompounded and beyond mind and 
speech, Of It neither the word Mirvana nor Sangsara may be said ’—The Good 
Wishes of the Adi-Buddha, 1-2 (cf. the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s transla- 
tion, TZantnk Texts, vol, vii, London, 1919). The Skinyatd, the Void, synony- 
mous with the Dharma-Kaya, is thus beyond all mental concepts, beyond the 
finite mind with all its imaginings and use of such ultimate terms of the dualistic 
world as Nirvana and Sangsara. 

8 Cf. Waddell, op. cit., pp. 127, 347: 

Ashvaghosha, the great philosopher of Mahayana Buddhism (see pp. 225-6), 

12 INTRODUCTION 

The Uncreated, the Unshaped, the Unmodified is the 
Dharma-Kaya. The Offspring, the Modification of the Un- 
modified, the manifestation of all perfect attributes in one 
body, is the Sambhoga-Kaya: ‘The embodiment of all 
that is wise, merciful and loving in the Dharma-Kaya— 
as clouds on the surface of the heavens or a rainbow on 
the surface of the clouds—is said to be Sambhoga-Kaya’. 
The condensation and differentiation of the One Body as 
many is the Mirmana-Kdaya, or the Divine Incarnations 
among sentient beings, that is to say, among beings im- 
mersed in the Illusion called Sangsa@ra, in phenomena, in 
worldly existence. All enlightened beings who are reborn 
in this or in any other world with full consciousness, as workers 
for the betterment of their fellow creatures, are said to be 
Nirmana-K aya incarnates. 

With the Dharma-Kaya Tantric Buddhism associates the 
Primordial Buddha Samanta-Bhadra (Tib. K tin-tu-bzang-po— 
pron. AKvin-tu-zang-po), Who is without Beginning or End, the 

has explained the 777-Kaya Doctrine in The Awakening of Faith, translation by 
T. Suzuki (Chicago, 1900, pp. 99-103), as follows : 

‘Because All Tathagatas are the Dharmakaya itself, are the highest truth 
(paramarthasatya) itself, and have nothing to do with conditionality (samuritts- 
satya) and compulsory actions; whereas the secing, hearing, &c. [i.e. the 
particularizing scnses], of the sentient being diversify [on its own account] the 
activity of the Tathagatas. 

‘Now this activity [in another word, the Dharmakdaya] has a twofold aspect. 
The first one depends on the phenomena-particularizing-consciousness, by 
means of which the activity is conceived by the minds of common people 
( prithagjana), Cravakas, and Pratyekabuddhas. This aspect is called the Body 
of Transformation (Virmanakdaya). 

‘But as the beings of this class do not know that the Body of Transformation 
is merely the shadow [or reflection] of their own evolving-consciousness 
(pravritti-vijndna), they imagine that it comes from some external sources, and 
so they give it a corporeal limitation, But the Body of Transformation [or 
what amounts to the same thing, the Dharmakaya| has nothing to do with 
limitation and measurement. 

‘The second aspect (of the Dharmahkaya] depends on the activity-consciousness 
(karma-vijiiana) by means of which the activity is conceived by the minds of 
Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration (cttfotpdda) stage up to the 
height of Bodhisattvahood. This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakdya).... 

‘The Dhaymakdaya can manifest itself in various corporeal forms just because 
it is the real essence of them’ (cf. p. 2287). 

' Cf. A. Avalon, Tantrik Texts, vii London and Calcutta, 1919), pp. 36 n., 41 n. 

THE WISDOM TEACHINGS 13 

Source of all Truth, the All-Good Father of the Lamaistic 
Faith. In this same highest Buddha realm Lamaism places 
Vajra-Dhara (Tib. Rdorje-Chang—pron. Dorje-Chang), ‘The 
Holder of the Dorje (or Thunderbolt)’ ‘the Divine Expounder of 
the Mystic Doctrine called Vajra Yana (Tib. Rdorje Theg-pa— 
pron. Dorje Theg-pa) or Mantra Yana’; and also the Buddha 
Amitabha (Tib. Hod-dpag-med—pron. Wod-pag-med ; or, as in 
the text, page 1131), the Buddha of Boundless Light, Who is 
the Source of Life Eternal. In the Sambhoga-K aya are placed 
the Five Dhyani Buddhas (or Buddhas of Meditation), the 
Lotus Herukas, and the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, all 
of whom will appear in the Bardo visions. With the 
Nirmdana-Kaya is associated Padma Sambhava, who, being 
the first teacher in Tibet to expound the Bardo Thédol, is 
the Great Guru for all devotees who follow the Bardo 
teachings. 

The opinion commonly held by men not initiated into the 
higher /amaic teachings, that Northern Buddhism recognizes 
in the Primordial or Adi-Buddha a Supreme Deity, is ap- 
parently erroneous. The translator held that the Adi-Buddha, 
and all deities associated with the Dharma-K aya, are not to 
be regarded as personal deities, but as Personifications of 
primordial and universal forces, laws, or spiritual influences, 
which sustain—as the sun sustains the earth’s physical life— 
the divine nature of all sentient creatures in all worlds, 
and make man’s emancipation from all sazgsaric existences 
possible: 

‘In the boundless panorama of the existing and visible 
universe, whatever shapes appear, whatever sounds vibrate, 
whatever radiances illuminate, or whatever consciousnesses 
cognize, all are the play or manifestation of the 7r7-Kaya, 
the Three-fold Principle of the Cause of All Causes, the 
Primordial Trinity. Impenetrating all, is the All-Pervading 
Essence of Spirit, which is Mind. It is uncreated, impersonal, 
self-existing, immaterial, and indestructible.’ 

(Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup.) 

Thus, the 777-Kaya symbolizes the Esoteric Trinity of 

14 INTRODUCTION 

the higher Buddhism of the Northern School; the Exoteric 
Trinity being, as in the Southern School, the Buddha, the 
Dharma (or Scriptures), the Saxgha (or Priesthood). Regarded 
in this way—the one trinitarian doctrine as esoteric, the other 
as exoteric—there are direct correspondences between the two 
Trinities. Detailed and comprehensive understanding of the 
Tri-K aya Doctrine, so the /amas teach, is the privilege of 
initiates, who, alone, are fitted to grasp and to realize it. 

The translator himself regarded the 7ri-Kaya Doctrine as 
having been transmitted by along and unbroken line of initiates, 
some Indian, some Tibetan, direct from the days of the Buddha. 
He considered that the Buddha, having re-discovered it, 
was merely its Transmitter from preceding Buddhas; that 
it was handed on orally, from guru to guru, and not com- 
mitted to writing until comparatively recent times, when 
Buddhism began to decay, and there were not always 
sufficient living gurus to transmit it in the old way. The 
theory of Western scholars, that simply because a doctrine 
is not found recorded before a certain time it consequently 
did not exist previously, he—as an initiate—laughed at; 
and the rather strenuous efforts of Christian apologists to 
claim for the Z7vi-Kaya Doctrine a Christian origin he held, 
likewise, to be wholly untenable. He had been a close and 
sympathetic student of Christianity ; and, as a young man, 
he had been much sought after by Christian missionaries, 
who looked upon him, with his remarkable learning and 
superior social standing, as an unusually desirable subject 
for conversion. He carefully examined their claims, and then 
rejected them, on the ground that, in his opinion, Christianity, 
as presented by them, is but an imperfect Buddhism, 
that the Asokan Buddhist missionaries to Asia Minor and 
Syria, as to Alexandria,' must have profoundly influenced 
Christianity through some such probable connecting link as 
the Essenes, that, if Jesus were an historical character, He, 
being—as the Lama interpreted the Jesus of the Mez 
Testament clearly to be—a Bodhisattva (i.e. a Candidate 
for Buddhahood), was, undoubtedly, well acquainted with 

1 Cf. V. A. Smith, Early History of India (Oxford, 1914), p. 184. 

THE WISDOM TEACHINGS 15 

Buddhist ethics, and taught them, as in the Sermon on 
the Mount. 

The Doctrine of the Three Bodies conveys the esoteric 
teachings concerning the Path of the Teachers, their descent 
from the Higher to the Lower, from the threshold of Wirvaua 
to the Sangsara; and progression from the Lower to the 
Higher, from the Sangsara to Nirvana, is symbolized by 
the Five Dhyani Buddhas, each personifying a universal 
divine attribute. Contained in the Five Dhyani Buddhas 
lies the Sacred Way leading to At-one-ment in the Dharma- 
Kaya, to Buddhahood, to Perfect Enlightenment, to Vzrvana — 
which is spiritual emancipation through Desirelessness. 

The Five Wisdoms.—As the All-Pervading Voidness, the 
Dharma-K aya is the shape (which is shapelessness) of the Body 
of Truth; the Thatness constituting it is the Dharma-Dhatu 
(Tib. Chos-kyt-dvyings—pron. Ché-kyi-ing), the Seed or Poten- 
tiality of Truth ; and this dawns on the First Day of the Bardo 
. as the glorious blue light of the Dhyani Buddha Vairochana, 
the Manifester, ‘He Who in Shapes Makes Visible’ [the 
universe of mattcr]. The Dharma-Dhatu is symbolized as 
the Aggregate of Matter. From the Aggregate of Matter 
arise the creatures of this world, as of all worlds, in which 
animal stupidity is the dominant characteristic ; and the mara 
(or illusion of shape) constitutes in all realms of the Sangsadra 
—as in the human kingdom where manas (or mind) begins to 
operate—the Bondage, emancipation from which is Vzrvdua. 
When in man, made as perfect as human life can make him, 
the stupidity of his animal nature and the illusion of shape, or 
personality, are transmuted into Right Knowledge, into Divine 
Wisdom, there shines forth in his consciousness the All-Per- 
vading Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu, or the Wisdom born 
of the Voidness, which is all-pervading. 

As the Aggregate of Matter, dawning in the Bardo of the 
First Day, produces physical bodies, so the Water-Element, 
dawning on the Second Day, produces the life-stream, the 
blood; Anger is the obscuring passion, consciousness is the 
aggregate, and these, when transmuted, become the Mirror- 
like Wisdom, personified in Vajra-Sattva (the Sambhoga-K aya 

16 INTRODUCTION 

reflex of the Dhyani Buddha Akshobhya), the ‘Triumphant 
One of Divine Heroic Mind’. 

The Earth-Element of the Third Day, producing the chief 
solid constituents of the human form, and of all physical 
forms, gives rise to the passion of Egoism, and the aggregate 
is Touch; and these, when divinely transmuted, become the 
Wisdom of Equality, personified in Ratna-Sambhava, the 
‘Gem-born One’, the Beautifier. 

The Fire-Element of the Fourth Day, producing the animal- 
heat of embodied human and animal beings, gives rise to the 
passion of Attachment, or Lust, and the Aggregate of Feelings. 
Herein the transmutation gives birth to the All-Discriminating 
Wisdom, which enables the devotee to know each thing 
separately, yet all things as one; personified in the Dhyani 
Buddha Amitabha, ‘ He of Boundless Light’, the Illuminator, 
or Enlightener. 

The Element Air, of the Fifth Day, produces the breath of 
life. Its quality, or passions, in man is Envy, or Jealousy. 
Its aggregate is Volition. The transmutation is into the 
All-Performing Wisdom, which gives perseverance and un- 
erring action in things spiritual, personified in Amogha-Siddhi, 
the ‘Almighty Conqueror’, the Giver of Divine Power. 

As explained above, in Section IV, the last Element, Ether, 
which produces the mind, or Knower, and the desire-body of 
the dwellers in the Intermediate State, does not dawn for the 
deceased, because—as the text tells us—the Wisdom Faculty 
of the Consciousness, that is to say, the supramundane 
Buddha (or Bodhic) consciousness, has not been developed 
in the ordinary humanity. To it is related—as in our text— 
Vajra-Sattva and the Mirror-like Wisdom and the Aggregate 
of Bodhic Wisdom, Vajra-Sattva being then synonymous, eso- 
terically, with Samanta-Bhadra (who, in turn, is often personi- 
ficd in Vairochana, the Chief of the Five Dhyani Buddhas), 
the Adi-Buddha, the Primordial, the Unborn, Unshaped, Un- 
modified Dharma-K aya. 

When the perfection of the Divine Body-Aggregate is 
attained by man, it becomes the unchanging, immutable 
Vajra-Sattva. When the perfection of the Divine Speech- 

THE WISDOM TEACHINGS 1. 

Principle is attained, with it comes the power of divine 
speech, symbolized by Amitabha. The perfection of the 
Divine Thought-Principle brings divine infallibility, symbo- 
lized by Vairochana. The perfection of the Divine Qualities 
of Goodness and Beauty is the realization of Ratna-Sambhava, 
their producer. With the perfection of Divine Actions comes 
the realization of Amogha-Siddhi, the Omnipotent Conqueror. 

To one after another of these divine attributes, or principles, 
innate in every human being, the deceased is introduced, as 
though in a symbolic drama of initiation, to test him and 
discover whether or not any part of his divine (or dodhic) 
nature has been developed. Full development in all the 
bodhic powers of the Five Dhyani Buddhas, who are the 
personifications of them, leads to Liberation, to Buddhahood. 
Partial development leads to birth in one of the happier 
states: deva-loka, the world of the devas or gods ; asura-loka, 
the world of the asuras or titans; xara-loka, the world of 
mankind. 

After the Fifth Day the Bardo visions become less and 
less divine; the deceased sinks deeper and deeper into the 
morass of sangsaric hallucinations; the radiances of the 
higher nature fade into the lights of the lower nature. 
Then—the after-death dream ending as the Intermediate 
State exhausts itself for the percipient, the thought-forms of 
his mental-content all having shown themselves to him like 
ghostly spectres in a nightmare—he passes on from the 
Intermediate State into the equally illusionary state called 
waking, or living, either in the human world or in one of 
the many mansions of existence, by being born there. And 
thus revolves the Wheel of Life, until the one who is bound 
on it breaks his own bonds through Enlightenment, and there 
comes, as the Buddha proclaims, the Ending of Sorrow. 

In Sections I to V, above, the more prominent occult 
teachings underlying the Bardo Thodol have been briefly 
expounded. In Sections VI to XII, which are to follow, 
the chief Bardo rites and ceremonies, the Bardo psychology, 
and other of the Bardo doctrines will be explained and 
interpreted. The last Sections, XIII to XV, will be devoted 

3069 D 

18 INTRODUCTION 

to a consideration of our manuscript, its history, the origin of 
the Bardo Thédol texts, and our translating and editing. 

In addition to these fifteen sections, there are, as Addenda 
(see pp. 211-41), six complementary sections, addressed chiefly 
to the student, who, more than the ordinary reader, will be 
interested in certain of the more abstruse doctrines and problems 
which arise from a careful study of the translation and its 
annotations. 

VI. THE DEATH CEREMONIES 

When the death-symptoms, as described in the first sections 
of our text, are completed, a white cloth is thrown over the 
face of the corpse ; and no person then touches the corpse, in 
order that the culminating process of death, which ends only 
upon the complete separation of the Bardo body from its 
earth-plane counterpart, shall not be interfered with. It is 
commonly held that normally the process takes from three 
and one-half to four days, unless assisted by a priest called 
the Zpho-bo (pron. pho-o) or ‘extractor of the consciousness- 
principle’; and that, even if the priest be successful in the 
extracting, the deceased ordinarily does not wake up to the 
fact of being separated from the human body until the said 
period of time has expired. 

The %pho-b0, upon his arrival, takes a seat on a mat or 
chair at the head of the corpse; he dismisses all lament- 
making relatives from the death-chamber and orders its doors 
and windows to be closed, so as to secure the silence necessary 
for the right performance of the Zpo-bo service. This consists 
of a mystic chant containing directions for the spirit of the 
deceased to find its way to the Western Paradise of Amitabha, 
and thus escape—if karma permits—the undesirable Inter- 
mediate State. After commanding the spirit to quit the body 
and its attachment to living relatives and goods, the /ama 
examines the crown of the head of the corpse at the line of 
the sagittal suture, where the two parietal bones articulate, 
called the ‘ Aperture of Brahma’ (Skt. Brakma-randhra), to 
determine if the spirit has departed thence, as it should have 
done; and, if the scalp be not bald, he pulls out a few of the 
hairs directly over the aperture. If through accident or 

THE DEATH CEREMONIES 19 

otherwise there be no corpse, the /ama mentally concentrates 
upon the deceased, and, visualizing the body of the deceased, 
imagines it to be present; and, calling the spirit of the 
deceased, performs the ceremony, which usually lasts about 
one hour. 

Meanwhile, the ¢s¢-pa, or astrologer-/ama, has been engaged 
to cast a death-horoscope, based upon the moment of death 
of the deceased, to determine what persons may approach and 
touch the corpse, the proper method of disposing of the 
corpse, the time and manner of the funeral, and the sort of 
rites to be performed for the benefit of the departed. Then 
the corpse is tied up in a sitting posture, much the same as 
that in which mummies and skeletons have been found in 
ancient graves or tombs in various parts of the world, and 
sometimes called the embryonic posture, symbolical of being 
born out of this life into the life beyond death. The corpse, 
so postured, is then placed in one of the corners of the death- 
chamber which has not been assigned to the household daemon. 

Relatives and friends, having been notified of the death, 
gather together at the house of the deceased; and there they 
are fed and lodged until the corpse is disposed of. If doubt 
exists concerning the complete separation of the conscious- 
ness-principle (or spirit) of the deceased from the body, there is 
not likely to be any disposal of the corpse until three and 
one-half to four days after the time of the death. So long as 
the entertaining of the mourners continues—usually for not 
less than two, but more often for three days—the spirit of the 
deceased is offered a part of all food, both solid and liquid, of 
each meal. This food is placed in a bowl in front of the 
corpse; and then, after the spirit of the deceased has extracted 
from the food thus offered the subtle invisible essences, the 
food is thrown away. After the corpse has been removed 
from the house for final disposal, an effigy of the deceased is 
put in the corner of the room which the corpse had occupied ; 
and before this effigy food continues thus to be offered until 
the forty-nine days of the Bardo have expired. 

Whilst the funeral rites—including the reading of the Bardo 
Thidol—are being performed, in the house of the deceased or 

20 INTRODUCTION 

at the place of death, other /amas chant by relays, all day and 
night, the service for assisting the spirit of the deceased to 
reach the Western Paradise of Amitabha, In Tibetan, this 
service (which the 4pho-0 also chants) is called De-qwa-chan- 
kyi-mon-lam. Wf the family be well-to-do, another service of 
like nature may be performed at the temple wherein the 
deceased used to worship, by all of the monks of the temple 
assembled. 

After the funeral, the /amas who read the Bardo Thodot 
return to the house of death once a week until the forty-ninth 
day of the Intermediate State has ended. It is not un- 
common, however, for them to intermit one day of the first 
week and of each of the succeeding periods in order to shorten 
the service, so that they return after six, five, four, three, two, 
and one day respectively, thereby concluding the reading in 
about three weeks. 

From the First to the Fourteenth Day, as the arrangement 
of Book One of our text suggests, the Chonyid Bardo is to be 
read and re-read, and from the Fifteenth Day onwards the 
Sidpa Bardo. In poorer families the rites may cease after 
the Fourteenth Day ; for families in better circumstances It is 
usual in Sikkim to continue the rites at least until the expira- 
tion of the twenty-one-day period and sometimes during the 
whole period of the Forty-nine Days of the Bardo. On the 
first day of the funeral rites, if the deceased were a man 
of wealth or position, as many as one hundred Jamas may 
assist ; at the funeral of a poor man only one or two lamas 
are likely to be present. After the Fourteenth Day, as a 
rule for all alike, only one /ama is retained to complete the 
reading. 

The effigy of the body of the deceased is made by dressing 
a stool, block of wood, or other suitable object in the clothes 
of the deceased; and where the face should be there is 
inserted a printed paper called the mtshan-spyang or spyang-pu 
(pronounced chang-ku), of which the following reproduction 
of a specimen is typical :} 

‘ Our reproduction, made by special permission given to the editor by Dr. 

L. A. Waddell, is from pl. xxi, Gasetteer of Sikhim, edited by H. H. Risley 
(Calcutta, 1894), section on Lamaism in Sikhim by L. A. Waddell. 

in ian ns WAR aah; 
| pats { 

THE EFFIGY OF THE DEAD PERSON 

(1. Mirror, 2. Conch, 3. Lyre. 4. Vase with flowers. 5. Holy Cake.) 

22 INTRODUCTION 

In this spyang-pu, the central figure represents the deceased 
with legs bound and in an attitude of adoration, surrounded 
by symbols of ‘ the five excellent sensuous things’: (1) a mirror 
(the first of the three objects on the left and numbered 1), 
symbolical of the body, which reflects all phenomena or 
sensations, and of sight as well; (2) a conch (numbered 2) 
and a lyre (numbered 3), symbolical of sound; (3) a vase of 
flowers (numbered 4), symbolical of smell; (4) holy cakes in a 
receptacle like that employed at the Roman Catholic Eucharist 
(numbered 5), symbolical of essence or nutriment, and of 
taste ; (5) the silk clothes of the central figure and the over- 
hanging royal canopy, symbolical of dress and ornamental 
art, and of the sense of touch. It is before such a paper 
figure, inserted in the effigy as a head and face, that the food 
offerings to the spirit of the deceased continue to be made, 
and to which, when visualized by the /a@ma as the deceased in 
person, the Bardo Thédol is read. 

Having begun my Tibetan researches fresh from three 
years of research in the ancient funeral lore of the Nile Valley, 
I realized as soon as I gained knowledge of the Tibetan 
funeral rites—which are very largely pre-Buddhistic—that the 
efhgy of the dead, as now used in Tibet and Sikkim, is so 
definitely akin to the effigy of the deceased called ‘the statue 
of the Osiris (or deceased one)’, as used in the funeral rites of 
ancient Egypt, as to suggest a common origin. Furthermore, 
the spyang-pu taken by itself alone, as the head-picce for the 
effigy, has its Egyptian parallel in the images made for the 
Ka or spirit. These sometimes were merely heads, complete 
in themselves, to replace or duplicate the head of the mummy 
and to furnish additional assistance to the Ka when seeking— 
as the Knower in the Bardo seeks—a body to rest in, or that 
which our text calls a prop for the body (see p. 182). And 
even as to ‘the statue of the Osiris’ the ancient priests of 
Egypt read their Book of the Dead, so to the Tibetan effigy 
the Jamas now read the Bardo Thédol—both treatises alike 
being nothing more than guide-books for the traveller in the 
realm beyond death. 

Again, the preliminary rituals of the Egyptian funeral were 

THE DEATH CEREMONIES 23 

designed to confer upon the deceased the magic power of 
rising up in the ghost-body or Ka possessed of all sense 
faculties, the service having consisted of ‘the opening of the 
mouth and eyes’ and the restoration of the use of all other 
parts of the body. Likewise, the /amas’ aim, at the outset, is 
to restore complete consciousness to the deceased after the 
swoon-state immediately following death, and to accustom 
him to the unfamiliar environment of the Otherworld, assum- 
ing that he be, like the multitude, one of the unenlightened, 
and thus incapable of immediate emancipation. 

In conformity with our own view, that that part of the 
Tibetan funeral rites directly concerned with the effigy and the 
spyang-pu has come down to our day as a survival from 
pre-Buddhist, probably very ancient, times, Dr. L. A. Waddell 
writes of it as follows: ‘ This is essentially a B6n rite, and is 
referred to as such in the histories of Gurz Padma Sambhava, 
as being practised by the Bén [i.e. the religion prevalent in 
Tibet before the advent of Buddhism, and, in its transcen- 
dentalism, much like Taoism], and as having incurred the 
displeasure of the Guru Padma Sambhava, the founder of 
Lamaism.’ 

Of the spyang-pu itself, Dr. Waddell adds: ‘Its inscrip- 
tion [as in our copy above] usually runs : 

‘T, the world-departing One,... (and here is inserted the 
name of the deceased), adore and take refuge in my /a@ma- 
confessor, and all the deities, both mild [translated by us as 
“peaceful” ] and wrathful;1 and [may] “the Great Pitier”? 
forgive my accumulated sins and impurities of former lives, 
and show me the way to another good world!’ 

At the left shoulder of the central figure of the spyang-pu, 
as in our copy, and sometimes down the middle in other 

1 ¢Of the hundred superior deities, forty-two are supposed to be mild, and 
fifty-eight of an angry nature.’—L. A. Waddell. 

2 ¢ An aboriginal or Chinese deity now identified with Avalokita, with whom 
he has much in common.’—L, A. Waddell. 

3 Our translation is based upon that made by Dr. Waddell; cf. Gazetteer of 
Sikhim, pp. 387-8. 

24 INTRODUCTION 

copies, are inscribed phonetic symbols referring to the six 
worlds of sangsdaric existence, translated as follows : 

S = sura, ot god, referring to the deva-world ; 

A = asura, or titan, referring to the asura-world ; 

Na = xara, or man, referring to the human-world ; 

Tri = ¢risan, or brute animal, referring to the brute-world ; 

Pre = preta, or unhappy ghost, referring to the preta-world ; 

and Hung (from hunu, meaning ‘ fallen’) = hell, referring to 
the hell-world.? 

At the termination of the funeral rites the spyang-pu or 
face-paper is ceremoniously burned in the flame of a butter- 
lamp, and the spirit of the deceased given a final farewell. 
By the colour of the flame and the way in which the flame 
acts the after-death fate which the deceased has met with is 
determined. 

The ashes of the cremated spyang-pu are collected in a 
plate, and then, upon being mixed with clay, are made 
into miniature stupas called sa-¢schha, usually in moulds 
leaving impressions either of symbolical ornamentation or of 
sacred letters. One is kept for the family altar in the home 
of the deceased, and the rest are deposited in a sheltered place 
at a cross-roads or on a hill-top, usually under a projecting 
ledge of rock, or in a cave if there happens to be a cave. 

With the burning of the paper, the rest of the effigy of the 
deceased is taken apart, the clothes going to the /amas, who 
carry them off and sell them to the first purchaser, keeping 
the proceeds as part of their fee. When one year has elapsed 
after the death, a feast in honour of the deceased is usually 
given and the service of the Medical Buddhas is performed.? 
Thereafter, a widow of the deceased is free to remarry.® 

Connected with the Tibetan funeral itself there is much 
interesting ritual. Thus, when the officiating /ama is pre- 
paring to assist at the removal of the corpse from the house, 

1 Cf. Waddell, Gazetteer of Sikhim, p. 388. 

* “In Ceylon, death-feasts are given, to the Bhtkkhus, seven days, one month, 
and one year after the death. These feasts are given “in the name of” the dead, 
to whom also the merit is offered. This, under certain circumstances, helps the 
dead to attain higher rebirth.’—Cassius A. Pereira, 

3 Cf. Waddell, Gazetteer of Sikhim, pp. 391 and 383. 

THE DEATH CEREMONIES 25 

he presents a ‘scarf of honour’ to the corpse and, addressing 
the corpse as the deceased, advises it to partake freely of the 
food offered, warns it that it is dead and that its ghost must 
not haunt the place or trouble living relatives, saying in 
conclusion, ‘ Remember the name of thy spiritual /aa-teacher, 
which is... [so and so], and by his aid take the right path— 
the white one. Come this way!’! 

Then, as the /ama begins to lead the funeral procession, 
he takes hold of one end of the long scarf, the other end 
having been tied to the corpse, and begins to chant a 
liturgy to the accompaniment of a miniature hand-drum 
(having loose-hanging knotted cords attached, which, striking 
the drum as it is twirled by the hand of the /ama, cause it to 
sound) and of a trumpet made of a human thigh-bone. When 
there are a number of priests, the chief priest, going before the 
rest, rings a handbell (as the Breton priest does in a Breton 
peasant funeral procession), and the other priests assist with the 
chanting and the music, one blowing at intervals the sacred 
conch-shell, another clashing brass cymbals, and perhaps 
another twirling the small drum, or blowing the thigh-bone 
trumpet. From time to time the chief /@ma looks back to invite 
the spirit to accompany the body and to assure it that the route 
is in the right direction. After the corpse-bearers come the 
main body of mourners, some bearing refreshments (to be in 
part cast on the funeral-pyre for the benefit of the deceased 
and in part partaken of by the priests and mourners), and last 
of all the weeping and wailing relatives. Such priestly guiding 
of the deceased’s spirit is for the laity alone, for the spirits of 
deceased /@mas, having been trained in the doctrines of the 
Bardo Thédol, know the right path and need no guidance. 

In Tibet itself all known religious methods of disposing 
of a corpse are in vogue; but, owing to lack of fuel for 
purposes of cremation, ordinarily the corpse, after having 
been carried to a hill-top or rocky eminence, is chopped 
to pieces and, much after the Parsee custom in Persia and 
Bombay, given to the birds and beasts of prey. If the 
corpse be that of a nobleman, whose family can well afford 

1 Cf, Waddell, Gazetteer of Stkhim, pp. 391 and 383. 

3069 E 

26 INTRODUCTION 

a funeral pyre, it may be cremated. In some remote districts 
earth burial is customary; and it is commonly employed 
everywhere when death has been caused by a very contagious 
and dangerous disease, like small-pox for example. Other- 
wise, Tibetans generally object to earth burial, for they 
believe that when a corpse is interred the spirit of the 
deceased, upon seeing it, attempts to re-enter it, and that 
if the attempt be successful a vampire results, whereas crema- 
tion, or other methods of quickly dissipating the elements 
of the dead body, prevent vampirism. Sometimes, too, as 
among the Hindus, corpses are cast into rivers or other 
bodies of water. In the case of the Dalai Lama and the 
Tashi Lama, and of some very great man or saint, em- 
balming is practised; and the corpse, in a way somewhat 
resembling the ancient Egyptian embalming process, is packed 
in a box of marsh salt, usually for about three months, or 
until the salt has absorbed all the watery parts of the corpse. 
Then, after the corpse is well cured, it is coated with a cement- 
like substance made of clay, pulverized sandal-wood, spices, 
and drugs. This adheres and hardens; and all the sunken or 
shrivelled parts of the body, such as the eyes, cheeks, and 
stomach, having been rounded out by it to their natural 
proportions, a very Egyptian-like mummy is_ produced. 
Finally, when thoroughly dried and then covered with 
a paint made of dissolved gold, the mummy is set up like 
an image in a sort of Tibetan Westminster Abbey. 

At Shigatze, the seat of the Tashi Lama, there are five 
such funereal temples. With their double roofs, resplendent 
with gold, they resemble the palaces or royal shrines of China. 
In size and embellishment they differ, in accordance with the 
rank and wealth of the mummies occupying them, some being 
inlaid with gold, some with silver.!. Before these enshrined 
mummies prayer is offered up, incense burnt, and elaborate 
rituals are performed, as in the ancestral cults of the Chinese 
and Japanese. 

The four Northern Buddhist methods of disposing of a 
corpse correspond to those mentioned in various of the sacred 

1 Ct. Ekai Kawaguchi, Three Years in Tibet (Madras, 1909), p. 394. 

THE DEATH CEREMONIES 27 

books of the Hindus: a human body is said to consist of four 
elements,—earth, water, air, and fire,—and it should be returned 
to these elements as quickly as possible. Cremation is con- 
sidered the best method to adopt. Earth-burial, as among 
Christians also, is the returning of the body to the element 
Earth; water-burial is the returning of the body to the element 
Water, air-burial, to the element Air—the birds which devour 
the corpse being the denizens of the air; and fire-burial, or 
cremation, the returning of the body to the element Fire. 

When air-burial is adopted in Tibet, even the bones of the 
corpse, after the birds have stripped them of flesh, are disposed 
of by being hammered to bits in small cavities in the rocks of 
the funereal hill, then mixed with flour and formed into a dough 
and given to the birds to devour! The Tibetan air-burial 
is thus more thorough than that of the Parsees, who allow 
the bones of thcir dead to remain in the air and slowly 
decompose. 

In a Tibetan funeral of the ordinary sort, neither a coffin 
nor any corpse-receptacle is used. The corpse after being 
laid upon its back on a sheet or piece of cloth spread over 
a framework, commonly made of a light material like wicker 
affixed to two poles, is covered with a pure white cloth. Two 
men, inserting their heads between the projecting ends of the 
two poles, act as pall-bearers. In Sikkim, however, the corpse 
is carried thus sitting, in the embryonic posture described 
above. 

Both in Sikkim and in Tibet every funeral is conducted 
in strict accordance with the directions which have been 
given by the astrologer who cast the death-horoscope, in- 
dicating who shall touch or handle the corpse, who shall 
carry it, and the form of the burial. The astrologer also 
declares what kind of evil spirit caused the death, for in 
popular belief—as also among the Celtic peoples of Europe— 
no death is natural, but is always owing to interference by one 
of the innumerable death-demons. The astrologer announces, 
too, what ceremonies are necessary to exorcize the death-demon 

1 The men who perform this part of the burial belong to a special caste, and, 
being regarded as unclean, are ordinarily shunned by other Tibetans. 

28 INTRODUCTION 

from the house of death, what special rituals need to be read 
for the benefit of the spirit of the deceased, the precautions 
necessary to secure for the deceased a good rebirth, and the 
country and sort of family in which the rebirth will occur. 

In Sikkim, on the space of ground levelled for the funeral- 
pyre, a mystic diagram, symbolical of the Happy Realm of 
Sukhavati, or the Red Western Realm of Happiness (see 
text, p. 113), is outlined with flour and divided into com- 
partments, the central space (upon which the funeral-pyre 
is built) being dedicated to the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha. 
At the beginning of the cremation ceremonies the chief dama 
visualizes the funeral-pyre as being the mandala of Amitabha, 
and the fire as being Amitabha, who, as in our text (see 
p. 113), personifies the element Fire. Then the corpse itself, 
when laid upon the pyre, is visualized as the szandala of 
Amitabha and its heart as the dwelling-place of Amitabha. 
As the fire begins to grow in volume, sweet-smelling oils 
and spices and sandal-wood and incense-sticks are cast into 
it in sacrifice, as in the Hindu ritual of Homa, or sacrifice 
to fire. Finally, as the cremation ceremonies end, the priests 
and the mourners visualize the spirit of the departed as being 
purged of all karmic obscurations by the fire which is Amitabha, 
the Incomprehensible Light. 

Such, in brief, is the mysticism underlying the beautiful | 
rites performed for the dead at the place of cremation in 
Sikkim. 

In all other forms of burial, throughout Tibet or territories 
under Tibetan influence, a parallel or corresponding funeral 
service, based on the same symbolical rituals, is performed, 
with variations according to sect and province. 

Vil. THE BARDO'! OR AFTER-DEATH STATE 

From the moment of death and for three and one-half 
or sometimes four days afterwards, the Knower, or principle of 

* Bar-do literally means ‘between (Bar) two (do)’, i.e. ‘between two 
[states |’—the state between death and rebirth—and, therefore, ‘ Intermediate’ 
or ‘Transitional (State}]’. The translator, in certain instances, favoured ‘ Un- 
certain {State]’ as its English rendering. It might also be rendered as 
‘ Twilight [State]’. 

tHE ARTER-DEATH STATE 29 

consciousness, in the case of the ordinary person deceased, is 
believed to be thus in a sleep or trance-state, unaware, as a 
rule, that it has been separated from the human-plane body. 
This period is the First Bardo, called the Chikhai Bardo (Tib. 
fchi-khahi Bar-do), or ‘ Transitional State of the Moment of 
Death’, wherein dawns the Clear Light, first in primordial 
purity, then the percipient, being unable to recognize it, that 
is to say, to hold on to and remain in the transcendental state 
of the unmodified mind concomitant with it, perceives it 
karmically obscured, which is its secondary aspect. When 
the First Bardo ends, the Knower, awakening to the fact that 
death has occurred, begins to experience the Second Bardo, 
called the Chonyid Bardo (Tib. Chés-nyid Bar-do), or ‘ Transi- 
tional State of [the Experiencing or Glimpsing of] Reality’ ; 
and this merges into the Third Bardo, called the Sidpa (or 
Sidpat) Bardo (Tib. Srid-pahi Bar-do), or ‘ Transitional State 
of [or while seeking] Rebirth’, which ends when the principle 
of consciousness has taken rebirth in the human or some other 
world, or in one of the paradise realms. 

As explained in Section III, above, the passing from one 
Bardo to another is analogous to the process of birth; the 
Knower wakes up out of one swoon or trance state and then 
another, until the Third Bardo ends. On his awakening in 
the Second Bardo, there dawn upon him in symbolic visions, 
one by one, the hallucinations created by the £armic reflexes 
of actions done by him in the earth-plane body. What he 
has thought and what he has done become objective: thought- 
forms, having been consciously visualized and allowed to take 
root and grow and blossom and produce, now pass in 
a solemn and mighty panorama, as the consciousness-content 
of his personality. 

In the Second Bardo, the deceased is, unless otherwise 
enlightened, more or less under the delusion that although 

1 Some of the more learned /amas—chiefly of the Gelugpa, or Yellow-Hat 
Sect—believe that the highly symbolic visions of the one hundred and ten 
principal deities of the Chényid Bardo are seen only by devotees of some 
spiritual advancement who have studied Tantricism; and that the ordinary 

person when deceased will have visions more like those described in the Sidpa 
Bardo. 

30 INTRODUCTION 

he is deceased he still possesses a body like the body of 
flesh and blood. When he comes to realize that really he has 
no such body, he begins to develop an overmastering desire 
to possess one; and, seeking for one, the karmic predilection 
for sangsaric existence naturally becoming all-determining, he 
enters into the Third Bardo of seeking Rebirth, and even- 
tually, with his rebirth in this or some other world, the 
after-death state comes to an end. 

For the commonalty, this is the normal process; but for 
those very exceptional minds, possessed of great yogic know- 
ledge and enlightenment, only the more spiritual stages 
of the Bardo of the first few days will be experienced ; the 
most enlightened of yogis may escape all of the Bardo, passing 
into a paradise realm, or else reincarnating in this world as 
soon as the human body has been discarded, maintaining all 
the while unbroken continuity of consciousness.’ As men 
think, so are they, both here and hereafter, thoughts being 
things, the parents of all actions, good and bad alike; and, as 
the sowing has been, so will the harvest be. 

If escape from the Intermediate State is not achieved, 
through rebirth into some other state—that of Hell being 
possible for the very exceptional evil-doer, though not for the 
ordinary person, who expiates normal moral delinquencies 
upon beine reborn as a human being—within the symbolic 
period of Forty-nine Days, a period whose actual duration is 
determined by karma, the deceased remains subject to all 
the armic illusions of the Bardo, blissful or miserable 
as the case may be, and progress is impossible. Apart from 
liberation by gaining Mirvana after death—thus cutting 
asunder for ever the karmic bonds of worldly or sangsaric 
existence in an illusionary body of propensities—the only 
hope for the ordinary person of reaching Buddhahood lies in 
being reborn as a human being; for birth in any other than 
the human world causes delay for one desirous of reaching 
the Final Goal. 

1 This is borne out in the Pali 77-Pitaka, which records several instances of 
high deva rebirth immediately after death on the human plane.’—Cassius A. 
Pereira. 

THE AFTER-DEATH PSYCHOLOGY 31 

Vill. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE BARDO VISIONS 

Definite psychological significance attaches to each of the 
deities appearing in the Bardo Thédol; but, in order to grasp 
it, the student must bear in mind that—as suggested above— 
the apparitional visions seen by the deceased in the Inter- 
mediate State are not visions of reality, but nothing more 
than the hallucinatory embodiments of the thought-forms 
born of the mental-content of the percipient; or, in other 
words, they are the intellectual impulses which have assumed 
personified form in the after-death dream-state. 

Accordingly, the Peaceful Deities (Tib. Z’c-wa) are the 
personified forms of the sublimest human sentiments, which 
proceed from the psychic heart-centre. As such, they are 
represented as the first to dawn, because, psychologically 
speaking, the heart-born impulses precede the brain-born 
impulses. They come in peaceful aspect to control and to 
influence the deceased whose connexion with the human 
world has just been severed; the deceased has left relatives 
and friends behind, works unaccomplished, desires unsatisfied, 
and, in most cases, he possesses a strong yearning to recover 
the lost opportunity afforded by human embodiment for 
spiritual enlightenment. But, in all his impulses and yearn- 
ings, karma is all-masterful; and, unless it be his Larmzc lot 
to gain liberation in the first stages, he wanders downwards 
into the stages wherein the heart-impulses give way to prain- 
impulses. 

Whereas the Peaceful Deities are the personifications of the 
feelings, the Wrathful Deities (Tib. Z’o-wo) are the personi- 
fications of the reasonings and proceed from the psychic 
brain-centre. Yet, just as impulses arising in the heart-centre 
may transform themselves into the reasonings of the brain- 
centre, so the Wrathful Deities are the Peaceful Deities in a 
changed aspect. 

As the intellect comes into activity, after the sublime heart- 
born impulses subside, the deceased begins to realize more 
and more the state in which he is; and with the supernormal 
faculties of the Bardo-body which he begins to make use of— 

32 INTRODUCTION 

in much the same manner as an infant new-born in the human 
world begins to employ the human plane sense-faculties—he is 
enabled to think how he may win this or that state of exis- 
tence. Karma is, however, still his master, and defines his 
limitations. As on the human plane the sentimental impulses 
are most active in youth and often lost in mature life, wherein 
reason commonly takes the place of them, so on the after-death 
plane, called the Bardo, the first experiences are happier than 
the later experiences. 

From another aspect, the chief deities themselves aye the 
embodiments of universal divine forces, with which the deceased 
is inseparably related, for through him, as being the microcosm of 
the macrocosm, penetrate all impulses and forces, good and bad 
alike. Samanta-Bhadra, the All-Good, thus personifies Reality, 
the Primordial Clear Light of the Unborn, Unshaped Dharma- 
Kaya (cf. p. 95). Vairochana is the Originator of all pheno- 
mena, the Cause of all Causes. As the Universal Father, 
Vairochana manifests or spreads forth as seed, or semen, all 
things; his skaktz, the Mother of Great Space, is the Universal 
Womb into which the seed falls and evolves as the world- 
systems. Vajra-Sattva symbolizes Immutability. Ratna- 
Sambhava is the Beautifier, the Source of all Beauty in the 
Universe. Amitabha is Infinite Compassion and Love Divine, 
the Christos. Amogha-Siddhi is the personification of Al- 
mighty Power or Omnipotence. And the minor dcities, 
heroes, dakinis (or ‘ fairies’), goddesses, lords of death, rak- 
shasas, demons, spirits, and all others, correspond to definite 
human thoughts, passions, and impulses, high and low, human 
and sub-human and superhuman, in karmic form, as they 
take shape from the seeds of thought forming the percipient’s 
consciousness-content (cf. p. 219). 

As the Bardo Théodol text makes very clear by repeated 
assertions, none of all these deities or spiritual beings has 
any real individual existence any more than have human 
beings: ‘It is quite sufficient for thee [ie. the deceased 
percipient] to know that these apparitions are [the reflections 
of] thine own thought-forms’ (p. 104). They are merely the 
consciousness-content visualized, by karmic agency, as appari- 

THE APTER-DEATH PSYCHOLOGY oo 

tional appearances in the Intermediate State—airy nothings 
woven into dreams. 

The complete recognition of this psychology by the deceased 
sets him free into Reality. Therefore is it that the Bardo 
Thodol, as the name implies, is The Great Doctrine of Libera- 
‘tion by Hearing and by Seeing. 

The deceased human being becomes the sole spectator of 
a marvellous panorama of hallucinatory visions; each seed 
of thought in his consciousness-content armically revives ; 
and he, like a wonder-struck child watching moving pictures 
cast upon a screen, looks on, unaware, unless previously an 
adept in yoga, of the non-reality of what he sees dawn and set. 

At first, the happy and glorious visions born of the seeds of 
the impulses and aspirations of the higher or divine nature awe 
the uninitiated ; then, as they merge into the visions born 
of the corresponding mental elements of the lower or animal 
nature, they terrify him, and he wishes to flee from them; but, 
alas, as the text explains, they are inseparable from himself, and 
to whatsoever place he may wish to flee they will follow him. 

It is not necessary to suppose that all the dead in the Inter- 
mediate State experience the same phenomena, any more 
than all the living do in the human world, or in dreams. The 
Bardo Thodol is merely typical and suggestive of all after. 
death experiences. It merely describes in detail what is 
assumed will be the Bardo visualizations of the consciousness- 
content of the ordinary devotee of the Red Hat School of 
Padma Sambhava. As a man is taught, so he believes. 
Thoughts being things, they may be planted like seeds in the 
mind of the child and completely dominate his mental content. 
Given the favourable soil of the will to believe, whether the 
seed-thoughts be sound or unsound, whether they be of pure 
superstition or of realizable truth, they take root and flourish, 
and make the man what he is mentally. 

Accordingly, for a Buddhist of some other School, as for 
a Hindu, or a Moslem, or a Christian, the Bardo experiences 
would be appropriately different: the Buddhist’s or the Hindu’s 
thought-forms, as in a dream state, would give rise to corre- 
sponding visions of the deities of the Buddhist or Hindu 

3089 ¥F 

34 INTRODUCTION 

pantheon; a Moslem’s, to visions of the Moslem Paradise ; 
a Christian’s, to visions of the Christian Heaven, or an 
American Indian’s to visions of the Happy Hunting Ground. 
And, similarly, the materialist will experience after-death 
visions as negative and as empty and as deityless as any 
he ever dreamt while in the human body. Rationally con- 
sidered, each person’s after-death experiences, as the Bardo 
Thodol teaching implies, are entirely dependent upon his or 
her own mental content. In other words, as explained above, 
the after-death state is very much like a dream state, and its 
dreams are the children of the mentality of the dreamer. This 
psychology scientifically explains why devout Christians, for 
example, have had—if we are to accept the testimony of 
Christian saints and seers—visions (in a trance or dream state, 
or in the after-death state) of God the Father seated on 
a throne in the New Jerusalem, and of the Son at His side, 
and of all the Biblical scenery and attributes of Heaven, or 
of the Virgin and Saints and Archangels, or of Purgatory 
and Hell. 

In other words, the Bardo Thidol seems to be based upon 
verifiable data of human physiological and psychological 
experiences; and it views the problem of the after-death 
state as being purely a psycho-physical problem; and is, 
therefore, in the main, scientific. It asserts repeatedly that 
what the percipient on the Bardo plane sees is due entirely 
to his own mental-content ; that there are no visions of gods 
or of demons, of heavens or of hells, other than those born of 
the hallucinatory karmic thought-forms constituting his per- 
sonality, which is an impermanent product arising from the 
thirst for existence and from the will to live and to believe. 

From day to day the Bardo visions change, concomitant 
with the eruption of the thought-forms of the percipient, 
until their karmic driving force exhausts itself; or, in other 
words, the thought-forms, born of habitual propensities, being 
mental records comparable as has already been suggested to 
records on a cinema-film, their reel running to its end, the after- 
death state ends, and the Dreamer, emerging from the womb, 
begins to experience anew the phenomena of the human 
world. 

PHEAPTER-DEATH PSYCHOLOGY 35 

The @zble of the Christians, like the Koran of the Moslems, 
never seems to consider that the spiritual experiences in the 
form of hallucinatory visions by prophet or devotee, reported 
therein, may, in the last analysis, not be real. But the Bardo 
Thodol is so sweeping in its assertions that it leaves its reader 
with the clear-cut impression that every vision, without any 
exception whatsoever, in which spiritual beings, gods or demons, 
or paradises or places of torment and purgation play a part, 
in a Bardo or any Bardo-like dream or ecstasy, is purely 
illusionary, being based upon sangsaric phenomena. 

The whole aim of the Bardo Thodol teaching, as otherwise 
stated elsewhere, is to cause the Dreamer to awaken into 
Reality, freed from all the obscurations of karmic or sangsaric 
illusions, in a supramundane or Wirvdnic state, beyond all 
phenomenal paradises, heavens, hells, purgatories, or worlds 
of embodiment. In this way, then, it is purely Buddhistic 
and unlike any non-Buddhist book in the world, secular or 
religious. 

IX. THE JUDGEMENT 

The Judgement Scene as described in our text and that 
described in the Egyptian Book of the Dead seem so much 
alike in essentials as to suggest that common origin, at present 
unknown, to which we have already made reference. In the 
Tibetan version, Dharma-Raja (Tib. Shznje-chho-gyal) King 
of the Dead (commonly known to Theravadists as Yama- 
Raja), the Buddhist and Hindu Pluto, as a Judge of the 
Dead, corresponds to Osiris in the Egyptian version. In 
both versions alike there is the symbolical weighing: before 
Dharma-Raja there are placed on one side of the balance 
black pebbles and on the other side white pebbles, sym- 
bolizing evil and good deeds; and similarly, before Osiris, 
the heart and the feather (or else in place of the feather an 
image of the Goddess of Truth which it symbolizes) are weighed 
one against the other, the heart representing the conduct or 
conscience of the deceased and the feather righteousness or 
truth, 

In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the deceased, addressing 
his heart, says: ‘Raise not thyself in evidence against me. 

36 INTRODUCTION 

Be not mine adversary before the Divine Circle; let there 
be no fall of the scale against me in the presence of the great 
god, Lord of Amenta.’ In the Egyptian Judgement Scene it 
is the ape-headed (less commonly the ibis-headed) Thoth, 
god of wisdom, who supervises the weighing; in the Tibetan 
Judgement Scene it is the monkey-headed Shinje ; and in both 
scenes there is the jury of deities looking on, some animal- 
headed, some human-headed.1_ In the Egyptian version there 
is a monstrous creature waiting to devour the deceased should 
the deceased be condemned, whilst in the Tibetan version 
devils wait to conduct the evil-doer to the hell-world of 
purgation; and the record-board which Thoth is sometimes 
depicted as holding corresponds to the Mirror of Karma held 
by Dharma-Raja or, as in some versions, by one of the divine 
jury. Furthermore, in both Books of the Dead, the deceased 
when first addressing the Judge pleads that he has done no 
evil. Before Osiris, this plea seems to be accepted in all the 
texts now known; before Dharma-Raja it is subject to the 
test of the Mirror of Karma, and this seems to be distinctly 
an Indian and Buddhist addition to the hypothetical pre- 
historic version, whence arose the Egyptian and the Tibetan 
versions, the Egyptian being the less affected. 

Plato, too, in recording the other-world adventures of Er, in 
the tenth book of the Repudlic, describes a similar Judgement, 
in which there are judges and karmic record-boards (affixed 
to the souls judged) and paths—one for the good, leading to 
Heaven, one for the evil, leading to Hell—and demons waiting 
to take the condemned souls to the place of punishment, quite 
as in the Bardo Thédol (see p. 49).” 

} Such animal-headed deities as appear in the Bardo Thédol are, for the 
most part, derived from the pre-Buddhistic religion of Tibet called Bin, and, 
therefore, probably of very great antiquity, Like their Egyptian parallels, they 
seem to be more or less totemistic ; and, through their impersonation by masked 
priests, as in the Ancient Egyptian Mysteries and surviving Tibetan mystery 
plays, may be—as our text also suggests—symbolic of definite attributes, 
passions, and propensities of sangsdric, or embodied, beings—human, sub-human, 
and superhuman. (See p. r4o!.) 

* The student is here referred to Section VII of our Addenda (pp. 238-41), 
concerning the Christianized version of the Judgement contained in the curious 
medieval treatise entitled The Lamentation of the Dying Creature. 

THE AFTER-DEATH JUDGEMENT 37 

The purgatorial lore now Christianized and associated with 
St. Patrick in the originally pagan St. Patrick’s Purgatory in 
Ireland, the whole cycle of Otherworld and Rebirth legends 
of the Celtic peoples connected with their Fairy-Faith, and 
similar Proserpine lore recorded in the Sacred Books of man- 
kind the world over, as well as the Semitic doctrines of 
heaven and hell and judgement, and of resurrection as the 
Christianized corruption of a pre-Christian and Jewish re- 
birth doctrine, as also the passage in Plato, all testify to 
beliefs universal among mankind, probably far older than the 
oldest of ancient records from Babylon or from Egypt.! 

The painting of the Tibetan Judgement Scene as reproduced 
herein (see opposite p. 166) was made, in strict accord with 
monastic tradition, in Gangtok, Sikkim, during the year 1919, 
by Lharipa-Pempa-Tendup-La, a Tibetan artist then sojourn- 
ing there. An early prototype of it was, until quite recently, 
preserved as one of the old frescoes contained within the 
pictorial Wheel of Life of the Tashiding temple-picture in 
Sikkim, which Dr. L. A. Waddell has described as follows: 
‘The judgement is in every case meted out by the impartial 
Shinge-chho-gyal or “ Religious King of the Dead” [Dharma- 
Raa|,a form of Yama, the Hindu god of the dead, who holds 
a mirror in which the naked soul is reflected, while his servant 
Shiye weighs out in scales the good as opposed to the bad 
deeds; the former being represented by white pebbles, and 
the latter by black.’2 And Dr. Waddell has traced back 

1 Jn my Fatry-Faith in Celtic Countries (Oxford, 1911), Chapter X, I have 
suggested how very probable it is that the purgatorial lore which centred about 
the cavern for mystic pagan initiations formerly existing on an island in Loch 
Derg, Ireland, at what is now the famous place of Catholic pilgrimage called 
St. Patrick’s Purgatory, gave rise to the doctrine of Purgatory in the Roman 
Church, The original purgatorial cavern was demolished, by order of the 
English Government in Ireland, to destroy, as was said, pagan superstition. 

Furthermore, the subterranean places of worship and initiation, dedicated to 
the Sun-God Mithras, still preserved as ancient remains throughout the Southern 
European countries, bear such close resemblance to the original Irish Purgatory— 
as to other underground places of initiation in Celtic countries like New Grange 
in Ireland and Gavrinis in Brittany—as to indicate a common prehistoric origin, 
essentially religious and connected with a cult of the Bardo-world and its 
inhabitants. 

2 Cf. The Gazetteer of Sikhim, ed. by H. H. Risley, p, 269. 

38 INTRODUCTION 

the origin of the picture to a similar Wheel of Life, commonly, 
though incorrectly, known as ‘the Zodiac’ in the verandah of 
the Ajanta Cave No. XVII, India. (See p. 56.) This, then, 
establishes the antiquity of the Judgement Scene, of which 
our text contains one version. 

Throughout the canonical and apocryphal literature of 
Northern Buddhism other versions are numerous. In the 
Pali canon of Southern Buddhism there are parallel versions, 
for example in the Devadita Vagga of the Anguttara Nikaya, 
and in the Devadita Sittam of the Mahima Nikaya. 
The latter version may be summarized as follows: The 
Exalted One, the Buddha, while sojourning at the Jetavana 
Monastery, addresses the monks assembled therein concerning 
the after-death state of existence. Like a man of clear vision, 
sitting between two houses, each with six doors, He beholds 
all who come and go; the one house symbolizing the Bardo 
or state of disembodied existence, the other the embodied 
state of existence, and the twelve doors the six entrances 
and the six exits of the six /okas. Then, after explaining 
the manner in which karma governs all states of existence, 
the Buddha describes how the evil-doer is brought before 
the King of Death and questioned about the Five Messengers 
of Death. 

The first messenger is symbolized by a new-born babe 
lying on its back; and the message is that even for it, 
as for all living creatures, old age and death are inevitable. 
The second messenger comes in the guise of an aged person, 
eighty, ninety, or a hundred years of age, decrepit, crooked as 
the curved rafter of a gabled roof, leaning on a staff, trembling 
as he walks, pathetically miserable, with youth entirely gone, 
broken-toothed, grey-haired and nearly bald, and with wrinkled 
brow ; and his message is that the babe but grows up and 
matures and decays to become a victim of Death. The third 
messenger, a person confined by illness, rolling in his own 
filth, unable to rise or to lie down without the aid of an 
attendant, brings the message that disease, too, is inevitable, 
even as death. The fourth messenger, a thief undergoing 
most terrible punishment, bears the message that the punish- 

THE AFTER-DEATH JUDGEMENT 39 

ment for evil-doing in this world is as nothing compared to 
the punishment which arma inflicts after death. The fifth 
messenger, to emphasize the same message of death and the 
corruptibility of the body, is a corpse, swollen, discoloured, 
and putrid. 

In each instance, King Yama asks the deceased if he had 
seen the messenger and receives the reply, ‘No’. Then the 
King explains to him who the messenger was and the meaning 
of the messages; and the deceased, thereby remembering, is 
obliged to confess that, not having done good deeds, he had 
not acted upon the messages, but had done evil instead, for- 
getting the inevitability of death. Thereupon, Yama pro- 
nounces the judgement, that since the deceased had failed to 
do good he must suffer the Lavmic consequences. Accordingly, 
the hell-furies take the deceased and cause him to suffer five 
sorts of purgatorial punishments; and, though he suffers most 
unbearable pains, he is, as the Bardo Thodol makes clear, 
incapable of dying 

In the Anguttara Nikaya version, wherein there are but 
three messengers, the aged person, the man or woman over- 
come with disease, and the corpse, the Buddha concludes the 
discourse thus : 

‘If men who have been warned by heavenly messengers 
have been indifferent as regards religion they suffer long, 
being born in a low condition. 

‘If virtuous men have been warned by heavenly messengers 
in this world, they do not neglect to profess the holy doctrines. 
Seeing the danger of attachment, which is the cause of birth 
and death, they have in this life extinguished the miseries of 
existence by arriving at a condition free from fear, happy 
and free from passions and sins.’} 

X. THE REBIRTH DOCTRINE 
In examining the Rebirth Doctrine, more particularly as 
it presents itself in our text, two interpretations must be 
taken into account: the literal or exoteric interpretation, 

1 Cf. translation by E. R. J. Gooneratne, Anguttara Nikadya, Eka Duka and 
Tika Nipata (Galle, Ceylon, 1913), pp. 160-5. 

40 INTRODUCTION 

which is the popular interpretation; and the symbolical or 
esoteric interpretation, which is held to be correct by the 
initiated few, who claim not scriptural authority or belief, 
but knowledge. With respect to Tibet, these few are chiefly 
learned Jamas who are said to have made successful applica- 
tion of methods like those which the Buddha expounded for 
remembering past incarnations, and for acquiring the yogic 
power of seeing what really takes place in the natural process 
of death and rebirth. To the devotee, seeking thus to know 
rather than merely to believe on the authority of priests or 
books, the Buddha has offered the following guidance: 

‘If he desireth to be able to call to mind his various 
temporary states in days gone by, such as one birth, two 
births, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a 
hundred, a thousand, or a hundred thousand births, his births 
in many an aeon of destruction, in many an aeon of renova- 
tion, in many an aeon of both destruction and renovation [so 
as to be able to say]: “In that place such was my name, 
such my family, such my caste, such my subsistence, such 
my experience of comfort or of pain, and such the limit of 
my life; and when I passed from thence I took form again 
in that other place, where my name was so and so, such 
my family, such my caste, such my subsistence, such my 
experience of comfort or of pain, and such my term of life; and 
from thence I was born here—thus I am able to call to mind 
my various temporary states of existence in days gone by” 
—in that state of self-concentration, if the mind be fixed on 
the acquirement of any object, that object will be attained. 

‘If he desireth to see with pure and heavenly vision, sur- 
passing that of men, beings as they pass from one state of 
existence and take form in others—beings base or noble, 
good-looking or ill-favoured, happy or miserable, according 
to the £arma they inherit—in that state of self-concentration, 
if the mind be fixed on the acquirement of any object, that 
object will be attained’ (Lonaphala Vagga, Anguttara Nikaya). 

Again in the Brahmana Vagga, Anguttara Nikaya, where 
the yogic method of recovering from the content of the sub- 
consciousness (which—in confirmation of the Buddha’s psycho- 

INTERPRETATION OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE 41 

logy—the science of the West has now proven ‘is the abode 
of everything that is latent’!) is likewise described, there is 
this additional passage: ‘ Thus he calleth to mind the various 
appearances and forms of his previous births. This is the first 
stage of his knowledge ; his ignorance [as regards prior births] 
hath vanished, and his knowledge [as regards prior births] hath 
arisen: darkness hath departed, and light hath arrived, the 
result due to one who liveth in meditation, subduing his passions 
promptly.’? 

Nowhere, to our knowledge, are there nowadays—as there 
are said to have been in Buddhaghosa’s time—yaogis among 
Southern Buddhists who have carried this practice to a suc- 
cessful issue. It is only among Northern Buddhists (as among 
Hindus) that such yoga seems to be, according to trustworthy 
evidence from well-informed Tibetans and Indians, a practically 
applied science even until now, producing modern saints, some 
few of whom are believed worthy to be called perfected saints, 
or Arhants. 

As the question, What is and is not the right interpretation 
of the Rebirth Doctrine? is by no means settled among the 
Oriental peoples who hold the Doctrine, it is necessary for us 
frankly to recognize the problem as highly controversial. 
Consequently in this Section we should try to weigh both 
interpretations carefully; and, if possible, arrive at a sound 
conclusion, in order to guide the student aright in what is 
the most fundamental doctrine underlying the Bardo Thédol. 
In doing so, it seems desirable to invoke the aid of such facts 
of Western Science as appear to be directly applicable. 

As to the esoteric interpretation, the editor has discovered 
that the initiates who hold to it invariably follow the Buddha’s 
command as contained in the Kalama Sitta, Anguttara Nikaya, 

1 William James, Varieties of Religious Experiences (New York, 1902), p. 483. 

2 Cf, translation by E. R. J. Gooneratne, Anguttara Nikaya, Eka Duka and 
Tika Nipata (Galle, Ceylon, 1913), pp. 188-9, 273-4. Passages parallel to these 
are contained in the Kandaraka Sittanta and Potaliya Sittanta of the Mayhima 
Nikaya (see translations by Bhikkhus Narada and Mahinda in The Blessing, 
Colombo, Ceylon, Jan. and Feb., 1925, vol. i, nos. 1 and 2). Buddhaghosa, 
in his Vissudhi Magga (i.e. ‘Path of Purity’), gives in more detail similar yogic 
methods for recovering (from the subconsciousness) memories of past births. 

3069 G 

42 INTRODUCTION 

or else the Hindu equivalent in works on Yoga, not to accept 
any doctrine as true until it be tested, and proven true, even 
though it be ‘found written in the Scriptures’; and they 
hold no Scriptures to be infallible, on this or any doctrine, 
or free from corruptions, Pali, Sanskrit, Tibetan, or others. 

The exoteric interpretation, namely that the human stream 
of consciousness, that is to say, the human life-flux, not only 
can, but very often does take re-embodiment in sub-human 
creatures immediately after having been in human form, is 
accepted universally by Buddhists, both of the Northern and 
Southern Schools—as by Hindus—who, referring to Scriptures, 
invariably regard it as being incontrovertible. Their belief, 
being based on the authority of written records, and on 
untested theories of gurus and priests who consider the 
literally interpreted written records to be infallible and 
who are not adept in yoga, is nowadays considered to be 
the orthodox interpretation. 

Over against the exoteric interpretation, which, without 
any doubt, the Bardo Thodol, if read literally, conveys, the 
esoteric interpretations may be stated—on the authority of 
the various philosophers, both Hindu and Buddhist, from 
whom the editor has received instruction—as follows: 

The human form (but not the divine nature in man) is 
a direct inheritance from the sub-human kingdoms; from 
the lowest forms of life it has evolved, guided by an ever- 
growing and ever-changing life-flux, potentially conscious- 
ness, which figuratively may be called the seed of the life- 
force, connected with or overshadowing each sentient creature, 
being in its essence psychical. As such, it is the evolving 
principle, the principle of continuity, the principle capable 
of acquiring knowledge and understanding of its own nature, 
the principle whose normal goal is Enlightenment. And, 
just as the physical seed of a vegetable or animal organism— 
even man’s seed—is seen by the eyes to be capable of pro- 
ducing after its own kind only, so with that which figuratively 
may be called the psychical seed of the life-flux which the 
eyes cannot sce—if of a human being it cannot incarnate 
in, or overshadow, or be intimately bound up with a body 

ESOTERICISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE 43 

foreign to its evolved characteristics, either in this world, 
-in Bardo, or in any realm or world of sangsdaric existence. 
This is held to be a natural Jaw governing the manifestation 
of life, as inviolable as the law of karma, which sets it into 
operation. 

For a human life-flux to flow into the physical form of 
a dog, or fowl, or insect, or worm, is, therefore, held to 
be as impossible as would be—Ict us say—the transferring 
of the waters of Lake Michigan into the depression occupied 
by the waters of Lake Killarney, or—as the Hindu would 
say—as putting into the bed of the Ganges River the waters 
of the Indian Ocean. 

Degeneration, in a highly developed flowering plant, or 
apple, or vegetable, or wheat, or animal, is, of course, con- 
comitant with cultural neglect; but within this creation 
period—at least so far as the physical vision of science 
has penetrated therein—the flowering plant does not de- 
generate into the apple, nor into the corn, nor one species 
of animals into another, nor does man degenerate into any- 
thing but the savage man—never into a sub-human creature. 
As to the processes affecting the life-flux which the human 
eye cannot see, the esoteric teaching coincides with that of 
the ancient Greek and Egyptian mystics: ‘As below, so 
above’; which implies that there is one harmonious karmic 
law governing with unwavering and impartial justice the 
visible as well as the invisible operations of nature. 

From this follows the corollary, which the Oriental advocates 
of the esoteric interpretation give out: Progression or retro- 
gression—never an unchanging neutral state of inactivity— 
are the alternatives within the Sangsara; and the one or 
the other, within any of the mansions of existence, cannot 
lead the life-flux to the threshold of that mansion—neither 
the sub-human to the human, nor the human to the sub- 
human—save step by step. And retrogression and pro- 
gression alike are time-processes: ages pass ere the fire-mist 
becomes the solidified planet; an Enlightened One is the 
tare fruit of unknown myriads of embodiments; and” man, 
the highest of the animal-beings, cannot become the lowest 

a INTRODUCTION 

of the animal-beings, no matter how heinous his sins, at one 
bound. 

Given ages of continual retrogression, the life-flux which 
is now human may cease to be human, the human con- 
stituents of it becoming atrophied or latent through lack 
of exercise, in much the same way as atrophy overcomes 
the activity of a bodily organ or function which is not used. 
Thereupon, being no longer kinetically, but merely potentially 
human—just as a dog or horse or elephant are potentially, but 
not kinetically, haman—that life-flux can and ordinarily would 
fall back into the sub-human kingdoms, whence it may begin 
anew to rise upwards to the human state or continue to retro- 
grade even below the brute world. 

The late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, the translator, has 
left on record his own complementary opinion, as follows: 
‘The forty-nine days of the Lardo symbolize ages either of 
evolution or of degeneration. Intellects able to grasp Truth 
do not fall into the lower conditions of existence. 

‘The doctrine of the transmigration of the human to the 
sub-human may apply solely to the lower or purely brutish 
constituents of the human principle of consciousness; for the 
Knower itself neither incarnates nor re-incarnates—it is the 
Spectator. 

‘In the Lardo Thodol, the deceased is represented as re- 
trograding, step by step, into lower and lower states of 
consciousness. Each step downwards is preceded by a swoon- 
ing into unconsciousness; and possibly that which constitutes 
his mentality on the lower levels of the Bardo is some mental 
element or compound of mental clements formerly a part of 
his earth-plane consciousness, separated, during the swooning, 
from higher or more spiritually enlightened elements of that 
consciousness. Such a mentality ought not to be regarded 
as on a par with a human mentality; for it seems to be 
a mere faded and incoherent reflex of the human mentality 
of the deceased. And perhaps it is some such thing as this 
which incarnates in sub-human animal bodies—if anything 
does in a literal sense,’ 

This theory, coming from the translator, is unusually interest- 

ESOTERICISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE 45 

ing, for he expressed it while quite unaware of its similarity 
to the theory held esoterically by the Egyptian priests and 
exoterically recorded by Herodotus, who, apparently, be- 
came their pupil in the monastic college at Heliopolis. Judging 
from what Herodotus and others of the ancient Greeks, and 
Romans as well, have written touching thereon, we arrive 
at the following summary: ‘The human soul was believed 
to remain in the after-death state during a period of three 
thousand years. Its human-plane body of the moment of 
death disintegrating, the constituents went to form the bodies 
of animals and plants, transmigrating from one to another 
during the three thousand years. At the end of that period 
the soul gathers together the identical particles of matter 
which had thus been continually transmigrating and which 
had constituted its former earth-plane body of the moment of 
death, and from them rebuilds, through habit, as a bird its 
nest, 2 new body and is reborn in it as a human being.’ 

1 Cf. Herodotus, ii. 123; Lucretius, De Revum Natura, ili. 843-61. In 
common with ancient historians and philosophers, Herodotus (ii, 171) refuses to 
divulge, in a literal manner, the higher or esoteric teachings of the Mysteries of 
Antiquity : 

“On this lake {within the sacred precinct of the temple at Sais] the Egyptians 
perform by night the representation of his adventures [i.e. the symbolic 
adventures touching the birth, life, death, and regeneration of Osiris—‘ whose 
name’, writes Herodotus, ‘I consider it impious to divulge’], which they call 
Mysteries. On these matters, however, though accurately acquainted with the 
particulars of them, I must {as an initiate] observe a discreet silence. So, too, 
with regard to the Mysteries of Demeter (celebrated at Eleusis, in Greece], 
which the Greeks term ‘‘ The Thesmophoria’’, I know them (as an initiate], but 
I shall not mention them, except so far as may be done without impiety [or 
done lawfully }.’ 

It has now been proven by archaeological and other research that the 
Mysteries consisted of symbolic dramatic performances open only to initiates 
and neophytes fit for initiation, illustrating the universally diffused esoteric 
teachings concerning death and resurrection (i.e. rebirth); and that the 
doctrine of transmigration of the human soul into animal bodies—if depicted at 
all—was not intended to be taken (as it has been taken by the uninitiated) 
literally, but symbolically as in Plato’s Republic, detailed reference to which 
follows herein. (Cf. Herodotus, ii. 122.) 

Herodotus in the last-mentioned passage gives a symbolic account of the 
descent into Hades and the return to the human world of King Rhampsinitus, 
in whose honour the priests of Egypt therefore instituted what was probably— 
when rationally interpreted—a rebirth festival. The most ancient recorded 
parallel now known exists in the Aig Veda (Mandala x, Sakta 135), wherein, 

46 INTRODUCTION 

And this theory, when amended with certain necessary modi- 
fications, helps to illustrate the symbolical or esoteric inter- 
pretation of the Bardo Rebirth Doctrine. 

In further illustration, applicable to the higher Hinduism as 
to the higher Buddhism, advocates of this interpretation point 
out that even before the final dissolution of the human body 
of the moment of death there is incessant transmigration of 
the bodily atoms. So long as the body is the receptacle 
of the consciousness-principle, it is said to renew itself com- 
pletely every seven years. And even as the constituents of 
the physical man thus transmigrate throughout all organic 
and inorganic kingdoms and the mind remains unchangedly 
human during the brief cycle of one life-time, so, normally, it 
likewise remains human during the greater evolutionary 
cycle—i.e. until it reaches the end of all sangsdaric evolution, 
namely, NVirvanic Enlightenment. 

The esoteric teaching concerning this may be stated liter- 
ally: That which is common to the human and to the 
sub-human worlds alike, namely, matter in its varied aspects 
as solids, liquids, and gases, eternally transmigrates. That 
which is specifically human and specifically sub-human remains 
so, in accordance with the law of nature that like attracts like 
and produces like, that all forces ever follow the line of least 

as Sayana in his Commentary in the Atharva Veda (xix) seems to explain, the 
boy mentioned is the same as the boy Nachikctas of the | Tatthiviya] Braéhmana, 
who went to the realm of Yama, the King of the Dead, in Yama-Loka, and then 
returned to the realm of men. That this primeval Hades legend was interpreted 
esoterically as teaching a rebirth doctrine is confirmed by the ancient Katha 
Upanishad, the story of Nachiketas being used therein as a literary vehicle to 
convey the highest Vedantic teachings concerning birth, life, and death. (Cf. 
Katha Upanishad, ii. 5; iii. 8, 15; iv. 10-113; vi. 18.) 

Preserved in an Old Javanese MS. of the fourteenth century is a very similar 
Hades legend in which the Yaksha Kufijarakarna is commanded by the Lord 
Vairéchana ‘to go to Yama’s kingdom to see what is prepared for all evil-doers’. 
Peculiar interest attaches to this version, because it records a doctrine—akin to 
that referred to by the Greek and Roman writers—of thousand-year periods of 
transmigration into plants, animals, and defective human beings, prior to rebirth 
in a human body free from karmic blemishes. It mentions, too, that from 
Yama’s kingdom Piirnavijaya was recalled to human life. (Cf. The Legend of 
Kujsijarakayna, translated from the Dutch of Prof. Kern by Miss L. A. Thomas, 
in the Indian Antiquary, Bombay, 1903, vol. xxxii, pp. 111-2'7.) 

ESOTERICISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE 47 

resistance, that such highly evolved mental compounds as are 
bound up with the complex human consciousness cannot be 
disintegrated instantaneously, but require due allowance of 
time for their degeneration and ultimate dissolution and 
transmigration.? 

1 Examination of The Laws of Manu, the authority of which is unquestioned 
by orthodox Hindus, seems to confirm the esoteric interpretation, following the 
translation by Sir William Jones as revised by G. C. Haughton (in /ustilutes of 
Hindu Law or the Ordinances of Menu, London, 1825), and that by G. Biihler 
(in The Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxv, Oxford, 1886). 

Manu at first sets forth the fundamental laws that ‘Action, which springs 
from the mind, from speech, and from the body, produces either good or evil 
results ; by action are caused the [various] conditions of man, the highest, the 
middling, and the lowest’ ; and that ‘{A man] obtains [the results of] a good or 
evil mental [act] in his mind, [that of] a verbal [act] in his speech, [that of] 
a bodily [act] in his body’. (Biihler’s trans., xii. 3, 8.) 

Manu then proceeds to expound how man is not a simple but a complex 
being: 

‘That substance, which gives a power of motion to the body, the wise call 
kshétrajna [i.e. ‘the knower of the field’—Biihler’s trans.], or j7vatman, the 
vital spirit ; and that body, which thence derives active functions, they name 
bhitatman, or composed of elements : 

‘Another internal spirit, called mahat, or the great soul, attends the birth of 
all creatures embodied, and thence in all mortal forms is conveyed a perception 
either pleasing or painful. 

‘These two, the vital spirit and reasonable soul, are closely united with five 
elements, but connected with the supreme spirit, or divine essence, which 
pervades all beings high and low.’ (Jones’s trans., xii, 12-14.) 

From what follows, Manu apparently implies that it is this ‘vital spirit’, or 
animal soul, which alone is capable of transmigrating into sub-human forms, and 
not ‘the reasonable soul’, or super-animal principle : 

‘When the vital soul has gathered the fruit of sins, which arise from a love 
of sensual [i.e. animal or brutish] pleasure, but must produce misery, and, when 
its taint has thus been removed, it approaches again those two most effulgent 
essences, the intellectual soul and the divine spirit: 

‘They two, closely conjoined, examine without remission the virtues and vices 
of that sensitive [or animal] soul, according to its union with which it acquires 
pleasure or pain in the present and future worlds. 

If the vital spirit had practised virtue for the most part, and vice in a small 
degree, it enjoys delight in celestial abodes, clothed with a body formed of pure 
elementary [i. e. ethereal] particles ; 

‘But, if it had generally been addicted to vice, and seldom attended to virtue, 
then shall it be deserted by those pure elements, and, haung a coarser body of 
sensible nerves, it feels the pains to which Yama shall doom it: 

‘Having endured those torments according to the sentence of Yama, and its 
taint being almost removed, it again reaches those five pure elements in the 
order of their natural distribution.’ (Jones’s trans., xii, 18-22.) 

48 INTRODUCTION 

Accordingly, the esotericists hold it to be unscientific to 
believe that a human life-flux or consciousness-principle could 
re-incarnate in the body of a sub-human creature within forty- 
nine days after its extraction from the human form, as the 
exotericist believes who accepts literally such a rebirth doctrine 

After further exposition of the science of rebirth in its esoteric or rational 
aspect, Manu arrives at the following summary: 

‘Thus, by indulging the sensual {i.e. animal or brutish] appetites, and by 
neglecting the performance of duties, the basest of men, ignorant of sacred 
expiations, assume [in their vital spirit form, but not in their reasonable soul 
form] the basest forms. 

‘What particular bodies the vital spirit enters in this world, and in consequence 
of what sins here committed, now hear at large and in order,’ (Jones’s trans., 
xii, 52-3.) 

Manu evidently exerts himself apart from the main subject of his treatise, 
as the whole of The Laws suggests, to invest with legal and divine sanction the 
dogma that the person of a Brahmin is peculiarly sacred and inviolable, and so 
gives prominence to the sin of slaying a Brahmin by mentioning it first; then 
to the sin of a priest drinking spirituous liquor, and then to the sin of stealing 
the gold of a priest. In all such instances, as in all which follow them, the im- 
plication is, as we have above observed, that the ‘vital spirit’, or animal soul, 
separated from the two higher elements of man’s complex constitution, which 
are ‘the reasonable soul’ and ‘the divine essence’, suffers the penalty of 
migrating in sub-human creatures : 

‘The slayer of a Brahmen (i.e. the vital spirit, or the irrational animal soul, 
of a Brahmen-slayer] must enter, according to the circumstances of the crime, the 
body of a dog, a boar, an ass, a camel, a bull, a goat, a sheep, a stag, a bird, 
a Chandala, or a Puccasa’ ; and so on for other crimes (Jones’s trans., xii. 55-7). 

In this connexion, it is interesting to observe a few of the correspondences 
between cause and effect which other of The Laws suggest. Thus, if a man 
steal precious things he ‘shall be born zm the tribe of goldsmiths (considered to 
be of very low caste], or among birds called hémacaras, or gold-makers. Ifaman 
steal grain in the husk, he shall be born a rat; if a yellow mixed metal, a gander 
[which is of like mixed colour] ; if water, a plava, or diver. ... If he steal flesh- 
meat, a vulture; ... if oil, a d/a¢za, or oil-drinking beetle; . .. if exquisite per- 
fumes, a musk-rat’. (Jones’s trans., xii. 61-5.) 

Understanding Manu in the sense which this note aims to set forth, the 
esotericists disallow such popular and literal interpretation of Manu’s Laws as 
the Brahmins in their own Brahmin interests promulgate—according to the 
esotericists—among the common people concerning the doctrines of rebirth 
and karma, 

The student should observe that the italicized non-Sanskrit words in the 
passages quoted in this note from the translation by Sir William Jones mark 
his interpolations from commentaries on Manu, especially from the Gloss of 
Culluca, and that the bracketed words indicate our own interpolations. Because 
the italicized interpolations tend to bring out the more obscure meanings of the 
passages cited, preference has been given to the Jones translation, although 
that by Biihler, which is more literal and therefore more technical, is, in all 
essentials, substantially the same. 

SYMBOLISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE = 49 

as the Bardo Thodol, when viewed exoterically, or literally, 
presents. 

The Bardo rebirth symbols themselves ought now to be 
considered from the standpoint of the esoteric interpretation ; 
and to elucidate them innumerable parallels could be chosen 
from widely separated sources, but because of its recognized 
authority no parallel seems more appropriate than that con- 
tained in the tenth book of Plato’s Republic, describing certain 
of the Greek Heroes in the Szdpa Bardo choosing their bodies 
for the next incarnations: 

The Bardo legend as recorded in the Republic concerns Er 
the son of Armenius,a Pamphylian by birth, who, as Plato 
tells us, ‘was slain in battle, and ten days afterwards, when 
the bodies of the dead were taken up already in a state of 
corruption, his body was found unaffected by decay, and 
carried home to be buried. And on the twelfth day, as he 
was lying on the funeral pile, he returned to life and told 
them what he had seen in the other world. He said that 
when his soul left the body he went on a journey with a great 
company, and they came to a mysterious place at which there 
were two openings in the earth; they were near together, and 
over against them were two other openings in the heaven 
above. In the intermediate space there were judges seated, 
who commanded the just, after they had given judgement on 
them and had bound their sentences in front of them, to ascend 
by the heavenly way on the right hand; and in like manner 
the unjust were bidden by them to descend by the lower way 
on the left hand; these also bore the symbols of their deeds, 
but fastened to their backs.’ 

Having thus described the otherworld Judgement—which 
closely resembles the Judgement described in our text—Plato 
goes on to describe the souls of the Greek Heroes in their 
Sidpa Bardo preparing for reincarnation: ‘Most curious, he 
said, was the spectacle—sad and laughable and strange; for 
the choice of the souls was in most cases based on their own 
experience of a previous life. There he saw the soul which 
had once been Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of 
enmity to the race of women, hating to be born of a woman 

3069 H 

50 INTRODUCTION 

because they had been his murderers; he beheld also the soul 
of Thamyras choosing the life of a nightingale; birds, on the 
other hand, like the swan and other musicians, wanting to be 
men. The soul which obtained the twentieth lot chose the 
life of a lion, and this was the soul of Ajax the son of Telamon, 
who would not be a man, remembering the injustice which was 
done him in the judgement about the arms. The next was 
Agamemnon, who took the life of an eagle, because, like 
Ajax, he hated human nature by reason of his sufferings. 
About the middle came the lot of Atalanta; she, seeing the 
great fame of an athlete, was unable to resist the temptation : 
and after her there followed the soul of Epeius the son of 
Panopeus passing into the nature of a woman cunning in the 
arts; and far away among the last who chose, the soul of the 
jester Thersites was putting on the form of a monkey. There 
came also the soul of Odysseus having yet to make a choice, 
and his lot happened to be the last of them all. Mow the 
recollection of former toils had disenchanted him of ambition, 
and he went about for a considerable time in search of the life 
of a private man who had no cares; he had some difficulty in 
jinding this, which was lying about and had been neglected by 
everybody else; and when he saw it he said that he would 
have done the same had his lot been first instead of last, and 
that he was delighted to have it. And not only did men pass 
into animals, but I must also mention that there were animals 
tame and wild which changed into one another and into corre- 
sponding human natures—the good into the gentle and the evil 
into the savage, in all sorts of combinations,’ 

If read superficially, this Platonic account of the rebirth 
process may be understood literally—even as the Bardo Thidol 
may be; and it is not impossible to imagine that Plato, as an 
initiate into the Greek Mysteries, who, like Herodotus, never 
refers to their esoteric teachings openly, but only in figurative 
and very often intentionally misleading phraseology, intended 
that it should be understood so by the uninitiated. Neverthe- 
less, when the passage is examined closely, the exoteric 
doctrine of transmigration of the human into the sub-human, 
or vice versa, is evidently not the meaning underlying it. 

SYMBOLISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE = 51 

The reference to the choice made by Odysseus, as italicized 
by us, gives the clue to the real meaning intended. Odysseus’ 
choice was last ; each of the heroes preceding him in choosing 
their lot had neglected the lot of ‘the life of a private man 
who had no cares’, and Odysseus chooses this lot as the best 
~ of all. 

If we consider the sort of life chosen by each of the Greeks 
who preceded Odysseus, we find it to be definitely symbolical 
of the character of the chooser : 

Thus, Orpheus, the founder of the Orphic Mysteries, a divine 
teacher sent to instruct mankind by the god of song and 
music, Apollo, and held by the Greeks to have been the 
greatest of harp-players and the most enlightened of poets 
and singers, very appropriately chooses ‘the life of a swan’, 
for since immemorial time the swan has symbolized—as it 
still does—song and music; and Plato’s figurative language, 
correctly interpreted, implies that Orpheus was to reincarnate 
as a great poet and musician, as was but natural. To assume— 
as the exotericist may—that such a being as Orpheus could 
be born as a swan in reality thus appears to the esotericist to 
be untenable. 

Likewise, Thamyras, an ancient Thracian bard, renowned 
as a harp-player and singer, symbolically chooses the life of 
the sweet-singing nightingale. 

Ajax, the Homeric hero, who, next to Achilles, was the 
bravest of the Greeks, most fittingly chooses the life of a lion ; 
for the king of beasts is, and has been for unknown ages, the 
symbol denoting bravery or fearlessness, which almost all 
nations and races of men have recognized. 

Agamemnon, the next to choose, selects the life of an eagle ; 
for among Greek heroes he was the chief, as Zeus was among 
the gods of Olympus; and, he having been regarded as an 
incarnation of Zeus and worshipped as one of the divinities, 
there is assigned to him the symbol of Zeus, which is the 
eagle. 

Atalanta, the most swift-footed of mortals and famous for 
her foot-races with her many suitors, very naturally is reborn 
as a great athlete; and, in her case, Plato uses no symbol. 

52 INTRODUCTION 

Nor is a symbol used in connexion with Epeius, who, noted 
for his cunning in constructing the wooden horse at the siege 
of Troy, and whose cowardice afterwards became proverbial, 
is seen ‘passing into the nature of a woman cunning in the 
ants”. 

As to the jester Thersites, who puts on the form of a 
monkey, comment is unnecessary. 

Accordingly, the expressions concerning the heroes’ hatred 
of being born of woman seem to be purely metaphorical and 
employed to carry out logically the literary use of the animal- 
symbols, just as the passages are concerning ‘animals tame 
and wild which changed into one another and into correspond- 
ing human natures—the good into the gentle and the evil into 
the savage, in all sorts of combinations’, and of ‘birds, on the 
other hand, like the swan and other musicians, wanting to 
be men’, 

Even the ordinary soul, the first seen by Er to make 
choice—although neither an incarnate divinity like Orpheus 
or Agamemnon, nor a hero like Ajax—and though possessed 
of a mind obscured by animal propensities, is not assigned by 
Plato, as he would be by a believer in the exoteric rebirth 
doctrine, to birth in sub-human form. In his case, too, no 
animal-symbol is made use of: 

‘He who had the first choice came forward and in a moment 
chose the greatest tyranny ; his mind having been darkened 
by folly and sensuality, he had not thought out the whole 
matter before he chose, and did not at first perceive that he 
was fated, among other evils, to devour his own children. . . . 
Now he was one of those who came from heaven, and in 
a former life had dwelt in a well-ordered State, but his virtue 
was a matter of habit only and he had no philosophy.’ 

And, as the Bardo Thddol teaches, in other language, in its 
insistence on the need of Right Knowledge to the devotee who 
follows the Bodhic Path, so Plato teaches: 

‘For if a man had always on his arrival in this world dedi- 
cated himself from the first to sound philosophy, and had 
been moderately fortunate in the number of the lot, he might, 
as the messenger reported, be happy here, and also his 

SYMBOLISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE 53 

journey to another life and return to this, instead of being 
rough and underground, would be smooth and heavenly.’! 

With the assistance of symbols and metaphors, Pindar, 
Empedocles, Pythagoras, and Socrates, like Plato and the 
Greek Mysteries, also taught the rebirth doctrine. 

On a golden funereal tablet dug up near the site of Sybaris 
there is the following line of an inscription: ‘And thus 
I escaped from the cycle, the painful, the misery-laden.’ ? 
This, like known Orphic teachings, is purely Buddhistic and 
Hindu, and suggests that in ancient Greece the rebirth 
doctrine was widespread, at least among Greeks of culture 
who had been initiated into the Mysteries. 

Symbolism similar to that used by Plato has been used by 
the recorders of the Buddhist Scriptures as well, as, for 
example, in the account of the Northern School of the birth 
of the Buddha Himself. This latter from the Tibetan Vizaya 
Pitaka or Dulva (the most trustworthy and probably oldest 
part of the Bkah-hgyur), III, folio 452° of the copy in the 
East India Office, Calcutta, runs thus : 

‘Now the future Buddha was in the Tushita Heaven, and 
knowing that his time had come, he made the five preliminary 
examinations: first, of the proper family [in which to be 
born]; second, of the country; third, of the time; fourth, of 
the race; fifth, of the woman. And having decided that 
Mahamaya was the right mother, in the midnight watch he 
entered her womb under the appearance of an elephant. Then 
the queen had four dreams: first, she saw a six-tusked white 
elephant enter her womb ; second, she moved in space above ; 
third, she ascended a great rocky mountain; fourth, a great 
multitude bowed down to her. 

‘The soothsayers predicted that she would bring forth 
a son with the thirty-two signs of the great man. “If he 
stay at home, he will become a universal monarch; but 
if he shave his hair and beard, and, putting on an orange- 
coloured robe, leave his home for the homeless state and 

1 Cf, B. Jowett, Dialogues of Plato (Oxford, 1892), iii. 336-7: Republic, x. 
614-20. 
3 Inscr. gr. Sictl. et Ital. 641; cf. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, p. 109°. 

B4 INTRODUCTION 

renounce the world, he will become a Tathagata, Arhant, a 
perfectly enlightened Buddha.”’ 

Again, the ¥a¢aka,—of the Southern School,—a compila- 
tion of folk-lore, folk-belief, and popular mythology touching the 
Buddha and his many incarnations, which crystallized round 
about His personality in much the same way as the matter 
of the Arthurian Legend crystallized round about King Arthur, 
during the third century after His death \—attributes to Him 
many previous births in sub-human form ; and although the 
esotericist would concede that in remote aeons of evolution 
such incarnations could possibly have been really sub-human, 
he would give to such of them as may have occurred in this 
world-period a symbolical significance, whereas the orthodox 
Theravadist interprets all of them literally. 

In any case, a literal interpretation of the fataka—seeing 
that it is, according to the esotericist, essentially an exoteric 
treatise designed for the people 7—appears to be more plausible 
than that of the Du/va account of the Buddha’s birth. Further- 
more, since there is a parallel account in the Pali Scriptures 
wherein the same animal symbol, namely, the six-tusked white 
elephant, is employed, we have here an example of the use of 
symbolism, definite in purpose, common to both Northern and 
Southern Buddhism, which even the exotericist could not but 
interpret symbolically. 

Similarly, as the popular interpretation appears to have 
fundamentally shaped the ¥ataka, so it may have also affected 
the compilation of the Bardo Thédol; for like all treatises 
which have had at lIcast a germ-origin in very ancient times 
and then grown up by the ordinary process of amalgamating 
congenial material, the Bardo Thédol, as a Doctrine of Death 
and Rebirth, seems to have existed at first unrecorded, like 
almost all sacred books now recorded in Pali, Sanskrit, or 
Tibetan, and was a growth of unknown centuries. Then by 
the time it had fully developed and been set down in writing 

1 Theravadists, on the contrary, believe that the Ja/aka dates from the 
Buddhia’s lifetime, and that its verses, but not its prose, are His very words. 

2 Here, again, in opposition to this view, the Southern Buddhists maintain 

that the Jdtaka, in its verses, is the most transcendental part of the Sita Pitika, 
and is designed for study by Bodhisattvas rather than for the common people. 

SYMBOLISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE = 55 

no doubt it had lost something of its primitive purity. By 
its very nature and religious usage, the Bardo Thidol would 
have been very susceptible to the influence of the popular or 
exoteric view; and in our own opinion it did fall under it, 
in such manner as to attempt the impossible, namely, the 
harmonizing of the two interpretations. Nevertheless, its 
original esotericism is still discernible and predominant. Let 
us take, for example, the animal-thrones of the Five Dhyani 
Buddhas as it describes them, in harmony with Northern 
Buddhist symbolology: the Lion-throne is associated with 
Vairochana, the Elephant-throne with Vajra-Sattva, the Horse- 
throne with Ratna-Sambhava, the Peacock-throne with Ami- 
tabha, the Harpy-throne with Amogha-Siddhi. And, in inter- 
preting the symbols, we find them to be poetically descriptive 
of the peculiar attributes of each deity: the Lion symbolizes 
courage or might, and sovereign power; the Elephant, im- 
mutability ; the Horse, sagacity and beauty of form; the 
Peacock, beauty and power of transmutation, because in popular 
belief it is credited with the power of eating poisons and trans- 
forming them into the beauty of its feathers; the Harpy, mighti- 
ness and conquest over all the elements. The deities, too, in the 
last analysis, are symbolical of particular Bodhic attributes of 
the Dharma-Kaya and of supramundane forces of Enlighten- 
ment emanating thence, upon which the devotee may depend 
for guidance along the Path to Buddhahood. 

In attempting the esoteric interpretation of the animal 
symbols used in the Szdpa Bardo—and this interpretation 
finds its parallel in the esoteric interpretation obviously in- 
tended by the Szdpa Bardo episode in Plato, as in the Dulva 
account of the birth of the Buddha—we have sufficient 
Buddhist rebirth symbols whose esoteric interpretation is 
clearly known and generally accepted to guide us. 

Dr. L. A. Waddell, a well-known authority on Lamaism, in 
Ladmaism in Sikhim| refers to the symbolism of the famous, 
but recently ruined, wall-painting of the Sz-pa-z-khor-lo or 
‘Circle of Existence’ in the Tashiding monastery, Sikkim, 
as follows: ‘This picture is one of the purest Buddhist 

1 See Gazetteer of Sikhim, ed. by H. H. Risley, p. 266. 

56 INTRODUCTION 

emblems that the /amas have preserved for us. And by 
its means I have been able to restore the fragment of a 
cycle in the verandah of Ajanta Cave No. XVII, hitherto 
uninterpreted, and merely known as “the Zodiac”. This 
picture portrays in symbolic and concrete form the three 
original sins and the recognized causes of rebirth (Vzdanas), 
so as to ensure their being vividly perceived and avoided ; 
while the evils of existence in its various forms and the 
tortures of the damned are intended to intimidate evil-doers.’ 
In it, the three original sins are depicted as a pig, a cock, 
and a snake, and their esoteric significance is given by 
Dr. Waddell thus: ‘The pig symbolizes the ignorance of 
stupidity; the cock, animal desire or lust; and the snake, 
anger.’! In the accompanying symbolic illustrations of the 
Twelve Midanas, only the third is an animal symbol, the 
others being human and figurative symbols; and this is 
a monkey eating fruit, symbolizing entire knowledge (Tib. 
nam-she; Skt. Vifidna) of good and evil fruits, through 
tasting every fruit or sensuous experience in the manner 
of a roving non-philosophically guided libertine, thus en- 
gendering consciousness.” 

Accordingly, the animal forms and environments named 
in the Second Book of the Bardo Thédol (see pp. 178-9, 185) 
as possible forms and environments to be entered by the 
human consciousness-principle upon rebirth in this world may 
be interpreted as follows: 

(1) The dog-form (like that of the cock in ‘The Wheel of 
Life’) symbolizes excessive sexuality or sensuality.? It also 
symbolizes, in popular Tibetan lore, jealousy. And the dog- 
kennel environment symbolizes abiding in, or living in, a state 
of sensuality. 

(2) The pig symbolizes (as in ‘The Wheel of Life’) the 
ignorance of stupidity dominated by lust; and _ selfishness 

1 See Gazetteer of Sikhim, ed, by H. H. Risley, p. 267. 

2 Ibid., p. 268. 

8 Compare the following passage from the Yoga Vashishtha (Nirvana Preka- 
rana, Sarga 28, verses 78-9): ‘Those wise Pandits, learned in the Shastras, 
should be considered Jackals if they relinquish not desire and anger.’ 

SYMBOLISM OF REBIRTH DOCTRINE — 57 

and uncleanliness as well. The pigsty environment symbo- 
lizes worldly existence dominated by these characteristics. 

(3) The ant symbolizes (as it does amongst the nations of 
the West) industry, and the lust for worldly possessions ; and 
the ant-hill environment the dwelling under the corresponding 
conditions of life. 

(4) The insect or grub symbolizes an earthly or grovelling 
disposition, and its hole the dwelling in an environment 
dominated by such disposition (see text, p. 179). 

(5) The calf, kid, lamb, horse, and fowl forms mentioned 
(see text, pp. 178-9) symbolize, in like manner, corresponding 
characteristics common to those animals and to the highest 
of the animal beings, man, such as almost all civilized races 
have associated therewith, and popularly illustrated in animal 
mythology like that which Aesop made the basis of his /ad/es. 
In the Old Testament the visions of the prophet Ezekiel and 
in the New Testament the Revelation of John show how similar 
animal symbolism affected even the zb/e. And, in our view, 
should the Buddhist and Hindu exotericists re-read their own 
Scriptures in the light of the Science of Symbols their opposi- 
tion to Esotericism would probably be given up. 

Accordingly, the animal symbols in the Szdpa Bardo— 
despite evident corruptions of the text and of the esoteric 
rebirth doctrine denoted by these symbols—should rightly 
be taken to imply that, in accordance with its karma, a human 
principle of consciousness, unless winning Emancipation, will, 
under the normal karmic conditions of gradual progression 
which govern the majority of mankind, continue to be born 
in a human form in this creation-period, with the mental 
traits or characteristics symbolized by animals. Under ex- 
ceptional or abnormal armze conditions of retrogression, it 
may, on the other hand, during the course of ages, gradually 
lose its human nature and fall back into sub-human kingdoms. 

As the translator explained, we need but look round us 
in the human world to find the bloodthirsty tiger-man, the 
murderer; the lustful swine-man; the deceitful fox-man; 
the thieving and imitating monkey-man; the grovelling 
worm-man; the industrious and oft-times miserly ant-man ; 

3069 I 

58 INTRODUCTION 

the ephemeral—sometimes professedly aesthetic—butterfly- 
man; the strong ox-man; or the fearless lion-man. Human 
life is far richer in possibilities for the workings out of 
evil Zarma—no matter how animal-like the karma may 
be—than any sub-human species could possibly be. The 
illiterate folk-beliefs so common in Buddhist and Hindu 
lands, that a human murderer must inevitably be reborn 
as a ferocious beast of prey, or a sensualist as a pig or 
dog, or a miser as an ant, are, therefore, like many other 
popular beliefs, evidently based upon false analogies—some 
of which have crept into Oriental Scriptures—and upon an 
unduly limited view of the innumerable conditions offered 
by human embodiment, from the saint to the criminal, from 
the King-Emperor to the slum-dweller, or from the man of 
culture to the lowest savage. 

In accordance with our findings, that higher and rational 
teaching concerning rebirth, which in the Bardo Thodol is, 
perhaps, confused because of corruptions of text, may now 
be summarized. If, on the Plane of Uncertainty, the in- 
fluence of innate or karmic propensities of desire for the 
grosser sensations of sangsdric existence, such as govern life 
in a human body, can be dominated through the exercise of 
the more powerful influence of Right Knowledge, that part 
of the consciousness-principle capable of realizing Buddahood 
triumphs, and the deceased, instead of being obsessed with 
the frightful hallucinatory spectres of his lower or animal 
nature, passes the interval between human death and rebirth 
in one of the paradise realms instead of in the Bardo. If 
such a more enlightened one be very unusually developed 
spiritually, that is to say if he be a great yogic saint, he 
may gain even the highest of the paradises and be reborn 
among mankind under the guiding power of the ‘Lords of 
Karma’, who, though still sangsaric beings, are described 
by the Jamas as being immeasurably higher in evolution 
than man. When thus directed by the ‘Guardians of the 
Great Law’, the earth-returning one is said to reincarnate 
out of compassion, to assist human kind; he comes as 
a Teacher, as a Divine Missionary, as a Nirmdana-K aya 

THE HIGHER REBIRTH DOCTRINE 59 

incarnate. Normally, however, rebirth is of the lower or 
ordinary sort, unendowed—because of the lack of enlighten- 
ment of the one undergoing it—with consciousness of 
the process. Even as a child knowing not the higher 
mathematics cannot measure the velocity of light, so the 
animal-man cannot profit by the higher law governing the 
rebirth of the divine-man; and, drinking of the River of 
Forgetfulness, he enters the door of the womb and is reborn, 
direct from the desire-world called the Bardo. This lower 
rebirth, almost brutish in many instances, because con- 
trolled chiefly by animal propensities such as sub-human 
and human creatures have in common, differs, however, from 
that of brutes in virtue of the functional activity of the purely 
human element of the consciousness, which in all sub-human 
creatures is latent and not active; and for this element, even 
in the lowest of mankind, to become latent instead of active 
requires approximately as long a period of cyclic time as it 
does for the sub-human consciousnesss to evolve its latent 
human element into full human activity. The popular mis- 
understanding of this aspect of the higher or esoteric Doctrine 
of Rebirth thus appears to have assisted in no small measure 
to give rise to the obviously irrational belief, found almost 
everywhere throughout the Scriptures of both Buddhism and 
Hinduism, that the brute principle of consciousness in its 
entirety and the human principle of consciousness in its entirety 
are capable of alternately exchanging places with one another. 

It was the late Dr. E. B. Tylor, father of the modern 
science of Anthropology, who after a very careful examination 
of the data pronounced the higher doctrine of rebirth to be 
the more reasonable: 

‘So it may seem that the original idea of transmigration 
was the straightforward and reasonable one of human souls 
being reborn in new human bodies.... The beast is the very 
incarnation of familiar qualities of man; and such names as 
lion, bear, fox, owl, parrot, viper, worm, when we apply them 
as epithets to men, condense into a word some leading feature 
of a human life.’? 

1 E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture (London, 1891), ii. 17. 

60 INTRODUCTION 

That this is the true interpretation is confirmed—so far as 
Europe is concerned—by the teachings of the Druids, the 
learned Brahmin-like priests of Europe’s scientific pre-Christian 
religion, held by the Celtic nations. 

In The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries, in the year 1911, 
I suggested that the rebirth doctrine, in its straightforward, 
Druidic form, accords, in its essentials, with the psychological 
science of the West—that the subconscious mind is the store- 
house of all latent memories; that these memories are not 
limited to one lifetime; that these memory-records, being 
recoverable, prove the doctrine to be based upon demonstrable 
facts. Since the year 1911 the whole trend of Western 
psychological research in the realm of the subconscious and in 
psycho-analysis has tended to confirm that view. 

I was unaware when I wrote The Fairy-Faith that Huxley 
held—as he did—the theory of human reincarnation to offer 
the best explanation of even ordinary physiological and bio- 
logical phenomena. And since the testimony of Huxley, as 
one of the greatest biologists, coincides with that, as above 
given, of the late Dr. Tylor, the foremost of modern anthro- 
pologists, and also confirms from the standpoint of our own 
Western Science the higher or esoteric interpretation of the 
Rebirth Doctrine as offered by the Occult Sciences of the 
East, we here record it as a fitting conclusion to this 
Section : 

‘Everyday experience familiarizes us with the facts which 
are grouped under the name of heredity. Every one of us 
bears upon him obvious marks of his parentage, perhaps of 
remoter relationships. More particularly, the sum of tendencies 
to act in a certain way, which we call “ character”, is often to 
be traced through a long series of progenitors and collaterals. 
So we may justly say that this “character”—this moral and 
intellectual essence of a man—does veritably pass over from 
one fleshly tabernacle to another, and does really transmigrate 

* Cf. Caesar, De B. G. vi. 14.5; 18. 1; Diodorus Siculus, v. 31. 4; Pom- 
ponius Mela, De Situ Orbts, iii, c.2; Lucan, Pharsalia, i. 449-62; Barddas 
(Llandovery, 1862), i. 177, 189-91; and W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy-Faith 
in Celtic Countries (Oxford 1911), Chaps. VII, XII. 

THESSCIENCE OF REBIRTH 61 

from generation to generation. In the new-born infant, the 
character of the stock lies latent, and the Ego is little more 
than a bundle of potentialities. But, very early, these become 
actualities; from childhood to age they manifest themselves 
in dullness or brightness,—weakness or strength, viciousness 
or uprightness ; and with each feature modified by confluence 
with another character, if by nothing else, the character passes 
on to its incarnation in new bodies. The Indian philosophers 
called character, as thus defined, “ karma”.... 

‘In the theory of evolution, the tendency of a germ to 
develop according to a certain specific type, e.g. of the kidney- 
bean seed to grow into a plant having all the characters of 
Phaseolus vulgaris, is its “Karma”. It is the “last inheritor 
and the last result” of all the conditions that have affected 
a line of ancestry which goes back for many millions of years, 
to the time when life first appeared on the earth.... 

‘As Prof. Rhys-Davids aptly says [in Hzdbert Lectures, 
‘p. 114], the snowdrop “is a snowdrop and not an oak, and 
just that kind of snowdrop, because it is the outcome of the 
Karma of an endless series of past existences ”.’ 1 

XI. THE COSMOGRAPHY 

Buddhist cosmography as understood by the /amas, and 
continually referred to throughout our text, more especially 
in connexion with the Doctrine of Rebirth, is a very vast and 
complex subject ; and to consider it here in any detail would 
involve the esoteric as well as the exoteric interpretation of an 
enormous mass of doctrines, more or less of Brahmanic origin, 
concerning the many states of sentient existence within the 
Sangsara, of cosmos—some planetary as in this world, some 

1 T, H. Huxley, Evolution and Ethics (London, 1894), pp. 61-2, 95. 

The late William James, the well-known American psychologist, indepen- 
dently arrived at substantially the same conclusion as Huxley; for, after 
explaining his ‘ own inability to accept either popular Christianity or scholastic 
theism’, he says, ‘I am ignorant of Buddhism and speak under correction, and 
merely in order the better to describe my general point of view ; but, as I appre- 
hend the Buddhist doctrine of Karma, I agree in principle with that ’.—( The 
Varieties of Religious Experiences, pp. 521-2.) 

62 INTRODUCTION 

in the many heavens and paradises, and others in the nume- 
rous states of purgation called hells. Generalizing, it may be 
said that when the Brahmanic and Buddhist teachings con- 
cerning cosmography are carefully examined from the stand- 
point of the initiated Oriental, and not from the too-oft 
prejudiced standpoint of the Christian philologist, it seems to 
suggest far-reaching knowledge, handed down from very 
ancient times, of astronomy, of the shape and motion of 
planetary bodies, and of the interpenetration of worlds and 
systems of worlds, some solid and visible (such as are alone 
known to Western Science) and some ethereal and invisible 
existing in what we may perhaps call a fourth dimension of 
space. 

Esoterically explained, Mt. Meru (Tib. R2z-vad), the central 
mountain of Hindu and Buddhist cosmography, round which our 
cosmos is disposed in seven concentric circles of oceans separated 
by seven intervening concentric circles of golden mountains, 
is the universal hub, the support of all the worlds. We may 
possibly regard it, like the Central Sun of Western astronomy, 
as the gravitational centre of the known universe. Outside 
the seven circles of oceans and the intervening seven circles of 
golden mountains lies the circle of continents. 

In illustration, an onion of fifteen layers may be taken to 
represent roughly the /amazc conception of our universe. The 
core, to which the fifteen layers cohere, is Mt. Meru. Below, 
are the various hells ; above, supported by Mt. Meru, are the 
heavens of the gods, the more sensuous, like the thirty-three 
heavens ruled by Indra, and those under the sway of Mara, 
being ranged in their own regular gradation beneath the less 
sensuous heavens of Brahma. As apex over all, is the final 
heaven, called ‘The Supreme’ (Tib. ‘Og-mz). Being the last 
outpost of our universe, ‘Og-min, as the vestibule to Wir- 
vana, is the transitional state leading from the mundanc to 
the supramundane; and thus there presides over it the 
divine influence of ‘The Best of All’ (Tib. Kzntu-zang- 
po: Skt. Samanta-Bhadra), the lamaic personification of 
Nirvana. 

On a level with Indra’s realm dwell, in their own heaven- 

THE COSMOGRAPHY 63 

worlds, the eight Mother Goddesses (Tib. H/amo), all of whom 
appear in our text. They are the Mother Goddesses of the 
early Hindus, called in Sanskrit the AZa¢ris. 

Within Mt. Meru itself, upon which the Heavens rest, there 
are four realms, one above another. Of these, the three lower 
are inhabited by various orders of genii; and in the fourth, 
immediately beneath the Heavens, from which, like the fallen 
angels of Christian belief, they were expelled on account of 
their pride, dwell the ‘Ungodly Spirits’, the Asuras (Tib. 
Lha-ma-yin), or Titans, who, as rebels, live and die waging 
unending war with the gods above. 

The innermost layer of the onion is the Ocean surrounding 
Mt. Meru. The next layer, outwardly expanding, is that of 
the Golden Mountains; the next beyond is another Ocean; 
and so on, a circle of Golden Mountains always coming after 
a circle of Ocean until the fifteenth layer containing the 
outermost Ocean, in which float the Continents and their 
satellites. The skin of the onion is a wall of iron enclosing 
the one universe. 

Beyond one such universe there lies another, and so on to 
infinity.! Each universe, like a great cosmic egg, is enclosed 
within the iron-wall shell, which shuts in the light of the sun 
and moon and stars, the iron-wall shell being symbolical of 
the perpetual darkness separating one universe from another. 
All universes alike are under the domination of natural law, 
with which karma is commonly made synonymous; for, in 
the Buddhist view, there is no scientific necessity to affirm or 
to deny the existence of a supreme God-Creator, the Karmic 
Law furnishing a complete explanation of all phenomena and 
being of itself demonstrable. 

Each universe, like our own, rests upon ‘a warp and woof’ 
of blue air (i.e. ether), symbolized by crossed dorjes (such as 
are depicted by the emblem on the cover of our book). Upon 

1 Could we take the /@maic conception of a universe to be that of a world- 
system, and of a plurality of universes to be that of a plurality of world- 
systems forming a universe, we should then be able better to correlate the 
cosmography of Northern Buddhism (and of Brahmanism, from which it 
appears to have originated) with the cosmography of Western Science. 

64 INTRODUCTION 

this rests ‘the body of the waters’ of the outer Ocean. Each 
Ocean symbolizes a stratum of air (or ether), and each of the 
intervening mountains a stratum of congealed air (or ether), 
that is to say, material substance; or, from a more occult 
view-point, the Oceans are the Subtle and the Mountains the 
Gross, the one alternating with the other as Opposites. 

Like the Seven Days of the Mosaic version of Creation, the 
numerical dimensions which the /amas assign to our universe 
are more often to be taken as suggestive or symbolical than 
literal. Mt. Meru, they say, towers 80,000 miles above the 
Central Enchanted Ocean and extends below the surface of 
the waters the same distance, the Central Ocean itself being 
also 80,000 miles deep and 80,000 miles wide. The succeed- 
ing girdle of Golden Mountains is just half that number of 
miles in height and width and depth, and the next Ocean, 
correspondingly, 40,000 miles deep and 40,coo miles wide. 
The consecutive circles of alternating pairs composed of Golden 
Mountains and an Enchanted Ocean gradually diminish as 
to width, depth, and height, being respectively 20,000, 10,000, 
5,0CO, 2,500, 1,250, and 625 miles. This brings us to the Con- 
tinents in the Outer Ocean of Space. 

Of these Continents, the four chief ones—as described in 
the Second Book of our Bardo Thodol—are situated in the 
Four Directions. On either side of each of these Four 
Continents are smaller or satellite Continents, thus making 
the total number of Continents twelve, which, again, is a sym- 
bolical number, like the number seven of the cosmographical 
arrangement. 

The Eastern Continent is called in Tibetan Lii-pah (Lus- 
hpags), or ‘Vast Body’ (Skt. Viradt-deha). Its symbolical 
shape is like that of a crescent moon; and, accordingly, the 
colour white is assigned to it, and crescentic faces are ascribed 
to its inhabitants, who are said to be tranquil-minded and 
virtuous. Its diameter is given as being 9,000 miles. 

The Southern Continent is our Planet Earth, called Jambu- 
ling (Skt. Fambudvipa), probably an onomatopoeic word— 
as the translator held—descriptive of the fruit of a jambu-tree 
falling into water, dmg itself meaning ‘place’, or ‘region’. 

THE COSMOGRAPHY 65 

The name _Jambuling would thus mean the region or continent 
wherein jambu-fruit fall into the water. Its symbolic shape 
is like that of the shoulder-blade of a sheep, that is sub- 
triangular, or rather pear-shaped, to which the faces of its 
inhabitants conform. Blue is the colour assigned to it. Riches 
and plenty abound in it, along with both good and evil. It is 
said to be the smallest of the Four Continents, being but 
7,000 miles in diameter, 

The Western Continent is called Balongchéd (Ba-glang- 
spyod), literally meaning cow+ox+ action (Skt. Godhana, or 
‘Wealth of Oxen’). In shape it is like the sun, and red of 
colour. Its inhabitants, whose faces are round like the sun, 
are believed to be very powerful and to be addicted to eating 
cattle, as the literal meaning of its name itself may suggest. 
Its diameter measures 8,000 miles. 

The Northern Continent is Daminyan, or Graminyan (Sgva- 
mi-snyan), equivalent to the Sanskrit U¢tara Kuru, meaning 
‘Northern Kuru [Race]’. It is of square shape and green 
colour. Its inhabitants have corresponding faces, square like 
those of horses. Trees supply all their sustenance and wants, 
and the Kuru, on dying, haunt the trees as tree-spirits. This 
is the largest of the Continents, being 10,coo miles in diameter. 

Each satellite Continent resembles the Continent to which 
it is attached, and is one-half its size. The left Satellite of 
our world (/ambuling), called Ngadyabling, is, for example, the 
world of the Rakshasas, to which Padma Sambhava, the Great 
Guru of Lamaism, is believed to have gone to teach the 
Rakshasas goodness and salvation, and to be there now as 
their king.’ 

Underlying this /amazc cosmology there is, as research will 
show, an elaborate symbolism. Take, for instance, the descrip- 
tion of Mt. Meru as given by Dr. Waddell: ‘Its eastern face 
is of silver, the south of jasper, the west of ruby, and the north 
of gold’*—which illustrates a use of ancient symbols very 
similar to that in the Revelation of John. The complete 
rational explanation of all the symbolism connected with 

1 Cf. Gazetteer of Sikhim, pp. 320-3. 
2 Cf. ibid., p. 322. 
8069 K 

66 INTRODUCTION 

Hindu and in turn Buddhist cosmography would be—even if 
it were possible for us—quite beyond the scope of an intro- 
duction. Suffice it to say that the possession of a key to such 
explanation is claimed by expert professors of the Occult 
Sciences in India and in Tibet—compared to which, in the 
realm of mind and matter, our Western Science is, so they 
maintain, but at the Threshold of the Temple of Under- 
standing. 

XII. THE FUNDAMENTAL TEACHINGS SUMMARIZED 

Ere passing on to the final Sections of this Introduction, 
touching the Manuscript itself, we may now summarize the 
chief teachings upon which the whole of the Bardo Thédol is 
based, as follows: 

1. That all possible conditions, or states, or realms of sang- 
saric existence, heavens, hells, and worlds, are entirely depen- 
dent upon phenomena, or, in other words, are nought but 
phenomena ; 

2. That all phenomena are transitory, are illusionary, are 
unreal, and non-existent save in the samgsd@ric mind perceiving 
them ; 

3. That in reality there are no such beings anywhere as 
gods, or demons, or spirits, or sentient creatures—all alike 
being phenomena dependent upon a cause; 

4. That this cause is a yearning or thirsting after sensation, 
after the unstable sangsaric existence ; 

5. That so long as this cause is not overcome by Enlighten- 
ment death follows birth and birth death, unceasingly—even 
as the wise Socrates believed ; 

6. That the after-death existence is but a continuation, 
under changed conditions, of the phenomena-born existence 
of the human world—both states alike being karmic ; 

7, That the nature of the existence intervening betwcen 
death and rebirth in this or any other world is determined by 
antecedent actions ; 

8. That, psychologically speaking, it is a prolonged dream- 
like state, in what may be called the fourth dimension of 
space, filled with hallucinatory visions directly resultant from 

THE FUNDAMENTAL TEACHINGS 67 

the mental-content of the percipient, happy and heaven-like 
if the karma be good, miserable and hell-like if the arma 
be bad ; 

g. That, unless Enlightenment be won, rebirth in the human 
world, directly from the Bardo-world or from any other world 
or from any paradise or hell to which arma has led, is 
inevitable ; 

10. That Enlightenment results from realizing the unreality 
of the sangsdara, of existence ; 

11. That such realizing is possible in the human world, or 
at the important moment of death in the human world, or 
during the whole of the after-death or Bardo-state, or in 
certain of the non-human realms ; 

12. That training in yoga, i.e. in control of the thinking 
processes so as to be able to concentrate the mind in an effort 
to reach Right Knowledge, is essential ; 

13. That such training can best be had under a human 
guru, or teacher ; 

14. That the Greatest of Gurus known to mankind in this 
cycle of time is Gautama the Buddha; 

15. That His Doctrine is not unique, but is the same Doctrine 
which has been proclaimed in the human world for the gaining 
of Salvation, for the Deliverance from the Circle of Rebirth 
and Death, for the Crossing of the Ocean of Sangsdra, for the 
Realization of Mirvéua, since immemorial time, by a long 
and illustrious Dynasty of Buddhas, who were Gautama’s 
Predecessors ; 

16. That lesser spiritually enlightened beings, Bodhisattvas 
and gurus, in this world or in other worlds, though still not 
freed from the Net of Illusion, can, nevertheless, bestow divine 
grace and power upon the shzshya (i.e. the chela, or disciple) 
who is less advanced upon the Path than themselves ; 

17. That the Goal is and can only be Emancipation from 
the Saugsara ; 

18. That such Emancipation comes from the Realization of 
Nirvana ; 

19. That Mirvaua is non-sangsaric, being beyond all para- 
dises, heavens, hells, and worlds ; 

68 INTRODUCTION 

20. That it is the Ending of Sorrow ; 

21. That it is Reality. 

He who realized Nirvana, the Buddha Gautama Himself, 
has spoken of it to His own disciples thus: 

‘There is, disciples, a Realm devoid of earth and water, 
fire and air. It is not endless space, nor infinite thought, nor 
nothingness, neither ideas nor non-ideas. Not this world nor 
that is it. I call it neither a coming nor a departing, nor 
a standing still, nor death, nor birth; it is without a basis, 
progress, or a stay; it is the ending of sorrow. 

‘For that which clingeth to another thing there is a fall; but 
unto that which clingeth not no fall can come. Where no 
fall cometh, there is rest, and where rest is, there is no keen 
desire. Where keen desire is not, naught cometh or goeth ; 
and where naught cometh or goeth there is no death, no birth. 
Where there is neither death nor birth, there neither is this 
world nor that, nor in between—it is the ending of sorrow. 

‘There is, disciples, an Unbecome, Unborn, Unmade, Un- 
formed; if there were not this Unbecome, Unborn, Unmade, 
Unformed, there would be no way out for that which is 
become, born, made, and formed; but since there is an Un- 
become, Unborn, Unmade, Unformed, there is escape for that 
which is become, born, made, and formed.’! 

XUI. THE MANUSCRIPT 

Our manuscript copy of the Bardo Thédol was procured 
by the editor early in the year 1919 from a young /éma 
of the Kargyutpa Sect of the Red Hat School attached to 
the Bhutia Basti Monastery, Darjeeling, who said that it 
had been handed down in his family for several generations. 
The manuscript is unlike any other seen by the translator 
or editor, in that it is illustrated by paintings in colour 
painted on the folios of the text. All other similarly illus- 
trated Tibetan manuscripts seen by us have had the illustra- 
tions made on separate pieces of manuscript paper or else 
of cotton cloth, pasted to the folios. When procured, the 

1 Udana, viii. 1, 4, 3; based on a translation from the original Pali by Mr. 
Francis J. Payne, London, England. 

THE MANUSCRIPT 69 

manuscript was in a very ragged and worn condition, now 
remedied by each folio being inserted in a protective frame 
of Tibetan paper of the same sort as that upon which the 
manuscript is written. Fortunately, all of the illuminated 
folios, though faded, were in a fair state of preservation, 
One of the ordinary folios, folio number 111, was missing, 
but this has now been replaced by a faithful copy of the 
same passage found in a Block-Print version of the Bardo 
Thédol belonging to Dr. Johan Van Manen, Secretary 
of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, well known as a Tibetan 
scholar. Reference to this Block-Print version is made 
throughout our translation. In all essentials, and, generally, 
word for word, our manuscript and Dr. Van Manen’s 
Block-Print were found to be identical. In some spellings of 
proper names of deities of Sanskrit origin there are variations 
in the two versions, and in both books a number of clerical 
errors. The manuscript is far older than the modern Block- 
Print and seems to have been copicd from an earlier manu- 
script. 

The manuscript itself is undated, but the translator judged 
it to be from 150 to 200 years old. It has seen very much 
service, having been read many times over the dead; its 
ragged and worn condition is, therefore, no criterion—as it 
might seem to be—of its age. It is written in an excellent 
hand on the ordinary paper used for manuscripts among the 
Tibetans and Himalayan peoples, made from the pulped 
bark of the Adal (pronounced Daa), otherwise known as 
Daphne, a kind of laurel of which one species bears a purplish 
white blossom, another a yellowish white. It is usually by 
lamas in a monastery that the paper is manufactured. On 
account of the bark of the Adal being extremely tough, the 
Sikkimese used it as ropes. 

The total number of folios composing the manuscript is 
137, each measuring about 9% by 3% inches. Excepting the 
first folio and the first half of the second, the space actually 
occupied by the text on each measures on an average 8% by 
24 inches. Most of the folios contain five lines of matter, 
a few contain four lines. The title-page contains two lines 

70 INTRODUCTION 

in a space 7 by 1 inches; the second page of the first folio 
along with the first page of the second folio, which give the 
Obeisances, consist of three lines, occupying a space 4} by 
21 inches respectively, and these, like the title-page, are 
written in gold (now much faded) on a black background. 
The illustrations are on fourteen of the folios, each illustra- 
tion being in the centre of the text, on one side of the folio 
(see Frontispiece), as follows: 

On folio 18, Vairochana embraced by his shkaktz, the Mother 
of the Space of Heaven, seated upon a lion throne, the deities 
of the First Day ; 

On folio 20, Vajra-Sattva, embraced by his shak7z, the Mother 
Mamaki, surrounded by their four accompanying deities of the 
Second Day; 

On folio 23, Ratna-Sambhava, embraced by his skakdz, the 
Mother Sangyay Chanma (‘She of the Buddha Eye’), sur- 
rounded by their four accompanying deities of the Third 
Day ; 

On folio 26, Amitabha, embraced by his shakiz, the Mother 
Gokarmo (‘She of White Raiment’), surrounded by their four 
accompanying deities of the Fourth Day ; 

On folio 31, Amogha-Siddhi, embraced by his skakiz, the 
Faithful Délma (or Skt. Zara), surrounded by their four 
accompanying deities of the Fifth Day ; 

On folio 35, the united mandalas of the deities that dawn 
on the Sixth Day; 

On folio 44, the mandala of the Ten Knowledge-Holding 
Deities of the Seventh Day ; 

On folio 55, the Buddha Heruka and shkakéz of the Eighth 
Day ; 

On folio 57, the Vajra Heruka and shakdéi of the Ninth 
Day ; 

On folio 58, the Ratna Heruka and shakti of the Tenth 
Day ; 

On folio 59, the Padma Heruka and shakdi of the Eleventh 
Day ; 

On folio 65, the Karma Heruka and skakti of the Twelfth 
Day ; 

THE MANUSCRIPT 71 

On folio 64, the Eight Kerima and the Eight Htamenma 
of the Thirteenth Day; and the Four Female Door-keepers 
of the Fourteenth Day ; 

On folio 67, the maxzda/a of the animal-headed deitics of the 
Fourteenth Day. 

Fach deity is depicted in conformity with the description 
given in the text as to colour, position, posture, mudra@, and 
symbols. 

All of the illustrations in the manuscript thus belong to 
the Chényid Bardo of the First Book. In our translation, 
copious annotations contain the textual name of each deity 
and the Sanskrit equivalent when, as in most cases, there 
is one. 

No attempt has been made to collate our manuscript with 
other manuscripts of the same text, none having been available. 
Such manuscripts are, no doubt, numerous in Tibet, and the 
production of a standard or uniform text would require years 
of careful labour—a task remaining for scholars of the future. 
The only comparison of texts attempted was with Dr. Van 
Manen’s Block-Print, which is probably not more than about 
twenty to thirty years old. The translator said that, so far 
as he was aware, Block-Prints of the Bardo Thddol have 
appeared—at least in Sikkim and Darjeeling—rather recently, 
although probably known in Tibet itself much longer, block- 
type printing having been carried on for unknown centuries in 
China, and thence brought to Tibet, long before printing was 
done in Europe.! 

1 These Block-Prints are usually composed of separate treatises belonging to 
the Bardo Thédol cycle. One of such Block-Prints—which was purchased in 
Gyantse, Tibet, during the year r919, by Major W. L. Campbell, then the 
British Political Representative in Tibet, Bhutan, and Sikkim, and presented to 
the editor—contains seventeen treatises, whose Tibetan titles have been 
rendered, in slightly abbreviated form, by the translator, as follows: 

1. ‘The Clear Directions on The Divine Bardo, called ‘‘ The Great Liberation 
by Hearing”, from ‘*The Profound Doctrine of the Divine Peaceful and’ 
[Wrathful] Self-Liberation’’’; 

a. ‘The Exposition of the Wrathful [or Active] Aspect of the Bardo’; 

3. ‘The Good Wishes [or Prayers] Invoking the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
for Assistance’; 

4. ‘The Root Verses of the Bardo’; 

5. ‘The Prayer to Rescue [One] from the Narrow Places of the Bardo’ ; 

72 INTRODUCTION 

Each Buddhist Sect in Tibet, according to the opinion 
of the translator, probably has its own version of the Bardo 
Thodol more or less changed in some details, but not in 
essentials, from our version, the version used by the reformed 
Gelugpa, otherwise known as the Yellow-Hat School, being 
the most altered, with all references to Padma Sambhava, the 
Founder of the Ningmapa, the Red-Hat School of Lamaism, 
as well as the names of deities peculiar to the Red-Hats, 
expurgated. 

Major W. L. Campbell, who was the British Political 
Representative in Sikkim during my residence there, wrote 
to me, from the Residency in Gangtok, under date of the 
twelfth of July, 1919, concerning the various versions of 
the Bardo Théodol, as follows: ‘The Yellow Sect have six, 
the Red Sect seven, and the Kar-gyut-pas five.’ 

Our text being of the primitive or Red-Hat School and 
attributed to the Great Guru Padma Sambhava himself, who 
introduced Tantric Buddhism into Tibct, has been decmed 
by us to be substantially representative of the original version, 
which, on the basis of internal evidence derived from our 

6. ‘ The Setting-Face-to Face of the S:dpa-Bardo’ ; 

q. ‘The Salvation by Attaching [whereby] the Body Aggregate is Self- 
Liberated ’—a version of the Tadhol Doctrine—(see pp. 136', 154°, 194 of our 
text); 

8. ‘The Prayer to Protect [One] from the Fears in the Bardo’ ; 

g. ‘The Self-Liberating Diagnosis of the Symptoms of Death’—(cf. pp. 86, 
89-97 of our text) ; 

to. ‘The Setting-Face-to-Face called ‘‘The Naked Vision”, and the Self- 
Liberation [by that]’; 

tr, ‘The Special Teaching showing the Forms of Merit or Demerit, while 
in the Sidpa Bardo, called ‘‘ The Self-Liberating in the Srdpa-Bardo”’ ; 

12, ‘The Addenda [to the above, ‘‘ The Special Teaching ’”’]’ ; 

13. ‘Prayer to the Line {of Gurus] of the Divine Self-Liberating Doctrine? ; 

14. ‘The Ransoming of the Dying’; 

15. ‘Self-Liberation called “ Absolution by Confession”? ; 

16. ‘The Best Wish-Granting TYadhol’—another form of the TZadhol 
Doctrine ; 

17. ‘The Ritual called ‘‘ The Self-Liberation from Habitual Propensities ””’, 

Herein, the treatises numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 correspond—in slightly 
different versions—to the matter contained in our manuscript. The manuscript, 
moreover, contains much matter in the Appendix not contained in this Block- 
Print. The Block-Print itself is quite new, but the blocks from which it was 
printed may be quite old—how old, we have been unable to ascertain, 

THE MANUSCRIPT 73 

manuscript text, was probably, at least in essentials, pre- 
Buddhistic. 

As elsewhere noted, our manuscript is arranged as one 
work in two parts or books, with thirteen folios of texts 
of Lardo prayers as an appendix at the end. The Block- 
Print is arranged as two distinct books and lacks the ap- 
pendix of prayers. But at the end of the first book of 
the Block-Print there comes a very important account of 
the origin of the Bardo Thidol, which is not contained 
in our manuscript, and this is given in translation in the 
following Section. 

XIV. THE ORIGIN OF THE BARDO THODOL 

Thus, from the Block-Print, and also from other Tibetan 
sources, we learn that the Bardo Thodol text originated, or, 
what is perhaps more correct, was first committed to writing 
in the time of Padma Sambhava, in the eighth century A. D.; 
was subsequently hidden away, and then, when the time came 
for it to be given to the world, was brought to light by 
Rigzin Karma Ling-pa. The Block-Print account is as follows : 

‘This has been brought from the Hill of Gampodar (Tib. 
Gampo-dar), on the bank of the Serdan (Tib. Gser-ldan, 
meaning ‘ Possessing Gold’ or ‘Golden’) River, by Rigzin 
Karma Ling-pa (Tib. Rigs-hdzin Kar-ma Gling-pa). 

Rigzin, as herein given, is a personal title, and Karma Ling- 
pa the name of a place in Tibet meaning ‘Karma Land’. 
The translator has pointed out that Rigs is an erroneous 
spelling of Rig; for, if Rags were correct, the name Rigzin 
would mean Class-Holder (Rigs+Zin). That Rig is in- 
tended—thus making the name mean Knowledge-Holder (Rig + 
hdzin), a caste or class designation’—was confirmed by a 
small section of a Bardo Thédol manuscript in the possession 
of the translator, in which Rigzin Karma Ling-pa is otherwise 
called Terton (Tib. Gter-bston), or ‘Taker-Out of Treasures’. 
The Bardo Thodol is, therefore, one of the Tibetan Lost 

1 Rig-hdein, a translation into Tibetan of the Sanskrit term Vidya-Dhara, used, 
as herein, of a learned person, such as a pandit, also denotes a class of super- 
natural beings like certain orders of fairies. 

3069 L 

74 INTRODUCTION 

Books recovered by Rigzin of Karma Ling-pa, who is held to 
be an emanation or incarnation of Padma Sambhava, the 
Founder of Lamaism. 

It was in the eighth century A.D. that Lamaism, which we 
may define as Tantric Buddhism, took firm root in Tibet. 
A century earlier, under the first king to rule over a united 
Tibet, King Srong-Tsan-Gampo (who died in A.D. 650), 
Buddhism itself entered Tibet from two sources: from Nepal, 
the land of the Buddha’s ancestors, through the Tibetan 
King’s marriage with a daughter of the royal family of Nepal ; 
and from China, through his marriage—in the year 641— 
with a princess of the Chinese Imperial Family. The King 
had been nurtured in the old B6n faith of Tibet, which, with 
its primitive doctrine of rebirth, was quite capable of serving 
as an approach to Buddhism ; and under the influence of his 
two Buddhist wives he accepted Buddhism, making it the 
state religion; but it made little headway in Tibet until 
a century later, when his powerful successor, Thi-Srong- 
Detsan, held the throne from A.D. 740 to 786. It was Thi- 
Srong-Detsan who invited Padma Sambhava (Tib. Pédma 
Jungné, ie. ‘The Lotus-Born’), better known to the Tibetans 
as Guru Rin-po-ch’e, ‘The Precious Guru’, to come to Tibet. 
The famous Guru was at that time a Professor of Yoga in the 
great Buddhist University of Nalanda, India, and far-famed 
for expert knowledge of the Occult Sciences. He was a native 
of Udyana or Swat, in what is now a part of Afghanistan. 

The Great Guru saw the wonderful opportunity which the 
King’s invitation offered, and promptly accepted the call, 
passing through Nepal and arriving at Samye (Sam-yas), 
Tibet, in the year 747. It was to Samye that the King had 
invited him, in order to have ecxorcized the demons of the 
locality ; for as soon as the walls of a monastery which the 
King was having erected there were raised they were over- 
thrown by local earthquakes, which the demons opposing 
Buddhism were believed to have caused. When the Great 
Guru had driven out the demons, all the local earthquakes 
ceased, much to the wonder of the people; and he him- 
self supervised the completion of the royal monastery, and 

ORIGIN OF THE BARDO THODOL 75 

established therein the first community of Tibetan Buddhist 
lamas, in the year 749. 

During his sojourn in Tibet at that time, and during sub- 
sequent visits, Padma Sambhava had many Tantric books 
translated into Tibetan out of Indian Sanskrit originals— 
some of which have been preserved in the monasteries of 
Tibet—and hidden away with appropriate mystic ceremonies 
in various secret places. He also endowed certain of his 
disciples with the yogic power of reincarnating at the proper 
time, as determined by astrology, in order to take them out, 
along with the treasures hidden away with them and the 
requisites needed for properly performing the rites described 
in the texts. This is the generally accepted tradition; but 
according to another tradition the Zertous are to be regarded 
as various incarnations of the Great Guru himself. According 
to a rough estimate, the religious texts already taken out by 
such Tertons, from century to century, would form an encyclo- 
peedia of about sixty-five volumes of block-prints, each, on an 
average, consisting of about four hundred ordinary-sized folios. 

Our text, the Bardo Thédol, being one of these recovered 
apocryphal books, should, therefore, be regarded as having 
been compiled (for the internal evidence suggests that it was 
a Tibetan compilation rather than a direct translation from 
some unknown Sanskrit original) during the first centuries of 
Lamaism, either—as it purports to have been—in the time of 
Padma Sambhava or soon afterwards. Its present general use 
all over Tibet as a funeral ritual and its acceptance by the 
different sects, in varying versions, could nct have been the 
outcome of a few generations; it testifies rather convincingly 
to its antiquity, bears out the pre-Buddhistic and at least par- 
tially B6n origin which we attribute to it, and suggests some 
validity in the claims made for the Zerdons. 

Weare well aware of the adverse criticisms passed by European 
critics on the Zerton tradition. There is not lacking, never- 
theless, sound reason for suspecting that the European critics 
are not altogether right. Therefore, it seems to us that the 
only sound attitude to assume towards the Zerton problem is 
to keep an open mind until sufficient data accumulate to 

76 INTRODUCTION 

pronounce judgement. Though the Zerton claim be proven 
false, the fact that the Bardo Thodol is now accepted as 
a sacred book in Tibet and has for some considerable time 
been used by the /amas for reading over the dead would, of 
course, not be affected; only the theory concerning the 
textual compilation of what, in its essentials, is apparently 
a prehistoric ritual would be subject to revision. 

As for Padma Sambhava’s own sources, apart from such 
congenial traditional teachings as no doubt he incorporated in 
some of his Tibetan treatises, we are told, by oral tradition 
now current among the /amas, that he had eight gurus in 
India, each representing one of the eight chief Tantric 
doctrines. 

Ina Tibetan block-print, which belonged to the translator, 
purporting to record the history, but much mixed with myth, 
of the Great Guru, entitled Orgyan-Padmas-mzad-pahi-bkah- 
thang-bsdiid-pa (pronounced Ugyan Padmay-zad-pat-ba-thang- 
dii-pa), meaning ‘The Abridged Testament made by Ugyan 
Padma’ (or ‘ by the Lotus-Born Ugyan’—Padma Sambhava), 
consisting of but seventeen folios, there is recorded on the 
twelfth folio, sixteenth section, the following passage, confirm- 
ing the historical tradition touching the origin of the Bardo 
Thodol text: 

‘Behold! the Sixteenth Section, showing the Eight Ling- 
pas, the Leaders of Religion, is [thus] : 

‘The Eight Incarnations of the Great Bodhisattvas are: 
‘ Ugyan-ling-pa, in the centre ; 
‘ Dorje-ling-pa, in the east ; 
‘Rinchen-ling-pa, in the south ; 
‘ Padma-ling-pa, in the west ; 
‘Karma-ling-pa, in the north ; 
‘Samten-ling-pa and Nyinda-ling, 
‘[And] Shig-po-ling (or Terdag-ling). 
‘These Eight Great Tertons shall come ; 
‘Mine own incarnations alone are they.’ 

Padma Sambhava himself is herein represented as declaring 
that the Zertons, or ‘Takers-out’ of the hidden books, are to 

ORIGIN OF THE BARDO THODOL v7 

be his own incarnations. According to this account, the 
Terton of our own book, the Bardo Thodol, is the fifth, named 
after the place called Karma Land, thus confirming the Block- 
Print of the Bardo Thodol; and Karma Land is in the 
northern quarter of Tibet. We have been unable to ascertain 
the exact time in which this Zerton lived, although he is 
a popular figure in the traditional history of Tibet. The 
name Rigzin, given to him in the Block-Print first above 
quoted, meaning ‘ Knowledge-Holder’, refers to his character 
as a religious devotee or lama; Karma ling-pa, as given in 
both accounts, refers also to an ancient Tibetan monastery of 
primitive Lamaism in the Kams Province, northern Tibet. 

According to our view, the best attitude to take touching 
the uncertain history and origin of the Bardo Théodol is that 
of a critical truth-seeker who recognizes the anthropological 
significance of the passing of time, and of the almost inevitable 
reshaping of ancient teachings handed down at first orally and 
then, after having crystallized, being recorded in writing. As 
in the case of the Egyptian Bardo Thodol, popularly known 
as ‘The Egyptian Book of the Dead’, so in ‘The Tibetan 
Book of the Dead’, there is, no doubt, the record of the belief 
of innumerable generations in a state of existence after death. 
No one scribe could have been its author and no one genera- 
tion its creator; its history as a book, if completely known, 
could only be the history of its compilation and recording; 
and the question, Whether this compilation and recording 
were done within comparatively recent times, or in the time 
of Padma Sambhava or earlier? could not fundamentally 
affect the ancient teachings upon which it is based. 

Although it is remarkably scientific in its essentials, there is 
no need to consider it as being accurate in all its details; for, 
undoubtedly, considerable corruption has crept into the text. 
In its broad outlines, however, it seems to convey a sublime 
truth, heretofore veiled to many students of religion, a philo- 
sophy as subtle as that of Plato, and a psychical science far 
in advance of that, still in its infancy, which forms the study 
of the Society for Psychical Research. And, as such, it 
deserves the serious attention of the Western World, now 

78 INTRODUCTION 

awakening to a New Age, freed, in large measure, from the 
incrustations of medievalism, and eager to garner wisdom from all 
the Sacred Books of mankind, be they of one Faith or of another. 

XV. THE TRANSLATING AND THE EDITING 

Although the translating of this manuscript was done 
wholly in the presence of the editor in Gangtok, Sikkim, the 
chief credit should be given to the late Lama Kazi Dawa- 
Samdup, the translator. The Lama himself aptly summarized 
the editor’s part in the work by saying that the editor was 
his living English dictionary. Indeed the editor could have 
been little more than this, for his knowledge of Tibetan was 
almost as nothing. 

The aim of both the translator and the editor has been to 
keep as closely to the sense of the text as the idiomatic struc- 
tures of the Tibetan and English tongues permit. Sometimes 
the translator, preferring to render into English the real 
meaning which a /a@ma would derive from certain more or less 
technically-worded phrases, has departed from a strictly literal 
translation. 

The Tibetan of Tantric texts, such as ours, is especially 
difficult to turn into good English; and owing to the terseness 
of many passages it has been necessary to interpolate words 
and phrases, which are bracketed. 

In years to come, it is quite probable that our rendering — 
as has been the case with the pioneer translations of the 
Bible—may be subject to revision. A strictly literal render- 
ing of a work so abstruse in its real meanings as this, and 
written in symbolical language as well, if attempted by 
Europeans—who, finding it difficult to get out of their Western 
mentality, too often are Christians first and scholars second 
when working with non-Christian sacred texts—would, perhaps, 
be as misleading as some of their renderings of the ancicnt 
Sanskrit Vedas. Even to a Tibetan, unless he be a /ama and 
well versed in Tantricism, as the translator was, the Bardo 
Thodol is almost a sealed book. 

His profound /a@maic training, his fervent faith in the higher 
yogic teachings of The Great Perfectionist School of Guru 

THE TRANSLATING AND EDITING 79 

Padma Sambhava (he being an initiate of the semi-reformed 
sect known as Kargyutpa, founded by the great yogis Marpa 
and Milarepa), his practical knowledge of the Occult Sciences 
as taught to him by his late Guru in Bhutan, and his mar- 
vellous command both of English and of Tibetan, lead me 
to think that rarely, if ever again in this century, is there 
likely to arise a scholar more competent to render the Bardo 
Thodol than the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, the actual 
translator. To him each reader of this book owes a debt 
of gratitude; for herein he has, in part, opened to the peoples 
of the West the treasure-house, so long tightly locked, of 
Tibetan Literature and Northern Buddhism. 

As his close disciple for many months, I hereby formally 
acknowledge that debt of gratitude and respect which is ever 
due from the disciple to the teacher. 

Though the translation was completed and revised by the 
translator during the year 1919, whilst he was the Head 
Master of the Maharaja’s Bhutia Boarding School, chiefly for 
Sikkimese boys of good Tibetan ancestry, near Gangtok, 
Sikkim (formerly a part of Tibct), it is unfortunate for us that 
he is not now in this world to read the printer’s proofs of it as 
he had hoped to do. 

As to the transliterations, it may rightly be objected by 
philologists that they are in some instances less technically 
exact than they might be. The editor, however, preferring to 
preserve the simpler transliterations according to the old- 
fashioned style—to which ordinary readers are more accus- 
tomed—just as the translator dictated them to him, has left 
them unchanged save for the correcting of a few obvious 
errors which had crept in. 

The editor himself cannot expect, in a book of this nature, 
that his own interpretations of controversial problems will 
meet with universal acceptance; nor can he hope to have 
escaped all error. He trusts, however, that critics, in recog- 
nizing the pioneer character of the work, will be prepared to 
concede to the editor, as to the translator, such measure of 
indulgence as it may perhaps seem to deserve. 

A brief account of the unusual career of the translator will, 

80 INTRODUCTION 

no doubt, be interesting to all who read this book. The late 
Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup—the honorific term Kazi indicating 
his superior social standing as a member of a landholding 
family of Tibetan origin settled in Sikkim—was born on the 
seventeenth day of June, 1868. 

From December of the year 1887 and until October, 1893, 
as a young man whose learning the British authorities of India 
had already recognized, he was stationed at Buxaduar, in 
Bhutan, as Interpreter to the British Government. (In later 
years he also acted as Interpreter to the Government of Tibet.) 
It was at Buxaduar that he first met his gurz, commonly known 
there as The Hermit Guru Norbu (S/ob-dpon-mtshams-pa- 
Norbu—pronounced Lob-on-tsham-pa-Norbu), a man of vast 
knowledge and of strict ascetical habits of life; and from him, 
afterwards, received the mystic initiation. 

The late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup once confided to me 
that at that time he had made all necessary preparations, as 
a shishya on probation, to renounce the world completely ; 
but his father, then an old man, called him home and re- 
quested him to perform the usual duties of an eldest son and 
marry, to perpetuate the family. The son had no option, 
and he married; two sons and one daughter being born 
to him. 

In the year 1906 the Maharaja of Sikkim appointed him 
Head Master of the Gangtok School, where, in the early part 
of the year 1919, I first met him, through a letter of introduc- 
tion from Mr. S. W. Laden La, Sardar Bahadur, Chief of 
Police, Darjeeling, who is a well-known Buddhist Scholar of 
Tibetan ancestry. About a year later, in 1920, after 
our work together was finished, the Lama was appointed 
Lecturer in Tibetan to the University of Calcutta; but, very 
unfortunately, as is usual with peoples habituated to the high 
Himalayan regions, he lost his health completely in the 
tropical climate of Calcutta, and departed from this world on 
the twenty-second day of March, 1922. 

As records of the Lama’s ripe scholarship, there are his 
English-Tibetan Dictionary, published by the University of 
Calcutta in 1919, and his edition of the Shrichakrasambhara 

hip TRANSLATING AND EDITING 81 

Tantra, with English translation and Tibetan text, published 
by Sir John Woodroffe (pseudonym, Arthur Avalon) as 
volume ii of Zantrik Texts, London, 1919. In addition to 
these, and a few small works published by the Asiatic Society 
of Calcutta, the Lama left behind him many important trans- 
lations out of the Tibetan, as yet unpublished, some with the 
editor, others with Sir E. Denison Ross and with Major 
W. L. Campbell. 

May this book help further to perpetuate the memory of 
him who revered the teachings of the Great Masters of 
Tibetan Wisdom and bequeathed this translation of the Bardo 
Thodol to the English-speaking peoples of the world. 

3069 M 

‘The Dharma-Kaya of thine own mind thou shalt see; and seeing 
That, thou shalt have seen the All—The Vision Infinite, the Round 
of Death and Birth and the State of Freedom.’—Milarepa. 

Jetstin Kahbum, xii (Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s Translation. ) 

[BOre kK 1} 

(Eee a7 LBARDO MAND THE 
CHONYID BARDO|\ 

HERBIN LIETH THE SETTING-PACE-TO-FPACE 
HO. THE REALITY “IN THE “INTERMEDIATE 
SPATE: THE GREAT DELIVERANCE BY HEAR- 
ING WHILE ON THE AFTER-DEATH PLANE, 
FROM ‘THE PROFOUND DOCTRINE OF THE EMAN- 
CIPATING OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS BY MEDITA- 
o1GON UPON THE PEACEFUL AND WRATHFUL 
WEITIES’* 

1 Text: ZAB-CHOS ZHI-KHRO DGONGS-PA RANG-GROL LAS 
BAR-DOHI THOS-GROL CHEN-MO CHOS-NYID BAR-DOHI NGO- 
SPROD BZHUGS-SO (pronounced: ZAB-CHO SHI-HTO GONG-PA 
RANG-DOL LAY BAR-DOI THO-DOL CHEN-MO CHO-NYID BAR- 
DOI NGO-TOD ZHU-SO). 

DEATH’S MESSENGERS 

*Atx they who thoughtless are, nor heed, 
What time Death’s messengers appear, 
Must long the pangs of suffering feel 
In some base body habiting. 

But all those good and holy men, 
What time they see Death’s messengers, 
Behave not thoughtless, but give heed 
To what the Noble Doctrine says; 
And in attachment frighted see 

Of birth and death the fertile source, 
And from attachment free themselves, 
Thus birth and death extinguishing. 
Secure and happy ones are they, 
Released from all this fleeting show; 
Exempted from all sin and fear, 

All misery have they overcome.’ 

Anguttara-Nikaya, iii. 35° (Warren's Translation), 

BOOK 1] INFKODUCTORY SECTIONS 85 

[THE OBEISANCES] 

To the Divine Body of Truth,! the Incomprehensible, Bound- 
less Light ; 

To the Divine Body of Perfect Endowment,? Who are the 
Lotus and the Peaceful and the Wrathful Deities ; 3 

To the Lotus-born Incarnation, Padma Sambhava,* Who is 
the Protector of all sentient beings ; 

To the Gurus, the Three Bodies,’ obeisance. 

[THE INTRODUCTION] 

This Great Doctrine of Liberation by Hearing, which con- 
ferreth spiritual freedom on devotees of ordinary wit while in 
the Intermediate State, hath three divisions: the preliminaries, 
the subject-matter, and the conclusion. 

At first, the preliminaries, Te Guide Series,’ for emanci- 
pating beings, should be mastered by practice. 

[THE TRANSFERENCE OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS-PRINCIPLE7™] 

By The Guide, the highest intellects ought most certainly 
to be liberated ; but should they not be liberated, then while 

1,2 See pp. 10-15. 

5 ‘These Deities are in ourselves. They are not something apart from us. 
We are one with all that is, in every state of sentient existence, from the 
lowest worlds of suffering to the highest states of bliss and Perfect Fnlighten- 
ment. In this esoteric sense, the Lotus Order of Deities represent the deified 
principles of the vocal functions in ourselves; the Peaceful represent the deified 
principles of the heart or functions of feeling; the Wrathful represent, in the 
same way, the functions of our mentality—such as thinking or reasoning, and 
imagination or memory—centred in the brain.—-Lama Kazi Dawa Samdup. 
See p. 1311. 

4 Padma Sambhava (Tib, Pédma Jungné), i.e. ‘The Lotus-Born’, referring to 
birth under pure, or holy, conditions, commonly called by the Tibetans Guru 
Rin-po-ch’e (‘The Precious Guru’), or simply Guru (the Sanskrit for ‘Teacher’), 
is regarded by his followers as an incarnation of the essence of the Buddha 
Shakya Muni in its Tantric, or deeply esoteric, aspect. 

5 See pp. Io-15. 

6 ‘ The Guide Series’ refers to various treatises offering practical guidance to 
devotees on the Bodhi Path through the human world and thence through 
Bardo, the After-Death State, and onward to rebirth or else to Nirvana. 

7 The Text contains merely the Tibetan word Hpho (pron. Pho), meaning 

86 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD [BooK! 

in the Intermediate State of the Moments of Death they 
should practise the Transference, which giveth automatic libera- 
tion by one’s merely remembering it. 

Devotees of ordinary wit ought most certainly to be freed 
thereby; but should they not be freed, then, while in the 
Intermediate State [during the experiencing] of Reality, they 
should persevere in the listening to this Great Doctrine of 
Liberation by Hearing. 

Accordingly, the devotee should at first examine the 
symptoms of death as they gradually appear [in his dying 
body], following Self-Liberation [by Observing the| Charac- 
teristics [of the| Symptoms of Death.’ Then, when all the 
symptoms of death are complete [he should] apply the Trans- 
ference, which conferreth liberation by mercly remembering 
[the process ].’ 

‘transference’ (of the sum-total, or aggregate, of karmic propensities, com- 
posing, or bound up with, personality and consciousness). The use of the term 
‘soul’ being objectionable, since Buddhism, as a whole, denies the existence of 
a permanent, unchanging personal-consciousness entity such as the Semitic 
Faiths and animistic creeds in general understand thereby, the translator has 
avoided using it. But wherever any similar or equivalent term occurs herein 
it should be taken to imply something akin to ‘consciousness-principle’ or ‘com- 
pound of consciousness’ as implied by the Tibetan Hpho, or else as synonymous 
with the term ‘life-flux’ as used chiefly by Southern Buddhists. 

1 A Tibetan work of the Bardo cycle, commonly used by /a4mas as supple- 
mentary to the Bardo Thédol (see part 9 of Note 1, p. 71). It treats of the 
symptoms of death in particular, scientifically and in very great detail. The 
late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup had planned its translation into English. 

2 Liberation in this context does not necessarily imply, especially in the case 
of the average devotee, the Liberation of Mixvaxa, but chiefly a liberation of the 
‘life-flux’ from the dying body, in such manner as will afford the greatest 
possible after-death consciousness and consequent happy rebirth. Yet for the 
very exceptional and very highly efficient yogt, or saint, the same esoteric 
process of Transference can be, according to the /ama-gurus, so employed as to 
prevent any break in the flow of the stream of consciousness, from the moment 
of a conscious death to the moment of a conscious rebirth. Judging from 
a translation, made by the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, of an old Tibetan 
manuscript containing practical directions for performing the Trausference, 
which the editor possesses, the process is essentially yogic, and could be em- 
ployed only by a person trained in mental concentration, or one-pointedness of 
mind, to such a high degree of proficiency as to have gained control over all 
the mental and bodily functions, Merely remembering the process at the all- 
important moment of death—as the text implies—is, for a yog?7, equivalent to 
performing the Transference itself; for once the yogi’s trained mind is directed 

BOOK 1] INTRODUCTORY SECTIONS 87 

[THE READING OF THIS THODOL] 

If the Transference hath been effectually employed, there is 
no need to read this 7ddol; but if the Transference hath not 
been effectually employed, then this 7ddol is to be read, 
correctly and distinctly, near the dead body. 

If there be no corpse, then the bed or the seat to which the 
deceased had been accustomed should be occupied [by the 
reader], who ought to expound the power of the Truth. 
Then, summoning the spirit [of the deceased], imagine it to 
be present there listening, and read.1 During this time no 
relative or fond mate should be allowed to weep or to wail, 
as such is not good [for the deceased]; so restrain them.? 

If the body be present, just when the expiration hath 
ceased, either a /ama [who hath been as a guru to the 
deceased], or a brother in the Faith whom the deceased 
trusted, or a friend for whom the deceased had great affection, 
putting the lips close to the ear [of the body] without actually 
touching it,? should read this Great Thédol. 

to ihe process, instantaneously, or, as the text explains, automatically, the 
desired result is achieved. 

1 The /@ma, or reader, stationed in the house of the deceased as directed, 
whether the corpse be there or not, is to summon the departed one in the name 
of Truth, saying, ‘As the Trinity is true, and as the Truth proclaimed by the 
Trinity is true, by the power of that Truth I summon thee’. Although no 
corpse be at hand (as there would not be when a person had met a violent or 
accidental death entailing loss or destruction of the human-plane body; or when, 
to accord with astrological calculations, the body had been removed or disposed 
of immediately after death, a not uncommon event in Tibet), the spirit of the 
deceased, in the invisible Bardo-plane body, must, nevertheless, be present at 
the reading, in order to be given the necessary guidance through the Other- 
world—as the Egyptian Book of the Dead also directs (see p. 19). 

3 This prohibition is found in Brahmanism too. 

3 According to Tibetan and /amarc belief, the body of a dying person should 
not be touched, that the normal departure of the consciousness-principle, which 
should take place through the Brahmanic aperture on the crown of the head, 
be not interfered with. Otherwise, the departure may be brought about through 
some other bodily aperture and lead to birth in one of the non-human states. 
For example, it is held that if the departure is through the aperture of the ear 
the deceased will be obliged—ere he can return to human birth—to be born in 
the world of the Gandharvas (fairy-like celestial musicians), wherein sound, as 
in song and music, is the prevailing quality of existence, 

88 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD [Book 1 

(THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THIS THODOL BY THE 
OFFICIANT] 

Now for the explaining of the 7/édo/ itself : 

If thou canst gather together a grand offering, offer it in 
worship of the Trinity. If such cannot be done, then arrange 
whatever can be gathered together as objects on which thou 
canst concentrate thy thoughts and mentally create as illimit- 
able an offering as possible and worship. 

Then the ‘Path of Good Wishes Invoking the Aid of the 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas’! should be recited seven times 
or thrice. 

After that, the ‘Path of Good Wishes Giving Protection 
from Fear in the Bardo’! and the ‘Path of Good Wishes 
for Safe Delivery from the Dangerous Pitfalls of the Bardo’, 
together with the ‘Root Words of the Bardo’, are to be read 
distinctly and with the proper intonation.? 

Then this Great 7/ddol is to be read either seven times or 
thrice,> according to the occasion. [First cometh] the setting- 
face-to-face [to the symptoms of death] as they occur during 
the moments of death ; [second] the application of the great 
vivid reminder, the setting-face-to-face to Reality while in the 

1 See the Appendix, pp. 197-208, where each of these chief Bardo prayers (or 
‘Paths of Good Wishes’) is translated. 

2 Cf. the two following passages, the first from The Book of the Craft of Dying, 
chap. VI, in Bodleian MS. 423 (arca fifteenth century), Comper’s ed. (p. 39), 
the second from The Craft to Know Well to Die (fifteenth century), chap, IV, 
Comper’s ed. (p. 74): 

‘Last of all, it is to be known that the prayers that follow may be conveniently 
said upon a sick man that laboureth to his end. And if it is a religious person, 
then when the covent [i. e. convent} is gathered together with smiting of the 
table, as the manner is, then shall be said first the litany, with the psalms and 
orisons that he used therewith. Afterward, if he live yet, let some man that is 
about him say the orisons that follow hereafter, as the time and opportunity 
will suffer. And they may be often rehearsed again to excite the devotion of 
the sick man—if he have reason and understanding with him.’ 

‘And if the sick man or woman may, nor can not, say the orisons and prayers 
beforesaid, some of the assistants [i. e. bystanders] ought to say them before him 
with a loud voice, in changing the words there as they ought to be changed.” 

3 Cf. the following from The Craft to Know Well to Die, chap. 1V, Comper’s 
ed. (p. 73): ‘After all these things he (the person dying] ought to say three 
times, if he may, these words that follow.’ 

PART J] BARDO OF THE DYING 89 

Intermediate State; and third, the methods of closing the 
doors of the womb while in the Intermediate State when 
seeking rebirth.1 

[PART I] 

[THE BARDO OF THE MOMENTS OF 
DEATH] 

(INSTRUCTIONS ON THE SYMPTOMS OF DEATH, 
Or THE BIRST SEAGE OF THE CAIKAAT 
PaO: THE PRIMARY CLEAR LIGHT SEEN 
AT THE MOMENT OF DEATH] 

The first, the setting-face-to-face with the Clear Light, 
during the Intermediate State of the Moments of Death, is: 

Here [some there may be] who have listened much [to 
religious instructions] yet not recognized ; and [some] who, 
though recognizing, are, nevertheless, weak in familiarity. But 
all classes of individuals who have received the practical 
teachings [called] Guzdes? will, if this be applied to them, 
be set face to face with the fundamental Clear Light ; and, 
without any Intermediate State, they will obtain the Unborn 
Dharma-K aya, by the Great Perpendicular Path.® 

1 The first Bardo is the Chikhat Bardo ; the second, the Chényid Berdo; the 
third, the Sidpa Bardo. (See p. 102* 6.) 

2 See p. 85°. 

3 Text: Yar-gyi-zang-thal-chen-po: the ‘Great Straight Upward Path’. One 
of the Doctrines peculiar to Northern Buddhism is that spiritual emancipation, 
even Buddahood, may be won instantaneously, without entering upon the 
Bardo Plane and without further suffering on the age-long pathway of normal 
evolution which traverses the various worlds of sangsdric existence. The 
doctrine underlies the whole of the Bardo Thédol, Faith is the first step 
on the Secret Pathway. Then comes Illumination; and, with it, Certainty; 
and, when the Goal is won, Emancipation, But here again success implies 
very unusual proficiency in yoga, as well as much accumulated merit, or 
good karma, on the part of the devotee. If the disciple can be made to see 
and to grasp the Truth as soon as the gurz reveals it, that is to say, if he has 
the power to die consciously, and at the supreme moment of quitting the body 
can recognize the Clear Light which will dawn upon him then, and become one 
with it, all sangsaric bonds of illusion are broken asunder immediately: the 

3069 N 

go BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

The manner of application is: 

It is best if the guru from whom the deceased received 
guiding instructions can be had; but if the guru cannot be 
obtained, then a brother of the Faith; or if the latter is 
also unobtainable, then a learned man of the same Faith; 
or, should all these be unobtainable, then a person who 
can read correctly and distinctly ought to read this many 
times over. Thereby [the deceased] will be put in mind 
of what he had [previously] heard of the setting-face-to-face 
and will at once come to recognize that Fundamental Light 
and undoubtedly obtain Liberation. 

As regards the time for the application [of these in- 
structions |: 

When the expiration hath ceased, the vital-force will have 
sunk into the nerve-centre of Wisdom! and the Knower? 
will be experiencing the Clear Light of the natural con- 
dition? Then, the vital-force,* being thrown backwards 
and flying downwards through the right and left nerves,° 
the Intermediate State momentarily dawns. 

The above [directions] should be applied before [the vital- 
force hath] rushed into the left nerve [after first having 
traversed the navel nerve-centre]. 

The time [ordinarily necessary for this motion of the vital- 

Dreamer is awakened into Reality simultaneously with the mighty achievement 
of recognition. 

1 Here, as elsewhere in our text, ‘nerve-centre’ refers to a psychic nerve- 
centre. The psychic nerve-centre of Wisdom is located in the heart. (Cf. 
pp. 217 ff.) 

2 Text: Shespa (pron. Shepa): ‘Mind’, ‘Knower’; i.e. the mind in its 
knowing, or cognizing, functions. 

8 Text: Sprosbral (pron. Todal): ‘devoid of formative activity’ ; i.e. the mind 
in its natural, or primal, state. The mind in its unnatural state, that is to say, 
when incarnate in a human body, is, because of the driving force of the five 
senses, continuously in thought-formation activity. Its natural, or discarnate, 
state is a state of quiescence, comparable to its condition in the highest of 
dhyana (or deep meditation) when still united toa human body. The conscious 
recognition of the Clear Light induces an ecstatic condition of consciousness 
such as saints and mystics of the West have called Illumination. 

* Text: rlung (pron. lung’): ‘vital-air’, or ‘vital-force’, or ‘psychic-force’. 

5 Text: rtsa-gyas-gyon (pron. tsa-yay-yon): ‘right and left [psychic] nerves’; 
et Pingala-nadi (right [psychic] nerve) and Jda-nédi (left [psychic] nerve). 
Cf. p. 215.) 

PART I] THE DEATH PROCESS . gi 

force] is as long as the inspiration is still present, or about 
the time required for eating a meal.} 

Then the manner of the application [of the instructions] is: 

When the breathing is about to cease, it is best if the Trans- 
ference hath been applied efficiently ; if [the application] hath 
been inefficient, then [address the deceased] thus: 

O nobly-born (so and so by name), the time hath now 
come for thee to seek the Path [in reality]. Thy breathing 
is about to cease. Thy guru hath set thee face to face 
before with the Clear Light; and now thou art about to 
experience it in its Reality in the Bardo state, wherein all 
things are like the void and cloudless sky, and the naked, 
spotless intellect is like unto a transparent vacuum without 
circumference or centre. At this moment, know thou thyself ; 
and abide in that state. I, too, at this time, am setting thee 
face to face. 

Having read this, repeat it many times in the ear of the 
person dying, even before the expiration hath ceased, so as 
to impress it on the mind [of the dying one]. 

If the expiration is about to cease, turn the dying one over 
on the right side, which posture is called the ‘Lying Posture 
of a Lion’. The throbbing of the arteries [on the right and 
left side of the throat] is to be pressed. 

If the person dying be disposed to sleep, or if the sleeping 
state advances, that should be arrested, and the arteries pressed 
gently but firmly.2 Thereby the vital-force will not be able 
to return from the median-nerve * and will be sure to pass out 

1 When this text first took form the reckoning of time was, apparently, yet 
primitive, mechanical time-keeping appliances being unknown. A similar con- 
dition still prevails in many parts of Tibet, where the period of a meal-time is 
frequently mentioned in old religious books—a period of from twenty minutes to 
half an hour in duration. 

2 The dying person should die fully awake and keenly conscious of the 
process of death; hence the pressing of the arteries. (Cf. p. xxix.) 

8 «Skt, of text: dhutth (pron. dufi), meaning “ median-nerve’’, but lit. “ tri- 
junction’”’, V.S. Apte’s Sanscnit-English Dictionary (Poona, 1890) gives dhuiz 
as the only similar word, defined as “shaking ” or ‘‘ moving”’, which, if applied 
to our text, may refer to the vibratory motion of the psychic force traversing the 
median-nerve as its channel.’,—-Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup. 

‘ Duti may also mean “ throwing away”, or ‘‘ throwing out”’, with reference 

92 BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

through the Brahmanic aperture.!_ Now the real setting-face- 
to-face is to be applied. 

At this moment, the first [glimpsing] of the Bardo of the 
Clear Light of Reality, which is the Infallible Mind of the 
Dharma-K aya, is experienced by all sentient beings. 

The interval between the cessation of the expiration and 
the cessation of the inspiration is the time during which the 
vital-force remaineth in the median-nerve.? 

The common people call this the state wherein the con- 
sciousness-principle® hath fainted away. The duration of 
this state is uncertain. [It dependeth] upon the constitu- 
tion, good or bad, and [the state of] the nerves and vital- 
force. In those who have had evena little practical experience 
of the firm, tranquil state of dhyana, and in those who have 
sound nerves, this state continueth for a long time.* 

to the outgoing of the consciousness in the process of death,’—-Sj. Atal Bihari 
Ghosh. 

1 See pp. 18, 878, 215. If non-distracted, and alertly conscious, at this 
psychological moment, the dying person will realize, through the power con- 
ferred by the reading of the Thédol, the importance of holding the vital-force in 
the median-nerve till it passes out thence through the Aperture of Brahma. 

2 After the expiration has ceased, the vital-force (lit. ‘inner-breath’) is 
thought to remain in the median-nerve so long as the heart continues to throb. 

8 Text: nam-shes (pron. nam-she): Skt. vijzdna or, preferably, chaitanya: 
‘conscious-principle’ or ‘ object-knowing principle’. 

4 Sometimes it may continue for seven days, but usually only for four or five 
days. The consciousness-principle, however, save in certain conditions of trance, 
such as a yogi, for example, can induce, is not necessarily resident in the body 
all the while ; normally it quits the body at the moment called death, holding 
a subtle magnetic-like relationship with the body until the state referred to in 
the text comes to an end. Only for adepts in yoga would the departure of the 
consciousness-principle be accomplished without break in the continuity of the 
stream of consciousness, that is to say, without the swoon state referred to. 

The death process is the reverse of the birth process, birth being the incar- 
nating, death the discarnating of the consciousness-principle ; but, in both alike, 
there is a passing from one state of consciousness into another. And, just as 
a babe must wake up in this world and learn by experience the nature of this 
world, so, likewise, a person at death must wake up in the Bardo world and 
become familiar with its own peculiar conditions. The Bardo body, formed of 
matter in an invisible or ethereal-like state, is an exact duplicate of the human 
body, from which it is separated in the process of death. Retained in the 
Bardo body are the consciousness-principle and the psychic nerve-system (the 

counterpart, for the psychic or Bardo body, of the physical nerve-system of the 
human body). (Cf. p. 161%.) 

PART I] THESSYMPTOMS OF DEATH 93 

In the setting-face-to-face, the repetition [of the above 
address to the deceased] is to be persisted in until a yellowish 
liquid beginneth to appear from the various apertures of the 
bodily organs [of the deceased]. 

In those who have led an evil life, and in those of unsound 
nerves, the above state endureth only so long as would take 
to snap a finger. Again, in some, it endurcth as long as the 
time taken for the eating of a meal, 

In various Zantras it is said that this state of swoon 
endureth for about three and one-half days. Most other 
[religious treatises] say for four days; and that this setting- 
face-to-face with the Clear Light ought to be persevered 
in [during the whole time]. 

The manner of applying [these directions] is: 

If [when dying] one be by one’s own self capable [of 
diagnosing the symptoms of death], use [of the knowledge] 
should have been made ere this.1_ If [the dying person be| 
unable to do so, then either the guru, or a shishya, or 
a brother in the Faith with whom the one [dying] was 
very intimate, should be kept at hand, who will vividly 
impress upon the one [dying] the symptoms [of death] 
as they appear in due order [repeatedly saying, at first] 
thus :? 

Now the symptoms of earth sinking into water are come.’ 

1 The full meaning implied is that not only should the person about to die 
diagnose the symptoms of death as they come, one by one, but that he should 
also, if able, recognize the Clear Light without being set face to face with it by 
some second person. 

2 Cf. the following instructions, from Ars Moriendi (fifteenth century), 
Comper’s ed. (p. 93): ‘When any of likelihood shall die [i.e. is likely to die}, 
then it is most necessary to have a special friend, the which will heartily help 
and pray for him, and therewith counsel the sick for the weal [i. e. health] of 
his soul.’ 

3 The three chief symptoms of death (which the text merely suggests by 
naming the first of them, it being taken for granted that the reader officiating 
will know the others and name them as they occur), with their symbolical counter- 
part, are as follows : (1) a bodily sensation of pressure, ‘earth sinking into water’ ; 
(2) a bodily sensation of clammy coldness as though the body were immersed in 
water, which gradually merges into that of feverish heat, ‘ water sinking into 
fire’; (3) a feeling as though the body were being blown to atoms, ‘ fire sinking 
into air’, Each symptom is accompanied by visible external changes in the 
body, such as loss of control over facial muscles, loss of hearing, loss of sight, 

94 BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

When all the symptoms [of death] are about to be com- 
pleted, then enjoin upon [the one dying] this resolution, 
speaking in a low tone of voice in the ear: 

O nobly-born (or, if it be a priest, O Venerable Sir), let not 
thy mind be distracted. 

If it be a brother [in the Faith], or some other person, then 
call him by name, and [say] thus: 

O nobly-born, that which is called death being come to 
thee now, resolve thus: ‘O this now is the hour of death. 
By taking advantage of this death, I will so act, for the good 
of all sentient beings, peopling the illimitable expanse of the 
heavens, as to obtain the Perfect Buddhahood, by resolving 
on love and compassion towards (them, and by directing my 
entire effort to] the Sole Perfection.’ 

Shaping the thoughts thus, especially at this time when 
the Dharma-Kaya of Clear Light [in the state] after death 
can be realized for the benefit of all sentient beings, know 
that thou art in that state; [and resolve] that thou wilt 
obtain the best boon of the State of the Great Symbol, 
in which thou art, [as follows]: 

‘Even if I cannot realize it, yet will I know this Bardo, 
and, mastering the Great Body of Union in Bardo, will appear 
in whatever [shape] will benefit [all beings] whomsoever : ? 

the breath coming in gasps just before the loss of consciousness, whereby /amas 
trained in the science of death detect, one by one, the interdependent psychic 
phenomena culminating in the release of the Bardo body from its human-plane 
envelope. The translator held that the science of death, as expounded in this 
treatise, has been arrived at through the actual experiencing of death on the 
part of learned /a@mas, who, when dying, have explained to their pupils the very 
process of death itself, in analytical and elaborate detail. (See p. 1627.) 

1 In this state, realization of the Ultimate Truth is possible, providing sufficient 
advance on the Path has been made by the deceased before death. Otherwise, 
he cannot benefit now, and must wander on into lower and lower conditions of 
the Bardo, as determined by karma, until rebirth. (See p. 135%.) 

* The Tibetan of the text is here unusually concise, Literally rendered it is, 
‘will appear in whatever will subdue {for beneficial ends] whomsoever’. To 
subdue in this sense any sentient being of the human world, a form which will 
appeal religiously to that being is assumed. Thus, to appeal to a Shaivite 
devotee, the form of Shiva is assumed ; to a Buddhist, the form of the Buddha 
Shakya Muni; to a Christian, the form of Jesus; to a Moslem, the form of the 
Prophet ; and so on for other religious devotees; and for all manners and con- 
ditions of mankind a form appropriate to the occasion—for example, for subduing 

Pam) THE CLEAR LIGHT OF THE VOID 95 

I will serve all sentient beings, infinite in number as are the 
limits of the sky.’ 

Keeping thyself unseparated from this resolution, thou 
shouldst try to remember whatever devotional practices 
thou wert accustomed to perform during thy lifetime. 

In saying this, the reader shall put his lips close to the ear, 
and shall repeat it distinctly, clearly impressing it upon the 
dying person so as to prevent his mind from wandering even 
for a moment. 

After the expiration hath completely ceased, press the 
nerve of sleep firmly ; and, a /é@ma, or a person higher or more 
learned than thyself, impress in these words, thus: 

Reverend Sir, now that thou art experiencing the Funda- 
mental Clear Light, try to abide in that state which now thou 
art experiencing. 

And also in the case of any other person the reader shall 
set him face-to-face thus: 

O nobly-born (so-and-so), listen. Now thou art experienc- 
ing the Radiance of the Clear Light of Pure Reality. Recog- 
nize it. O nobly-born, thy present intellect,? in real nature 
void, not formed into anything as regards characteristics or 
colour, naturally void, is the very Reality, the All-Good.? 

Thine own intellect, which is now voidness, yet not to be 

children, parents, and vice versa; for shishyas, gurus, and vice versa; for 
common people, kings or rulers ; and for kings, ministers of state. 

1 Cf. the following, from The Book of the Craft of Dying, chap. V, in Bodleian 
MS. 423 (circa fifteenth century), Comper’s ed. (p. 35) : ‘Also, if he that shall die 
have long time and space to be-think himself, and be not taken with hasty death, 
then may be read afore him, of them that be about him, devout histories and devout 
prayers, in the which he most delighted in when he was in heal [{i.e. health].’ 

2 Text: Shes-rig (pron. She-rig) isthe intellect, the knowing or cognizing faculty. 

3 Text: Chés-nyid Kiin-tu-bzang-po (pron. Ché-nyid Ktintu-zang-po), Skt. 
Dharma-Dhdaiu Samanta-Bhadra, the embodiment of the Dharma-Kaya, the 
first state of Buddhahood. Our Block-Print text, in error here, gives for the All- 
Good (Kuntu-Zang-po, meaning ‘All-Good Father’) Kuntu-Zang-mo, which 
means ‘All-Good Mother’. According to the Great Perfectionist School, the 
Father is that which appears, or phenomena, the Mother is that which is con- 
scious of the phenomena. Again, Bliss is the Father, and the Voidness 
perceiving it, the Mother; the Radiance is the Father, and the Voidness per- 
ceiving it, the Mother; and, as in our text here, the intellect is the Father, 
the Voidness the Mother. The repetition of ‘void’ is to emphasize the im- 
portance of knowing the intellect to be in reality void (or of the nature of void- 
ness), i.e. of the unborn, uncreated, unshaped Primordial. 

96 BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

regarded as of the voidness of nothingness, but as being the 
intellect itself, unobstructed, shining, thrilling, and blissful, is 
the very consciousness,! the All-good Buddha.? 

Thine own consciousness, not formed into anything, in 
reality void, and the intellect, shining and _blissful,—these 
two,—are inseparable. The union of them is the Dharma- 
Kaya state of Perfect Enlightenment.® 

Thine own consciousness, shining, void, and inseparable 
from the Great Body of Radiance, hath no birth, nor death, 
and is the Immutable Light—Buddha Amitabha.* 

Knowing this is sufficient. Recognizing the voidness of 
thine own intellect to be Buddhahood, and looking upon it as 
being thine own consciousness, is to keep thyself in the [state 
of the] divine mind ® of the Buddha.® 

1 Text: Rig-fa, meaning ‘consciousness’ as distinct from the knowing 
faculty by which it cognizes or knows itself to be. Ordinarily, rig-pa and shes- 
rig are Synonymous; but in an abstruse philosophical treatise, as herein, 7ig-pa 
refers to the consciousness in its purest and most spiritual (i. e. supramundane) 
aspect, and shes-rig to the consciousness in that grosser aspect, not purely 
spiritual, whereby cognizance of phenomena is present. 

In this part of the Bardo Thédol the psychological analysis of consciousness 
or mind is particularly abstruse. Wherever the text contains the word rig-pa 
we have rendered it as ‘consciousness’, and the word shkes-ng as ‘intellect’ ; 
or else, to suit the context, »#g-pa as ‘consciousness’ and shes-rig as ‘ conscious- 
ness of phenomena’, which is ‘ intellect’, 

2 Text: Kun-tu-bzang-po: Skt. Samanta (‘All’ or ‘ Universal’ or ‘Com- 
plete’) Bhadra (‘Good’ or ‘ Beneficent’), In this state, the experiencer and 
the thing experienced are inseparably one and the same, as, for example, the 
yellowness of gold cannot be separated from gold, nor saltness from salt. For 
the normal human intellect this transcendental state is beyond comprehension. 

8 From the union of the two states of mind, or consciousness, implied by the 
two terms vig-pa and shes-rig, and symbolized by the All-Good Father and the 
All-Good Mother, is born the state of the Dharma-Kdaya, the state of Perfect 
Enlightenment, Buddahood. The Dharma-Kaya (‘ Body of Truth’) symbolizes 
the purest and the highest state of being, a state of supramundane consciousness, 
devoid of all mental limitations or obscurations which arise from the contact of 
the primordial consciousness with matter. 

4 As the Buddha-Samanta-Bhadra state is the state of the All-Good, so the 
Buddha-Amitabha state is the state of the Boundless Light ; and, as the text 
implies, both are, in the last analysis, the same state, merely regarded from 
two viewpoints. In the first, is emphasized the mind of the All-Good, in the 
second, the enlightening Bodhi power, symbolized as Buddha Amitabha (the 
personification of the Wisdom faculty), Source of Life and Light. 

5 Text: dgongs-pa (pron. gong-pa): ‘thoughts’ or ‘mind’, and, being in the 
honorific form, ‘ divine mind’. 

® Realization of the Non-Sangsara, which is the Voidness, the Unbecome, the 

PARTI] LIBERATION BY RECOGNITION 97 

Repeat this distinctly and clearly three or [even] seven times. 
That will recall to the mind [of the dying one] the former 
[i.e. when living] setting-face-to-face by the guru. Secondly, 
it will cause the naked consciousness to be recognized as the 
Clear Light ; and, thirdly, recognizing one’s own self [thus], 
one becometh permanently united with the Dharma-Kaya 
and Liberation will be certain.} 

[INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING THE SECOND 
STAGE OF THE CHIKHAT BaARDO » THE 
SECONDARY CLEAR LIGHT SEEN IMME- 
DIATELY AFTER DEATH] 

Thus the primary Clear Light is recognized and Liberation 
attained. But if it be feared that the primary Clear Light 
hath not been recognized, then [it can certainly be assumed] 
there is dawning [upon the deceased] that called the secondary 

Unborn, the Unmade, the Unformed, implies Buddhahood, Perfect Enlighten- 
ment—the state of the Divine Mind of the Buddha. Compare the following 
passage, from The Diamond [or Immutable] Sara, with its Chinese commentary 
(trans. by W. Gemmell, London, 1912, pp. 17-18): ‘Every form or quality of 
phenomena is transient and illusive. When the mind realizes that the pheno- 
mena of life are not real phenomena, the Lord Buddha may then be clearly 
perceived.’—(Chinese Annotation : ‘ The spiritual Buddha must be realized within 
the mind, otherwise there can be no true perception of the Lord Buddha.’) 

1 If, when dying, one be familiar with this state, in virtue of previous spiritual 
(or yogic) training in the human world, and have power to win Buddhahood at 
this all-determining moment, the Wheel of Rebirth is stopped, and Liberation 
instantaneously achieved. But such spiritual efficiency is so very rare that the 
normal mental condition of the person dying is unequal to the supreme feat of 
holding on to the state in which the Clear Light shines; and there follows 
a progressive descent into lower and lower states of the Bardo existence, and 
then rebirth. The simile of a needle balanced and set rolling on a thread is 
used by the /a@mas to elucidate this condition. So long as the needle retains its 
balance, it remains on the thread. Eventually, however, the law of gravitation 
affects it, and it falls. In the realm of the Clear Light, similarly, the mentality 
of a person dying momentarily enjoys a condition of balance, or perfect equi- 
librium, and of oneness. Owing to unfamiliarity with such a state, which is an 
ecstatic state of non-ego, of subliminal consciousness, the consciousness-principle 
of the average human being Jacks the power to function in it; karmic propensi- 
ties becloud the consciousness-principle with thoughts of personality, of 
individualized being, of dualism, and, losing equilibrium, the consciousness- 
principle falls away from the Clear Light. It is ideation of ego, of self, which 
prevents the realization of Nirvana (which is the ‘blowing out of the flame of 
selfish longing’); and so the Wheel of Life continues to turn. 

3069 O 

98 BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

Clear Light, which dawneth in somewhat more than a meal- 
time period after that the expiration hath ceased.’ 

According to one’s good or bad karma, the vital-force 
floweth down into either the right or left nerve and goeth out 
through any of the apertures [of the body].2_ Then cometh a 
lucid condition of the mind.* 

To say that the state [of the primary Clear Light] endureth 
for a meal-time period [would depend upon] the good or bad 
condition of the nerves and also whether there hath been 
previous practice or not [in the setting-face-to-face]. 

When the consciousness-principle getteth outside [the body, 
it sayeth to itself], ‘Am I dead, or am I not dead?’ It cannot 
determine. It seeth its relatives and connexions as it had 
been used to seeing them before. It even heareth the wailings, 
The terrifying karmic illusions have not yet dawned. Nor 
have the frightful apparitions or experiences caused by the 
Lords of Death * yet come. 

During this interval, the directions are to be applied [by the 
lama or reader]: 

There are those [devotees] of the perfected stage and of the 

1 Immediately after the passing of the vital-force into the median-nerve, the 
person dying experiences the Clear Light in its primitive purity, the Dharma- 
Kaya unobscured; and, if unable to hold fast to that experience, next ex- 
periences the secondary Clear Light, having fallen to a lower state of the Bardo, 
wherein the Dharma-Kaya is dimmed by karmtc obscurations. 

SEC apesorxs 

8 Text: shes-pa, rendered here as ‘mind’. The translator has added the 
following comment: ‘The vital-force, passing from the navel psychic-nerve 
centre, and the principle of consciousness, passing from the brain psychic-nerve 
centre, unite in the heart psychic-nerve centre, and in departing thence from 
the body, normally through the Aperture of Brahma, produce in the dying 
person a state of ecstasy of the greatest intensity. The succeeding stage is 
less intense. In the first, or primary, stage, is experienced the Primary Clear 
Light, in the second stage, the Secondary Clear Light. A ball set bounding 
reaches its greatest height at the first bound; the second bound is lower, and 
each succeeding bound is still lower until the ball comes to rest. Similarly is it 
with the consciousness-principle at the death of ahuman body. Its first spiritual 
bound, directly upon quitting the earth-plane body, is the highest; the next 
is lower. Finally, the force of karma having spent itself in the after-death 
state, the consciousness-principle comes to rest, a womb is entered, and then 
comes rebirth in this world.’ 

* Text: Gshin-ye (pron. Shin-je): ‘Lord of Death’; but the plural form is 
allowable and preferable here. 

PARTI] RECOGNITION OF THE BARDO 99 

visualizing stage. If it be one who was in the perfected stage, 
then call him thrice by name and repeat over and over again 
the above instructions of setting-face-to-face with the Clear 
Light. If it be one who was in the visualizing stage, then 
read out to him the introductory descriptions and the text of 
the Meditation on his tutelary deity,! and then say, 

O thou of noble-birth, meditate upon thine own tutelary 
deity.—[Here the deity’s name is to be mentioned by the 
reader.”]_ Do not be distracted. LEarnestly concentrate thy 
mind upon thy tutelary deity. Meditate upon him as if he 
were the reflection of the moon in water, apparent yet in- 
existent [in itself]. Meditate upon him as if he were a being 
with a physical body. 

So saying, [the reader will] impress it. 

If [the deceased be] of the common folk, say, 

Meditate upon the Great Compassionate Lord.® 

By thus being set-face-to-face even those who would not 
be expected to recognize the Bardo [unaided| are undoubtedly 
certain to recognize it. 

Persons who while living had been set face to face [with the 
Reality] by a guru, yet who have not made themselves 
familiar with it, will not be able to recognize the Lardo 
clearly by themselves. Either a guru or a brother in the 
Faith will have to impress vividly such persons.* 

1 Cf. the following, from The Craft to Know Well to Die, chap. [V, Comper’s 
ed. (p. 73): ‘And after he [the person dying] ought to require the apostles, the 

martyrs, the confessors and the virgins, and in special all the saints that he 
most loved ever.’ 

2 The favourite deity of the deceased is the tutelary (Tib. y#-dawz), usually 
one of the Buddhas or Bodhisattvas, of whom Chenrazee is the most popular. 

3 Text: Jo-vo-thugs-rje-chen-po (pron. Jo-wo-thu-ji-chen-po) : ‘ Great Compas- 
sionate Lord’, synonymous with Tib. Spyan-ras.gzigs (pron. Chen-ré-si): Skt. 
Avalokiteshvara. 

4 A person may have heard a detailed description of the art of swimming and 
yet never have tried to swim. Suddenly thrown into water he finds himself 
unable to swim. So with those who have been taught the theory of how to act 
in the time of death and have not applied, through yogic practices, the theory : 
they cannot maintain unbroken continuity of consciousness; they grow be- 
wildered at the changed conditions ; and fail to progress or to take advantage 
of the opportunity offered by death, unless upheld and directed by a living guru. 
Even with all that a guru can do, they ordinarily, because of bad Zarma, fail to 
recognize the Bardo as such. 

pale 

100 BARDO OF THE DYING [BOOK I 

There may be even those who have made themselves 
familiar with the teachings, yet who, because of the violence 
of the disease causing death, may be mentally unable to 
withstand illusions. For such, also, this instruction is abso- 
lutely necessary. 

Again [there are those] who, although previously familiar 
with the teachings, have become liable to pass into the 
miserable states of existence, owing to breach of vows or 
failure to perform essential obligations honestly. To them, 
this [instruction] is indispensable. 

If the first stage of the Bardo hath been taken by the 
forelock, that is best. But if not, by application of this 
distinct recalling [to the deceased], while in the second stage 
of the Bardo, his intellect is awakened and attaineth liberation. 

While on the second stage of the Bardo, one’s body is of 
the nature of that called the shining illusory-body.} 

Not knowing whether [he be] dead or not, [a state of] 
lucidity cometh [to the deceased].? If the instructions be 
successfully applied to the deceased while he is in that state, 
then, by the meeting of the Mother-Reality and the Offspring- 
Reality,? kayma controlleth not.4 Like the sun’s rays, for 
example, dispelling the darkness, the Clear Light on the Path 
dispelleth the power of karma. 

1 Text: dag-pahi-sgyu-lus (pron. tag-pay-gyu-lit) : ‘pure (or shining) illusory 
body’: Skt. mayd-riipa. This is the ethereal counterpart of the physical body 
of the earth-plane, the ‘astral-body’ of Theosophy. 

2 With the departure of the consciousness-principle from the human body 
there comes a psychic thrill which gives way to a state of lucidity. 

§ Text: Chés-nyid-ma-bu: Skt. Dharma Matri Putra : ‘Mother and Offspring 
Reality (or Truth).? The Offspring-Truth is that realized in this world through 
practising deep meditation (Skt. dhyana), The Mother-Truth is the Primal or 
Fundamental Truth, experienced only after death whilst the Knower is in the 
Bardo state of equilibrium, ere karmic propensities have erupted into activity. 
What a photograph is compared to the object photographed, the Offspring- 
Reality is to the Mother-Reality. 

* Lit., ‘karma is unable to turn the mouth or head’, the figure implied being 
that of a rider controlling a horse with a bridle and bit. In the Tantra of the 
Great Liberation, there is this similar passage: ‘The man blinded by the dark- 
ness of ignorance, the fool caught in the meshes of his actions, and the illiterate 
man, by listening to this Great Tantra, are released from the bonds of harma’ 
(cf. Tantra of the Great Liberation, line ao5, as edited by Arthur Avalon, London, 
1913, P- 359). 

PART 1] BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS 101 

That which is called the second stage of the Bardo dawneth 
upon the thought-body.' The Knower? hovereth within 
those places to which its activities had been limited. If at 
this time this special teaching be applied efficiently, then the 
purpose will be fulfilled; for the karmic illusions will not 
have come yet, and, therefore, he [the deceased] cannot be 
turned hither and thither [from his aim of achieving En- 
lightenment ]. 

[PART 1]j 

Pee 2.47900 OF THE EXPERIENCING OF 
KREALITY| 

LINTRODUCTORY INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING 
Tee ESP RI PNCING OF REAL DURING 
THe THIRD STAGE OF THESt4AnR20, CALDED 
THE CHONYID BARDO, WHEN THE KARMIC 
APPARIDIONS APPEAR] 

But even though the Primary Clear Light be not recognized, 
the Clear Light of the second Bardo being recognized, Libera- 
tion will be attained. If not liberated even by that, then that 
called the third Bardo or the Chonyid Bardo dawneth. 

In this third stage of the Bardo, the karmic illusions come 
to shine. It is very important that this Great Setting-face-to- 
face of the Choényid Bardo be read: it hath much power and 
can do much good. 

About this time [the deceased] can see that the share of 
food is being set aside, that the body is being stripped of its 
garments, that the place of the sleeping-rug is being swept ;° 

1 Text: jsid-kyi-lis (pron. yid-kyt-li), ‘mental-body’, ‘desire-body’, or 
‘ thought-body’. 

2 Cf. pp. 92%, 957, 961. 

5 The references are (1) to the share of food being set aside for the deceased 

during the funeral rites ; (2) to his corpse being prepared for the shroud; (3) 
to his bed or sleeping-place. 

102 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

can hear all the weeping and wailing of his friends and rela- 
tives, and, although he can see them and can hear them calling 
upon him, they cannot hear him calling upon them, so he 
goeth away displeased. 

At that time, sounds, lights, and rays—all three—are 
experienced. These awe, frighten, and terrify, and cause 
much fatigue. At this moment, this setting-face-to-face with 
the Bardo [during the experiencing] of Reality is to be 
applied. Call the deceased by name, and correctly and dis- 
tinctly explain to him, as follows: 

O nobly-born, jisten with full attention, without being 
distracted: There are six states of Bardo, namely: the 
natural state of Bardo while in the womb;! the Bardo 
of the dream-state;? the Bardo of ecstatic equilibrium, 
while in deep meditation;* the Bardo of the moment of 
death ;* the Bardo (during the experiencing| of Reality ;° 
the Bardo of the inverse process of saugsdric existence.® 
These are the six. 

O nobly-born, thou wilt expericnce three Bardos, the Bardo 
of the moment of death, the Bardo [during the experiencing] 
of Reality, and the Sardo while seeking rebirth. Of these 
three, up to yesterday, thou hadst experienced the Bardo of 
the moment of death. Although the Clear Light of Reality 
dawned upon thee, thou wert unable to hold on, and so thou 
hast to wander here. Now henceforth thou art going to 
experience the [other] two, the Chényid Bardo and the Sidpa 
Bardo. 

1 Text: Skye-gnas Bardo (pron. Kye-nay Bardo): ‘Intermediate State’, or 
‘State of Uncertainty, of the place of birth (or while in the womb)’. 

* Text: Rmi-lan Bardo (pron. Mi-lam Bardo): ‘Intermediate State’, or 
‘State of Uncertainty, [during the experiencing] of the dream-state’. 

° Text: Ting-nge-hzin Bsam-giam Bardo (pron. Tin-ge-ain Sam-tam Bardo) : 
‘Intermediate State’, or ‘State of Uncertainty, [during the experiencing] of 
Dyhana (Meditation) in Samadhi (Ecstatic equilibrium)’. 

* Text: Hehi-khahi Bardo (pron. Chi-khai Bardo): ‘Intermediate State’, or 
‘State of Uncertainty, of the dying moment (or moment of death) ’. 

5 Text: Chés-nyid Bardo (pron. Ché-nyid Bardo): ‘Intermediate State’, or 
‘State of Uncertainty, [during the experiencing] of Reality’. 

® Text: Lugs-hbyung Srid-pahi Bardo (pron. Lu-jung Sid-pai Bardo : ‘Inter- 
mediate State’, or ‘State of Uncertainty, in the inverse process of sangsdaric 
(worldly) existence’—the state wherein the Knower is seeking rebirth. 

PART II] THE SECRET OF RECOGNITION 103 

Thou wilt pay undistracted attention to that with which I 
am about to set thee face to face, and hold on: 

O nobly-born, that which is called death hath now come. 
Thou art departing from this world, but thou art not the only 
one; [death] cometh to all. Do not cling, in fondness and 
weakness, to this life. Even though thou clingest out of 
weakness, thou hast not the power to remain here. Thou 
wilt gain nothing more than wandering in this Sangsara.} 
Be not attached [to this world]; be not weak. Remember 
the Precious Trinity.? 

O nobly-born, whatever fear and terror may come to thee 
in the Chinyid Bardo, forget not these words; and, bearing 
their meaning at heart, go forwards: in them lieth the vital 
secret of recognition: 

‘Alas! when the Uncertain Experiencing of Reality is 
dawning upon me here,’ 

With every thought of fear or terror or awe for all [appari- 
tional appearances] set aside, 

May I recognize whatever [visions] appear, as the reflections 
of mine own consciousness ; 

May I know them to be of the nature of apparitions in the 
Bardo: 

When at this all-important moment [of opportunity] of 
achieving a great end, 

May I not fear the bands of Peaceful and Wrathful [ Deities], 
mine own thought-forms.*’ 

Repeat thou these [verses] clearly, and remembering their 
significance as thou repeatest them, go forwards, [O nobly- 
born]. Thereby, whatever visions of awe or terror appear, 

1 Text: Hkhor-va (pron. Khor-wa): ‘a thing whirling round’; ‘ whirligig’ : 
Skt. Sangsdra (or Samsara). 

2 That is, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, 

8 Reality is experienced or glimpsed in a state of uncertainty, because the 
Knower experiences it through the Bardo counterpart of the illusory perceptive 
faculties of the earth-plane body and not through the unobscured supramundane 
consciousness of the pure Dharma-Kaya state, wherein there can be no Bardo 
(i.e ‘Uncertain’, or ‘Intermediate State’). 

4 Text: rang-snang (pron. rang-nang): ‘one’s own [mental] visions (or 
thought-forms).’ 

104 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

recognition is certain; and forget not this vital secret art 
lying therein. 

O nobly-born, when thy body and mind were separating, 
thou must have experienced a glimpse of the Pure Truth, 
subtle, sparkling, bright, dazzling, glorious, and radiantly 
awesome, in appearance like a mirage moving across a land- 
scape in spring-time in one continuous stream of vibrations. 
Be not daunted thereby, nor terrified, nor awed. That is the 
radiance of thine own true nature. Recognize it. 

From the midst of that radiance, the natural sound of 
Reality, reverberating like a thousand thunders simultaneously 
sounding, will come. That is the natural sound of thine own 
real self. Be not daunted thereby, nor terrified, nor awed. 

The body which thou hast now is called the thought-body 
of propensities! Since thou hast not a material body of 
flesh and blood, whatever may come,—sounds, lights, or rays, 
—are, all three, unable to harm thee: thou art incapable of 
dying. It is quite sufficient for thee to know that these 
apparitions are thine own thought-forms. Recognize this 
to be the Bardo. 

O nobly-born, if thou dost not now recognize thine own 
thought-forms, whatever of meditation or of devotion thou 
mayst have performed while in the human world—if thou hast 
not met with this present teaching—the lights will daunt 
thee, the sounds will awe thee, and the rays will terrify thee. 
Shouldst thou not know this all-important key to the teach- 
ings,—not being able to recognize the sounds, lights, and 
rays,—thou wilt have to wander in the Sangsara. 

[THE DAWNING OF "THE PEACEFUL*s DEITEa] 
PROM THE FERST TO THE SEVENTH Diag) 

[Assuming that the deceased is karmically bound—as the 
average departed one is—to pass through the forty-nine days 
of the Bardo existence, despite the very frequent settings-face- 
to-face, the daily trials and dangers which he must meet and 

' Text: bag-chags yid-liis (pron. bag-chah yid-li). yid-lis: ‘mind-body’ or 

‘thought-body’; dag-chags: ‘habit’, ‘propensities’ (born of samgsaric or 
worldly existence). 

PART II] DAWNING OF VAIROCHANA 105 

attempt to triumph over, during the first seven days, wherein 
dawn the Peaceful Deities, are next explained to him in 
detail; the first day, judging from the text, being reckoned 
from the time in which normally he would be expected to wake 
up to the fact that he is dead and on the way back to rebirth, 
or about three and one-half to four days after death.] 

[THE FIRST DAY] 

O nobly-born, thou hast been in a swoon during the last three 
and one-half days. As soon as thou art recovered from this 
swoon, thou wilt have the thought, ‘What hath happened !’ 

Act so that thou wilt recognize the Bardo. At that time, 
all the Saxgsara will be in revolution ;! and the phenomenal 
appearances that thou wilt see then will be the radiances and 
deities. The whole heavens will appear deep blue. 

Then, from the Central Realm, called the Spreading Forth 
of the Seed,® the Bhagavan Vairochana,* white in colour, and 

1 That is to say, phenomena, or phenomenal experiences as experienced 
when in the human world, will be experienced in quite another way in the 
Bardo world, so that to one just dead they will seem to be in revolution or 
confusion ; hence the warning to the deceased, who must accustom himself to 
the after-death state as a babe must accustom itself after birth to our world. 

2 At this point, where the marvellous Bardo visions begin to dawn, the 
student in attempting to rationalize them should ever keep in mind that this 
treatise is essentially esoteric, being in most parts, especially from here onwards, 
allegorical and symbolical of psychic experiences in the after-death state. 

3 Text: Thiglé-Brdalva (pron. Thigle-Dalwa): ‘ Spreading forth the Seed [of 
all Things].’? Esoterically, this is the Dharma-Dhatu. 

4 Text : Rnam-par-Snang-mzad (pron. Nam-par-Nang-2ad) ; Skt. Vairochana, 
the Dhyani Buddha of the Centre (or Central Realm). Vavvochana literally 
means, ‘in shapes making visible’; hence he is the Manifester of Phenomena, 
or the Noumena, The wheel he holds symbolizes sovereign power. His title 
Bhagavan (applied to many other of the deities to follow hereinafter), meaning 
“One Possessed of Dominion’ (or ‘of the Six Powers’), or ‘The Victorious’, 
qualifies him as being a Buddha, i.e. One who has conquered, or has dominion 
over, sangsaric, or worldly, existence. 

As the Central Dhyani Buddha, Vairochana is the highest path te Enlighten- 
ment of the Esoteric School. Like a Central Sun, surrounded by the four 
Dhyani Buddhas of the four cardinal directions, who dawn on the four succeed- 
ing days, he symbolizes the One Truth surrounded by its four constituents or 
elements. As the source of all organic life, in him all things visible and invisible 
have their consummation and absorption. 

For general references to the deities of the Bardo Thédol, see L. A. Waddell, 
The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism (London, 1895) ; and A, Getty, The Gods of 
Northern Buddhism (Oxford, 1914). 

3069 P 

106 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [BOOK I 

seated upon a lion-throne, bearing an eight-spoked wheel 
in his hand, and embraced by the Mother of the Space of 
Heaven,! will manifest himself to thee. 

It is the aggregate of matter resolved into its primordial 
state which is the blue light.” 

The Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu, blue in colour, shining, 
transparent, glorious, dazzling, from the heart of Vairochana 
as the Father-Mother,’ will shoot forth and strike against thee 
with a light so radiant that thou wilt scarcely be able to look 
at it. 

Along with it, there will also shine a dull white light from 
the devas, which will strike against thee in thy front. 

Thereupon, because of the power of bad karma, the glorious 
blue light of the Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu will produce 
in thee fear and terror, and thou wilt [wish to] flee from it. 
Thou wilt beget a fondness for the dull white light of the 
devas. 

At this stage, thou must not be awed by the divine blue 
light which will appear shining, dazzling, and glorious; and 
be not startled by it. That is the light of the Tathagata * 
called the Light of the Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu. Put 
thy faith in it, believe in it firmly, and pray unto it, thinking 
in thy mind that it is the light proceeding from the heart of 
the Bhagavan Vairochana coming to receive thee while in the 

1 Text: Nam-mkh-ah-dvyings-kyi-duang-phyung-ma (pron. Nam-kha-ing-hya- 
wang-chug-ma) : ‘ Sovereign Lady of the Space of Heaven’: Skt. Akasa Dhatu 
/shvari. The Mother is the female principle of the universe; the Father, 
Vairochana, the seed of all that is, 

? Here the Block-Print reads: ‘It is the aggregate of consciousness (Rvam- 
par Shes-tahi—pro. Nam-par She-pay —Skt. Vijfiana Skandha) resolved into its 
primordial state which is the blue light.’ In our MS. the aggregate of 
consciousness shines as a white light in relationship with Vajra-Sattva, on the 
Second Day (see p. 109). 

* Here, as in parallel passages following, the chief deity personifies in him- 
self the female as well as the male principle of nature, and hence is called the 
Father-Mother—depicted, as described by the text, in appropriate symbolic 
colours, on the corresponding illuminated folio of our MS., as the Divine Father 
and the Divine Mother in union (i.e. in divine at-one-ment). 

* Text : De-bshing-shegs-pa (pron. De-shing-sheg-pa) : Skt. Tathagata, meaning 
‘{He] who hath gone that same way’, i.e. One who hath reached the Goal 
(Nirva@na)—a Buddha, 

PART II] LIBERATION BY VAIROCHANA 107 

dangerous ambuscade! of the Bardo. That light is the light 
of the grace of Vairochana. 

Be not fond of the dull white light of the devas. Be not 
attached |to it]; be not weak. If thou be attached to it, 
thou wilt wander into the abodes of the devas and be drawn 
into the whirl of the Six Zokas. That is an interruption to 
obstruct thee on the Path of Liberation. Look not at it. 
Look at the bright blue light in deep faith. Put thy whole 
thought earnestly upon Vairochana and repeat after me this 
prayer: 

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sazgsara, because of intense 
stupidity, 

On the radiant light-path of the Dkarma-Dhatu Wisdom 

May [I] be led by the Bhagavan Vairochana, 

May the Divine Mother of Infinite Space be [my] rear- 

guard ; 

May |I] be led safely across the fearful ambush of the 
Bardo; 

May [I] be placed in the state of the All-Perfect Buddha- 
hood.’ ? 

Praying thus, in intense humble faith, [thou] wilt merge, in 
halo of rainbow light, into the heart of Vairochana, and obtain 
Buddhahood in the Sambhoga-K aya, in the Central Realm of 
the Densely-Packed.® 

1 Text: hphrang (pron. htang): ‘narrow passage’, ‘ambush’. 

2 Cf, the following instructions to the dying person and the prayer from 
The Craft to Know Well to Die, chap. IV, Comper’s ed. (p. 73): ‘ He ought after- 
wards, if he may, to call on the holy angels, in saying: ‘‘ Ye spirits of Heaven, 
Angels much glorious, I beseech you that ye will be assistant [i.e. present] 
with me that now beginneth to depart, and that ye deliver me mightily from 
the awaits and fallacies of mine adversaries; and that it please you to receive 
my soul into your company. The principal, my leader and my good angel, 
which by our Lord art deputed to be my warder and keeper, I pray and 
require thee that thou now aid and help me.”’’ 

3 Text: Stug-po-bkod-pahi shing-khams (pron. Tug-po-kod-pai shing-kham) : 
‘Thickly-formed’ or ‘Densely-packed Realm’, i.e. the seed of all universal 
forces and things are densely packed together therein; also called in Tibetan 
‘Og-min: lit, ‘No-down’, the realm whence there is no fall, the state leading 
into Nirvdua; it is pre-eminently the realm of the Buddhas, 

108 BARDO OF KARMIC ILEWSIONS [BeeK! 

[THE SECOND DAY] 

But if, notwithstanding this setting-face-to-face, through 
power of anger or obscuring karma one should be startled at 
the glorious light and flee, or be overcome by illusions, despite 
the prayer, on the Second Day, Vajra-Sattva and his attendant 
deities, as well as one’s evil deeds [meriting] Hell, will come 
to receive one. 

Thereupon the setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased 
by name, thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Second Day 
the pure form of water will shine as a white light. At that 
time, from the deep blue Eastern Realm of Pre-eminent Hap- 
piness, the Bhagavan Akshobhya [as] Vajra-Sattva,’ blue in 
colour, holding in his hand a five-pronged dovze,? seated upon 
an elephant-throne, and embraced by the Mother Mamaki?, 
will appear to thee, attended by the Bodhisattvas Kshiti- 
garbha* and Maitreya,® with the female Bodhisattvas, Lasema 
and Pushpema.® These six Bodhic deities will appear to thee. 

1 Text: Rdorje-sems-dpah Mi-bskyod-pa (pron. Dorje-sems-pa Mi-kyod-pa) : Skt. 
Vajra-Sativa Akshobhya. Akshobhya (the ‘ Unagitated’ or ‘Immovable’), the 
Dhyani Buddha of the Eastern Direction, here, as throughout the text, appears 
as Vajra-Sattva (‘The Divine Heroic-Minded’, or ‘ Indestructible-Minded’), his 
Sambhoga-Kdaya, or adorned active reflex. WVajra-Dhara (‘The Indestructible 
or Steadfast Holder’ [see p. 13]) is, also, a reflex of Akshobhya; and both 
reflexes are very important deities of the Esoteric School. 

2 The dorye is the lamatc sceptre, a type of the thunderbolt of Indra (Jupiter). 

8 This is the Sanskrit form as incorporated in our Tibetan text. Here the 
Block-Print, evidently in error, contains, in Tibetan, Sangs-rgyas-spyan-ma 
(pron. Sang-yay Chan-ma), meaning ‘She of the Buddha Eye’, who, in our manu- 
script text, comes with Ratna-Sambhava on the Third Day. Mamaki is also 
one of the ro8 names given to Délma (Skt. Tara), the national goddess of Tibet. 
(See p, 116%.) In the Dharma Samgraha it is said that there are four Devis, 
namely, Rochani, Mamaki, Pandura, and Tara. 

* Text: Sahi-snying-po (pron. Sayi-nying-po): Skt. Kshitigarbha: ‘Womb 
(or Matrix) of the Earth.’ 

5 Text: Byants-pa (pron. Cham-pa): Skt. Mattreya: ‘ Love’; the Buddha to 
come, who will reform mankind through the power of divine love. 

® Lasema and Pushpema are corrupt Sanskrit forms incorporated in our 
manuscript. Their Tibetan equivalents are, respectively, Sgeg-mo-ma (Skt. 
Lasya), meaning ‘ Belle’ (or ‘ Dallying One’), and Me-tog-ma (Skt. Pushpa), 
‘She who offers (or holds) Blossoms’. Pushpa, depicted holding a blossom 
in her hand, is a personification of blossoms. Ldsya, the Belle, depicted 
holding a mirror in a coquettish attitude, personifies beauty, 

PART 1] DAWNING OF VAJRA-SATTVA 1cg 

The aggregate of thy principle of consciousness,! being in its 
pure form—which is the Mirror-like Wisdom—will shine as 
a bright, radiant white light, from the heart of Vajra-Sattva, 
the Father-Mother,? with such dazzling brilliancy and trans- 
parency that thou wilt scarcely be able to look at it, [and] 
will strike against thee. And a dull, smoke-coloured light 
from Hell will shine alongside the light of the Mirror-like 
Wisdom and will [also] strike against thee. 

Thereupon, through the power of anger, thou wilt beget 
fear and be startled at the dazzling white light and wilt [wish 
to] flee from it; thou wilt beget a feeling of fondness for the 
dull smoke-coloured light from Hell. Act then so that thou 
wilt not fear that bright, dazzling, transparent white light. 
Know it to be Wisdom. Put thy humble and earnest faith in 
it. That is the light of the grace of the Bhagavan Vajra- 
Sattva. Think, with faith, ‘I will take refuge in it’; and pray- 

That is the Bhagavan Vajra-Sattva coming to receive thee 
and to save thee from the fear and terror of the ardo. 
Believe in it; for it is the hook of the rays of grace of Vajra- 
Sattva.? 

Be not fond of the dull, smoke-coloured light from Hell. 
That is the path which openeth out to receive thee because 
of the power of accumulated evil karma from violent anger. 
If thou be attracted by it, thou wilt fall into the Hell-Worlds; 
and, falling therein, thou wilt have to endure unbearable 
misery, whence there is no certain time of getting out. That 
being an interruption to obstruct thee on the Path of Libera- 
tion, look not at it; and avoid anger.* Be not attracted by 

1 Text: Ruampar-shes-paht-phung-po (pron. Nampar-she-pay-phung-po), ‘ag- 
gregate of consciousness-principle’, the Knower. The Block-Print contains, 
in place of this, Geugs-kyt-phung-po (pron. Zu-kyt-phung-po), ‘aggregate of the 
body’ or ‘ Bodily-aggregate’. 

2 See p. 1063. 

8 The rays of divine grace are a hook of salvation to catch hold of the 
deceased and drag him away from the dangers of the Bardo. Sometimes each 
ray is thought of as ending in a hook, just as each ray emanating from the sun- 
god Ra, and descending as a grace ray upon a devotce, is depicted in ancient 
temples of Egypt as ending in a hand. Similarly, the Christian thinks of the 
saving grace of God. 

4 The deceased is here thought of, perhaps, as being able to see his people 

110 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [800K I 

it; be not weak. Believe in the dazzling bright white light ; 
[and] putting thy whole heart earnestly upon the Bhagavan 
Vajra-Sattva, pray thus : 

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsdra because of the 
power of violent anger, 

On the radiant light-path of the Mirror-like Wisdom, 

May [I] be led by the Bhagavan Vajra-Sattva, 

May the Divine Mother Mamaki be [my] rear-guard; 

May [I] be led safely across the fearful ambush of the 
Bardo; 

And may [I] be placed in the state of the All-perfect 
Buddhahood.’ 

Praying thus, in intense humble faith, thou wilt merge, in 
rainbow light, into the heart of the Bhagavan Vajra-Sattva 
and obtain Buddhahood in the Sambhoga-K aya, in the Eastern 
Realm called Pre-eminently Happy. 

[THE THIRD DAY] 

Yet, even when set face to face in this way, some persons, 
because of obscurations from bad karma, and from pride, 
although the hook of the rays of grace [striketh against them], 
flee from it. [If one be one of them], then, on the Third Day, 
the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava! and his accompanying deities, 
along with the light-path from the human world, will come to 
receive one simultaneously. 

Again, calling the deceased by name, the setting-face-to-face 
is thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Third Day 
the primal form of the element earth will shine forth asa yellow 
light. At that time, from the Southern Realm Endowed with 
on earth and as liable to anger should he see them disputing over the division 
of his property, or if he perceives avarice on the part of the Jama conducting 
the funeral rites. But the prohibition touching anger is essentially yogic, yogis 
of all religions recognizing that anger prevents spiritual progress; and it 

parallels the moral teaching against giving way to anger contained in the ancient 
Egyptian Precepts of Ptah-hotep. 

1 Text: Rinchen-hbyung-ldan (pron, Rinchen-Jung-dan): Skt. Ratna-Sam- 
bhava, i.c. ‘Born of a Jewel’. He is the Beautifier, whence comes all that is 
precious ; a personified attribute of the Buddha. 

PART 11] DAWNING OF RATNA-SAMBHAVA 111 

Glory, the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava, yellow in colour, 
bearing a jewel in his hand, seated upon a horse-throne and 
embraced by the Divine Mother Sangyay-Chanma,! will shine 
upon thee. 

The two Bodhisattvas, Akasha-Garbha? and Samanta- 
Bhadra,* attended by the two female Bodhisattvas, Mahlaima 
and Dhupema,*—in all, six Bodhic forms,—will come to shine 
from amidst a rainbow halo of light. The aggregate of touch 
in its primal form, as the yellow light of the Wisdom of 
Equality, dazzlingly yellow, glorified with orbs having satellite 
orbs of radiance, so clear and bright that the eye can scarcely 
look upon it, will strike against thee. Side by side with it, 
the dull bluish-yellow light from the human [world] will also 
strike against thy heart, along with the Wisdom light. 

Thereupon, through the power of egotism, thou wilt beget 
a fear for the dazzling yellow light and wilt [wish to] flee 
from it. Thou wilt be fondly attracted towards the dull 
bluish-yellow light from the human [world]. 

At that time do not fear that bright, dazzling-yellow, trans- 
parent light, but know it to be Wisdom; in that state, keeping 
thy mind resigned, trust in it earnestly and humbly. If thou 
knowest it to be the radiance of thine own intellect—although 
thou exertest not thy humility and faith and prayer to it— 
the Divine Body and Light will merge into thee inseparably, 
and thou wilt obtain Buddhahood. 

If thou dost not recognize the radiance of thine own intel- 
lect, think, with faith, ‘It is the radiance of the grace of the 

1 Text: Sangs-reyas-spyan-ma (pron, Sang-yay Chan-ma): ‘She of the 
Buddha Eye (or Eyes)’ 

2 Text: Nam-mkhahi-snying-po (pron. Nam-khai-nying-po): Skt. Akasha- 
Garbha, ‘Womb (or Matrix) of the Sky’. 

3 Text: Kuntu-byzang-po (pron. Kuntu-zang-po): Skt. Samanta-Bhadra, 
‘All-Good’. This is not the Adi-Buddha Samanta-Bhadra (cf. p. 95°), but 
the spiritual son of the Dhyani Buddha Vairochana. 

4 Text: Mahlaima, ‘She Who Holds (or Bears) the Rosary’; and Dhupema, 
‘She Who Holds (or Bears) the Incense’. These are corrupt forms, hybrids 
of Sanskrit and Tibetan, their Sanskrit equivalents being Ma/d and Dhipa, and 
their Tibetan equivalents Hphreng-ba-ma (pron. Phreng-ba-ma) and Bdug-spis- 
ma (pron. Dug-pd-ma). The colour of these goddesses, corresponding to that 
of the earth-light, is yellow. 

112 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava; I will take refuge in it’; and 
pray. It is the hook of the grace-rays of the Bhagavan 
Ratna-Sambhava; believe in it. 

Be not fond of that dull bluish-yellow light from the human 
[world]. That is the path of thine accumulated propensities 
of violent egotism come to receive thee. If thou art attracted 
by it, thou wilt be born in the human world and have to suffer 
birth, age, sickness, and death; and thou wilt have no chance 
of getting out of the quagmire of worldly existence. That is 
an interruption to obstruct thy path of liberation. Therefore, 
look not upon it, and abandon egotism, abandon propensities; 
be not attracted towards it; be not weak. Act so as to trust 
in that bright dazzling light. Put thine earnest thought, 
one-pointedly, upon the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava; and 
pray thus: 

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sanugsadra because of the 
power of violent egotism, 

On the radiant light-path of the Wisdom of Equality, 

May [I] be led by the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava ; 

May the Divine Mother, She-of-the-Buddha-Eye, be [my] 

rear-guard; 

May [I] be led safely across the fearful ambush of the 

Bardo; 
And may [I] be placed in the state of the All-Perfect 
Buddhahood.’ 

By praying thus, with deep humility and faith, thou wilt 
merge into the heart of the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava, the 
Divine Father-Mother, in halo of rainbow light, and attain 
Buddhahood in the Sambhoga-K aya, in the Southern Realm 
Endowed with Glory. 

[THE FOURTH DAY] 

By thus being set face to face, however weak the mental 
faculties may be, there is no doubt of one’s gaining Liberation. 
Yet, though so often set face to face, there are classes of men 
who, having created much bad karma, or having failed in observ- 
ance of vows, or, their lot [for higher development] being alto- 
gether lacking, prove unable to recognize: their obscurations 

PART IT] DAWNING OF AMITABHA 113 

and evil karma from covetousness and miserliness produce 
awe of the sounds and radiances, and they flee. [If one be 
of these classes], then, on the Fourth Day, the Bhagavan 
Amitabha' and his attendant deities, together with the light- 
path from the Preta-loka, proceeding from miserliness and 
attachment, will come to receive one simultaneously. 

Again the setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased by 
name, thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Fourth Day 
the red light, which is the primal form of the element fire, will 
shine. At that time, from the Red Western Realm of Happi- 
ness,? the Bhagavan Buddha Amitabha, red in colour, bearing 
a lotus in his hand, seated upon a peacock-throne and em- 
braced by the Divine Mother Gékarmo,? will shine upon thee, 
[together with] the Bodhisattvas Chenrazee* and Jampal,* 
attended by the female Bodhisattvas Ghirdhima® and Aloke.° 
The six bodies of Enlightenment will shine upon thee from 
amidst a halo of rainbow light. 

1 Text: Suang-va-mthah-yas (pron. Nang-wa-tha-yay): Skt. Amustabha, ‘Bound- 
Jess (or Incomprehensible) Light’, As an embodiment of one of the Buddha- 
attributes or Wisdoms, the All-discriminating Wisdom, Amitabha personifies 
life eternal. 

2 Text: Gés-dkar-mo (pron. Gé-kar-mo), ‘ She-in-White-Raiment’. 

3 Text: Spyan-ras-geigs (pron. Chen-rd-2t): Skt. Avalokiteshvara, ‘ Down- 
Looking One’, the embodiment of mercy or compassion. The Dalai Lamas are 
believed to be his incarnations ; Amitabha, with whom he here dawns, is his. 
spiritual father, whose incarnate representatives are the Tashi Lamas. He is 
often depicted with eleven heads and a thousand arms, each with an eye in the 
palm—as ‘The Great Pitier’—his thousand arms and eyes appropriately 
representing him as ever on the outlook to discover distress and to succour the 
troubled. In China, Avalokiteshvara becomes the Great Goddess of Mercy 
Kwanyin, represented by a female figure bearing a child in her arms. 

* Text: Hgam-dpal (pron. Jam-pal): Skt. Matjushri, ‘Of Gentle Glory’. 
A fuller Tibetan form is Hgam-dpal-dvyangs (pron. Jam-pal-yang): Skt. Maii- 
jughosha, ‘Glorious Gentle-Voiced One’. He is ‘The God of Mystic Wisdom’, 
the Buddhist Apollo, commonly depicted with the flaming sword of light held 
aloft in his right hand and the lotus-supported Book of Wisdom, the Prajza- 
Paramité, held in his left. 

& Text: Ghir-dhi-ma and Aloke, corrupted from Skt. Gita, ‘ Song’, and Aloka, 
‘Light’: Tib. Glu-ma (pron, Lu-ma) and Snang-gsal-ma (pron. Nang-sal-ma). 
Gita, commonly represented holding a lyre, personifies (or symbolizes) music 
and song, and Aloka, holding a lamp, personifies (or symbolizes) light. Related 
to the element fire, as herein, their colour is red, 

3069 Q 

114 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book 1 

The primal form of the aggregate of feelings as the red 
light of the All-Discriminating Wisdom, glitteringly red, glori- 
fied with orbs and satellite orbs, bright, transparent, glorious 
and dazzling, proceeding from the heart of the Divine Father- 
Mother Amitabha, will strike against thy heart [so radiantly] 
that thou wilt scarcely be able to look upon it. Fear it not. 

Along with it, a dull red light from the Preta-loka, coming 
side by side with the Light of Wisdom, will also shine upon thee. 
Act so that thou shalt not be fond of it. Abandon attach- 
ment [and] weakness [for it]. 

At that time, through the influence of intense attachment, 
thou wilt become terrified by the dazzling red light, and wilt 
[wish to] flee from it. And thou wilt beget a fondness for 
that dull red light of the Preta-loka. 

At that time, be not afraid of the glorious, dazzling, trans- 
parent, radiant red light. Recognizing it as Wisdom, keeping 
thine intellect in the state of resignation, thou wilt merge 
[into it] inseparably and attain Buddhahood. 

If thou dost not recognize it, think, ‘It is the rays of the 
grace of the Bhagavan Amitabha, and I will take refuge in it’; 
and, trusting humbly in it, pray unto it. That is the hook- 
rays of the grace of the Bhagavan Amitabha. Trust in it 
humbly; flee not. Even if thou fleest, it will follow thee 
inseparably [from thyself]. Fear it not. Be not attracted 
towards the dull red light of the Preta-loka. That is the light- 
path proceeding from the accumulations of thine intense 
attachment [to sangsaric existence] which hath come to 
receive thee. If thou be attached thereto, thou wilt fall into 
the World of Unhappy Spirits and suffer unbearable misery 
from hunger and thirst. Thou wilt have no chance of gaining 
Liberation [therein].!. That dull red light is an interruption 
to obstruct thee on the Path of Liberation. Be not attached 
to it, and abandon habitual propensities. Be not weak. Trust 
in the bright dazzling red light. In the Bhagavan Amitabha, 

1 Lit. ‘Of Liberation there will be no time.’ Once the deceased becomes 
a preta, or unhappy ghost, the after-death attainment of Nirvdua is, normally, 
no longer possible; he must then wait for the opportunity afforded by rebirth 
in the human world, when his Preta-loka existence has ended. 

PART 1] DAWNING OF AMOGHA-SIDDHI 115 

the Father-Mother, put thy trust one-pointedly and pray 
thus: 
‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsdra because of the 
power of intense attachment, 
On the radiant light-path of the Discriminating Wisdom 
May [I] be led by the Bhagavan Amitabha ; 
May the Divine Mother, She-of-White-Raiment, be [my] 
rear-guard ; 
May [I] be safely led across the dangerous ambush of the 
Bardo; 
And may [I] be placed in the state of the All-Perfect 
Buddhahood.’ 

By praying thus, humbly and earnestly, thou wilt merge 
into the heart of the Divine Father-Mother, the Bhagavan 
Amitabha, in halo of rainbow-light, and attain Buddhahood in 
the Sambhoga-K aya, in the Western Realm named Happy. 

{THE FIFTH DAY} 

It is impossible that one should not be liberated thereby. 
Yet, though thus set face to face, sentient beings, unable 
through long association with propensities to abandon propen- 
sities, and, through bad karma and jealousy, awe and terror 
being produced by the sounds and radiances—the hook-rays 
of grace failing to catch hold of them—wander down also to 
the Fifth Day. [If one be sucha sentient being], thereupon 
the Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi, with his attendant deities 
and the light and rays of his grace, will come to receive one. 
A light proceeding from the Asura-loka, produced by the evil 
passion of jealousy, will also come to receive one. 

The setting-face-to-face at that time is, calling the deceased 
by name, thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Fifth Day, the 
green light of the primal form of the element air will shine 
upon thee. At that time, from the Green Northern Realm of 
Successful Performance of Best Actions, the Bhagavan Buddha 
Amogha-Siddhi, green in colour, bearing a crossed-dorje in 

1 Text: Don-yod-grub-pa (pron. Don-yéd-rub-pa): Skt. Amogha-Siddht: ‘ Al- 
mighty Conqueror,’ 

116 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

hand,! seated upon a sky-traversing Harpy-throne,? embraced 
by the Divine Mother, the Faithful Délma,’ will shine upon 
thee, with his attendants,—the two Bodhisattvas Chag-na- 
Dorje4 and Dibpanamsel,® attended by two female Bodhi- 
sattvas, Gandhema® and Nidhema.’ These six Bodhic forms, 
from amidst a halo of rainbow light, will come to shine. 

The primal form of the aggregate of volition, shining as the 
green light of the All-Performing Wisdom, dazzlingly green, 
transparent and radiant, glorious and terrifying, beautified 
with orbs surrounded by satellite orbs of radiance, issuing 
from the heart of the Divine Father-Mother Amogha-Siddhi, 
green in colour, will strike against thy heart [so wondrously 

1 That is, a dorje with four heads, such as is depicted on the front cover of 
this volume. It symbolizes equilibrium, immutability, and almighty power, 

2 Text: shang-shang, refers to an order of creatures like the fabulous harpies 
of classical mythology, having human form from the waist upwards, and from 
the waist downwards the form of a bird; but whereas the Greek harpies 
were female, these are of both sexes. That a race of such harpies exists in 
the world somewhere is a popular belief among Tibetans. 

5 Text: Sgrol-ma (pron. Dél-ma): Délma (Skt. Tara) = ‘Saviouress’. She 
is the divine consort of Avalokiteshvara. There are now two recognized forms 
of this goddess: the Green Délma, as worshipped in Tibet, and the White Dolma, 
as worshipped chiefly in China and Mongolia. The royal Nepalese princess 
who became the wife of the first Buddhist king of Tibet is believed to have 
been an incarnation of the Green Dolma, and his wife from the Imperial House 
of China an incarnation of the White Doélma. (Seep. 74.) The late Lama Kazi 
Dawa-Samdup told me that, because Tibetans saw the likeness of Queen Victoria 
on English coins and recognized it as being that of Délma, there developed 
throughout Tibet during the Victorian Era a belief that Dolma had come back to 
birth again to rule the world in the person of the Great Queen of England ; and 
that, owing to this belief, the British representatives of the Queen then met with 
an unusually friendly reception in their negotiations with Lhassa, although 
probably unaware of the origin of the friendship. 

* Text: Phyag-na-rdove (pron. Chag-na-dorje): ‘Bearing the Dore in hand’: 
Skt. Vajra-pani. 

5 Text: Sgrib-pa-rnam-sel (pron. Dib-pa-nam-sel): ‘Clearer of Obscurations’ : 
Skt. Dipani, also Dipika. 

® Skt.-Tib. hybrid of text. Corresponding Tib., Dri-chha-ma (Skt. Gandha), 
‘She Spraying Perfume’, one of the eight mother goddesses (Matris) of the 
Hindu pantheon. She is depicted holding a shell-vase of perfume (a7). 

7 Skt.-Tib. hybrid of text. Corresponding Tib., Zhal-gas-ma (pron. Shal-za- 
ma), ‘She Holding Sweetmeats’. Although a goddess like Gandhema, Nidhema 
(Skt. Wazvedya) cannot be included in the formal list of eight Matris, the eight 
already having been named in our text. Both goddesses are green in colour, 
like the light of the All-Performing Wisdom, 

PART 1] LIBERATION BY AMOGHA-SIDDHI 117 

bright] that thou wilt scarcely be able to look at it. Fear it 
not. That is the natural power of the wisdom of thine own 
intellect. Abide in the state of great resignation of im- 
partiality. 

Along with it [i.e. the green light of the All-Performing 
Wisdom], a light of dull green colour from the Asura-loka, 
produced from the cause of the feeling of jealousy, coming side 
by side with the Wisdom Rays, will shine upon thee. Medi- 
tate upon it with impartiality——with neither repulsion nor 
attraction. Be not fond of it: if thou art of low mental 
capacity, be not fond of it. 

Thereupon, through the influence of intense jealousy,’ 
thou wilt be terrified at the dazzling radiance of the green 
light and wilt [wish to] flee from it; and thou wilt beget 
a fondness for that dull green light of the Asura-loka. At 
that time fear not the glorious and transparent, radiant and 
dazzling green light, but know it to be Wisdom ; and in that 
state allow thine intellect to rest in resignation. Or else 
[think], ‘It is the hook-rays of the light of grace of the 
Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi, which is the All-Performing 
Wisdom’. Believe [thus] on it. Flee not from it. 

Even though thou shouldst flee from it, it will follow thee 
inseparably [from thyself]. Fear it not. Be not fond of that 
dull green light of the Asura-loka. That is the karmic path 
of acquired intense jealousy, which hath come to receive thee. 
If thou art attracted by it, thou wilt fall into the Asura-loka 
and have to engage in unbearable miseries of quarrelling and 
warfare.? [That is an] interruption to obstruct thy path of 
liberation. Be not attracted by it. Abandon thy propensities. 
Be not weak. Trust in the dazzling green radiance, and 
putting thy whole thought one-pointedly upon the Divine 
Father-Mother, the Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi, pray thus: 

1 Here, as in the previous and following paragraph, the jealousy referred to 
is the karmic propensities of jealousy existing as part of the content of the 
consciousness (or subconsciousness) of the deceased; and, erupting on this 
the Fifth Day of the Bardo existence, they produce their corresponding ‘ astral’ 
hallucinations. 

2 Quarrelling and warfare are the chief passions of a being born as an asura 
in the Asura-loka. 

118 BARDO OF KARQNC IERUSIONS [BOOK 1 

‘Alas! when wandering in the Sangsdra because of the 

power of intense jealousy, 

On the radiant light-path of the All-Performing Wisdom 

May [I] be led by the Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi ; 

May the Divine Mother, the Faithful Tara, be [my] rear- 

guard ; 

May [I] be led safely across the dangerous ambush of 

the Bardo; 

And may [I] be placed in the state of the All-Perfect 

Buddhahood.’ 

By praying thus with intense faith and humility, thou 
wilt merge into the heart of the Divine Father-Mother, the 
Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi, in halo of rainbow light, and attain 
Buddhahood in the Sambhoga-K aya, in the Northern Realm of 
Heaped-up Good Deeds.! 

[THE SIXTH DAY] 

Being thus set face to face at various stages, however weak 
one’s karmic connexions may be, one should have recognized in 
one or the other of them; and where one has recognized in any 
of them it is impossible not to be liberated. Yet, although set 
face to face so very often in that manner, one long habituated 
to strong propensities and lacking in familiarity with, and pure 
affection for, Wisdom, may be led backwards by the power of 
one’s own evil inclinations despite these many introductions. 
The hook-rays of the light of grace may not be able to catch 
hold of one: one may still wander downwards because of one’s 
begetting the feeling of awe and terror of the lights and rays. 

Thereupon all the Divine Fathers-Mothers of the Five 
Orders [of Dhyani Buddhas] with their attendants will come 
to shine upon one simultaneously. At the same time, the 
lights proceeding from the Six Lokas will likewise come to 
shine upon one simultaneously. 

The setting-face-to-face for that is, calling the deceased by 
name, thus: 

O nobly-born, until yesterday each of the Five Orders of 

1 The Block-Print has ‘Realm of Perfected Good Deeds (or ‘‘ Actions”)? ; 
and this is the more correct form. 

3 
i 
| 
4 
‘ 
4 

S 

THE GREAT 

MANDALA OF THE PEACEFUL DEITIE 

7-220 

—22, 21 

XI, TI8 

Described on pages xviti 

THE TIBETAN WHEEL OF THE LAW 

Described on page xxitt 

PART II] THE FIVE DHYANI BUDDHAS 119 

Deities had shone upon thee, one by one; and thou hadst 
been set face to face, but, owing to the influence of thine 
evil propensities, thou wert awed and terrified by them and 
hast remained here till now. 

If thou hadst recognized the radiances of the Five Orders 
of Wisdom to be the emanations from thine own thought- 
forms, ere this thou wouldst have obtained Buddhahood in 
the Sambhoga-K aya, through having been absorbed into the 
halo of rainbow light in one or another of the Five Orders of 
Buddhas. But now look on undistractedly. Now the lights 
of all Five Orders, called the Lights of the Union of Four 
Wisdoms,}! will come to receive thee. Act so as to know them. 

O nobly-born, on this the Sixth Day, the four colours of 
the primal states of the four elements [water, earth, fire, air] 
will shine upon thee simultaneously. At that time, from the 
Central Realm of the Spreading Forth of Seed, the Buddha? 
Vairochana, the Divine Father-Mother, with the attendant 

1 The philosophically descriptive Tibetan terms (which are not contained in 
our text) for these Four Wisdoms are: (1) Snang-Stong (pron. Nang-Tong), 
‘Phenomena and Voidness’ ; (2) Gsal-Stong (pron. Sal-Tong), ‘Radiance and 
Voidness’; (3) Bde-Stong (pron. De-Tong), ‘Bliss and Voidness’; (4) Rig- 
Stong (pron. Rig-Tong), ‘Consciousness and Voidness’. 

They correspond to the four stages of dhyana which arise in the same order. 
They probably also correspond, but in a less exact manner, to the Four 
Wisdoms: the Mirror-like Wisdom, the Wisdom of Equality, the All-Discrimi- 
nating Wisdom, and the All-Performing Wisdom. 

‘Dhyana consists of progressive mental states: analysis (Skt. vzlarka), 
reflection (Skt. wichdra), fondness (Skt. fritz), bliss (Skt. @nanda), and concentra- 
tion (Skt. eka@gvata). In the first stage of dhyana, the devotee asks himself, ‘‘ What 
is this body? Isit lasting; is it the thing tobe saved?” and decides that to cling 
to an impermanent, corruptible bodily form, such as he thereby realizes it to be, 
is not desirable. Similarly, having gained knowledge of the nature of Form, he 
analyses and reflects upon Touch, Feeling, Volition, Cognition, and Desire ; 
and, finding that Mind is the apparent reality, arrives at ordinary concentration. 

“In the second stage of dhydua, reflection only is employed; in other words, 
reflection transcends the lower mental process called analysis. In the third 
stage, reflection gives way to a blissful state of consciousness ; and this bliss, 
being at first apparently a physical sensation, merges into pure ecstasy, in the 
fourth stage. In the fifth stage, the sensation of ecstasy, although always 
present in a suppressed or secondary condition, gives way to complete concen- 
tration.’—Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup. 

2 Heretofore each of the chief deities has been called Bhagavan (‘The 
Victorious’), but, herein, Buddha (‘ The Enlightened’) is the designation. The 
text contains Tib. Sangs-rgyas (pron. Sang-yay) = Skt. Buddha: Sangs = 

120 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book 1 

[deities], will come to shine upon thee. From the Eastern 
Realm of Pre-eminent Happiness, the Buddha Vajra-Sattva, the 
Divine Father-Mother, with the attendant [deities] will come 
to shine upon thee, From the Southern Realm endowed with 
Glory, the Buddha Ratna-Sambhava, the Divine Father-Mother, 
with the attendant [deities] will come to shine upon thee. 
From the Happy Western Realm |! of Heaped-up Lotuses, 
the Buddha Amitabha, the Divine Father-Mother, along with 
the attendant [deities] will come to shine upon thee. From 
the Northern Realm of Perfected Good Deeds, the Buddha 
Amogha-Siddhi, the Divine Father-Mother, along with the 
attendants will come, amidst a halo of rainbow light, to shine 
upon | thee at this very moment. 

O nobly-born, on the outer circle of these five pair of 
Dhyani Buddhas, the [four] Door-Keepers, the Wrathful 
[Ones]: the Victorious One,? the Destroyer of the Lord 
of Death,? the Horse-necked King,t the Urn of Nectar; ° 
with the four female Door-keepers: the Goad-Bearer,® the 
Noose-Bearer,? the Chain-Bearer,2 and the Bell-Bearer ; ® 
‘awakened [from sleep of stupidity]? + sgyas = ‘developed fully [in all 
attributes of perfection (or moral virtues) ]’. 

1 Between this bar and the bar in the sentence following is contained the 
translation of the Tibetan text on the upper folio (35a) of our Frontispiece. 

2 Text: Ruam-par-rgyal-va (pron. Nam-par-gyal-wa): Skt. Vaya: ‘ Vic- 
torious [One]’, the Door-keeper of the East. 

8 Text: Gshin-rje-gshed-po(pron. Shin-je-shed-po): Skt. Yamdntaka: ‘ Destroyer 
of Yama (Death)’, the Door-keeper of the South, a form of Shiva, and the 
wrathful aspect of Avalokiteshvara. He, as a Wrathful Deity, personifies one 
of the ten forms of Anger (Tib. K’vo-bo—pron. T’o-wo: Skt. Krodha). 

4 Text: Rla-mgrin-rgyal-po (pron. Tam din-gyal-po): Skt. Hayagriva: ‘Horse- 
necked King’, the Door-keeper of the West. 

5 Text: Bdud-rtst-hkhyil-va (pron. Di-tst-khyil-wa): Skt. Amrita-Dhara: ‘(He 
who is the] Urn of Nectar’, whose divine function is to transmute all things into 
nectar (in the esoteric sense of Tantric Yoga), amrita meaning ‘nectar’ exoteri- 
cally, and, esoterically, ‘voidness’, He is the Door-keeper of the North. 

6 Text: Chags-kyu-ma (pron. Chak-yu-ma): Skt. Ankusha: ‘She holding the 
Goad’, the shaktt, or female counterpart, of Vijaya. 

7 Text: Zhags-pa-ma (pron. Zhag-pa-ma) : Skt. Pashadhari: ‘She holding 
the Noose’, the shakti of Yamantaka. 

® Text: Lehags-sgrog-ma (pron. Cha-dog-ma): Skt. Vajra-shringkhald: ‘She 
holding the Chain’, the ska&ti of Hayagriva. 

° Text: Dril-bu-ma (pron. Til-bu-ma) : Skt. Kinkint-Dhari: ‘She holding the 
Bell’, the shakti of Amrita-Dhara. 

All the Door-keepers and their shakits possess occult significance in relation 

PART UI] AZANDALA OF PEACEFUL DEITIES 1a1 

along with the Buddha of the Devas, named the One of 
Supreme Power,’ the Buddha of the Asuras, named [He of] 
Strong Texture,’ the Buddha of Mankind, named the Lion 
of the Shakyas, the Buddha of the brute kingdom, named 
the Unshakable Lion, the Buddha of the Pretas, named the 
One of Flaming Mouth, and the Buddha of the Lower World, 
named the King of Truth:%*—[these], the Eight Father- 
Mother Door-keepers and the Six Teachers, the Victorious 
Ones—will come to shine, too. 

The All-Good Father, and the All-Good Mother,‘ the 
Great Ancestors of all the Buddhas: Samanta-Bhadra [and 
Samanta-Bhadra], the Divine Father and the Divine Mother— 
these two, also will come to shine. 

These forty-two perfectly endowed deities, issuing from 
within thy heart, being the product of thine own pure love, 
will come to shine. Know them. 

O nobly-born, these realms are not come from somewhere 
outside [thyself]. They come from within the four divisions 
of thy heart, which, including its centre, make the five direc- 
tions. They issue from within there, and shine upon thee. The 

to the four directions and to the mandala (or conclave of deities) to which they 
belong. As Tantric faith-guarding deities (Tib. Ch’os-skyor : Skt. Dharmapala) 
they rank with Bodhisattvas. They symbolize, too, the four tranquil or peace- 
ful methods employed by Divine Beings for the salvation of sentient creatures 
(of whom mankind are the highest), which are; Compassion, Fondness, Love, 
and Stern Justice. 

1 Text: Dvang-po-rgya-byin (pron. Wang-po-gya-jin): ‘Powerful One of a 
Hundred Sacrifices’: Skt. Shata-Kratu, a name of Indra (‘(One of] Supreme 
Power’). 

2 Text: Thag-bzang-ris (pron. Thag-zang-ree): ‘[He of] Strong Texture’ 
(Skt. Virdchdra): a name referring either to the bodily strength of, or else to the 
coat of mail worn by, this Lord of the Asvva-loka, the world wherein warfare 
is the predominant passion of existence. 

3 Text: Chés-kyt-rgyal-po (pron. Ché-kyi-gyal-po): Skt. Dharma-Raja. 

4 Text: Kiintu-bzang-mo (pron, Kiintu-beang-mo): ‘ All-Good Mother’; Skt. 
Samanta-Bhadraé. The Tantric School holds that every deity, even the Supreme, 
has its shakit, A few deities are, however, commonly depicted skakit-less—for 
example, Mafijushri, or Mafijughosha (see p. 113*); though there may be, as in 
the instance of the Prajid-Paramita (often called the Mother) which this deity 
holds, some symbolic representation of a shakt, This is, apparently, a doctrine 
of universal dualism, In the final analysis, however, all pairs of opposites being 
viewed as having a Single Source—in the Voidness of the Dharma-Kaya—the 
apparent dualism becomes monism. 

3069 R 

122 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [nook 1 

deities, too, are not come from somewhere else: they exist 
from eternity within the faculties of thine own intellect.? 
Know them to be of that nature. 

O nobly-born, the size of all these deities is not large, not 
small, [but] proportionate. [They have] their ornaments, 
their colours, their sitting postures, their thrones, and the 
emblems that each holds. 

These deities are formed into groups of five pairs, each 
group of five being surrounded by a fivefold circle of 
radiances, the male Bodhisattvas partaking of the nature 
of the Divine Fathers, and the female Bodhisattvas par- 
taking of the nature of the Divine Mothers. All these 
divine conclaves will come to shine upon thee in one com- 
plete conclave.2 They are thine own tutelary deities.® 
Know them to be such. 

O nobly-born, from the hearts of the Divine Fathers and 
Mothers of the Five Orders, the rays of light of the Four 
Wisdoms united, extremely clear and fine, like the rays 
of the sun spun into threads, will come and shine upon 
thee and strike against thy heart. 

On that path of radiance there will come to shine glorious 
orbs of light, blue in colour, emitting rays, the Dharma- 
Dhétw Wisdom [itself], each appearing like an inverted 
turquoise cup, surrounded by similar orbs, smaller in size, 
glorious and dazzling, radiant and transparent, each made 
more glorious with five yet smaller [satellite] orbs dotted 
round about with five starry spots of light of the same 
nature, leaving neither the centre nor the borders [of the 
blue light-path] unglorified by the orbs and the smaller 
[satellite] orbs. 

1 According to the esotericism of Northern Buddhism, man is, in the sense 
implied by the mystical philosophies of ancient Egypt and Greece, the micro- 
cosm of the macrocosm, 

2 Text: dkyil-hkhor (pron. kytl-khor): Skt. mandala, i.e. conclave of deities. 

3 The Tutelary Deities, too, in the last analysis, are the visualizations of the 
person believing in them, Zhe Demchok Tantra says that the ‘ Devatas are but 
symbols representing the various things which occur on the Path, such as the 
helpful impulses and the stages attained by their means’; and that ‘should 
doubts arise as to the divinity of these Devatads, one should say ‘The Dakini is 
only the recollection of the body ”’ and remember that the deities constitute the 
Path’ (cf. A. Avalon, Tantitk Texts, London, 1919, vii. 41). 

Pee) LIGHT-PATHS OF THE WISDOMS — 1:23 

From the heart of Vajra-Sattva, the white light-path of 
the Mirror-like Wisdom, white and transparent, glorious 
and dazzling, glorious and terrifying, made more glorious 
with orbs surrounded by smaller orbs of transparent and 
radiant light upon it, each like an inverted mirror, will come 
-to shine. 

From the heart of Ratna-Sambhava, the yellow light-path 
of the Wisdom of Equality, [glorified] with yellow orbs 
[of radiance], each like an inverted gold cup, surrounded 
by smaller orbs, and these with yet smaller orbs, will come 
to shine. 

From the heart of Amitabha, the transparent, bright red 
light-path of the Discriminating Wisdom, upon which are 
orbs, like inverted coral cups, emitting rays of Wisdom, 
extremely bright and dazzling, each glorified with five 
[satellite] orbs of the same nature,—leaving neither the 
centre nor the borders [of the red light-path] unglorified 
with orbs and smaller satellite orbs,—will come to shine. 

These will come to shine against thy heart simultaneously.’ 

O nobly-born, all those are the radiances of thine own 
intellectual faculties come to shine. They have not come from 
any other place. Be not attracted towards them; be not 
weak ; be not terrified ; but abide in the mood of non- thought- 
formation.2. In that state all the forms and radiances will 
merge into thyself, and Buddhahood will be obtained. 

The green light-path of the Wisdom of Perfected Actions 
will not shine upon thee, because the Wisdom-faculty of thine 
intellect hath not been perfectly developed. 

O nobly-born, those are called the Lights of the Four 

1 Each of these mystical radiances symbolizes the particular Bodhic, or 
Wisdom, quality of the Buddha whence it shines. In the Tibetan of our text 
there is here such fervency in the poetical description of the light-paths that the 
translator, in order to render something of the beauty of the original language, 
essayed several renderings, of which the actual rendering is the outcome. 

2 ‘The mood of non- thought-formation’ is attained in samdadhi-yoga. This 
state, regarded as the primordial state of Mind, ts illustrated by the following 
figure: So long as a man afloat on a river passively submits to the current, he 
is carried along smoothly; but if he attempts to grasp an object fixed in the 
water the tranquillity of his motion is broken. Similarly, thought-formation 
arrests the natural flow of the mind. 

124 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Boox 1 

Wisdoms United, [whence proceeds that] which is called 
the Inner Path through Vajra-Sattva.! 

At that time, thou must remember the teachings of the 
setting-face-to-face which thou hast had from thy gurzw. 
If thou hast remembered the purport of the settings-face- 
to-face, thou wilt have recognized all these lights which 
have shone upon thee, as being the reflection of thine own 
inner light, and, having recognized them as intimate friends, 
thou wilt have believed in them and have understood [them 
at] the meeting, as a son understandeth his mother. 

And believing in the unchanging nature of the pure and holy 
Truth, thou wilt have had produced in thee the tranquil-flowing 
Samadhi; and, having merged into the body of the perfectly 
evolved intellect, thou wilt have obtained Buddhahood in the 
Sambhoga-K aya, whence there is no return. 

O nobly-born, along with the radiances of Wisdom, the 
impure illusory lights of the Six Lokas will also come to 
shine. If it be asked, ‘What are they?’ [they are] a dull 
white light from the devas, a dull green light from the asuras, 
a dull yellow light from human beings, a dull blue light from 
the brutes, a dull reddish light from the frezas, and a dull 
smoke-coloured light from Hell.? These six thus will come 
to shine, along with the six radiances of Wisdom; whereupon, 
be not afraid of nor be attracted towards any, but allow thy- 
self to rest in the non-thought condition. 

} In the transcendental state of the Illumination of Buddhahood, on the Inner, 
or Secret, Path, into Vajra-Sattva merge, in at-one-ment, all the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities of the greater mandala described by our text; in all, one- 
hundred and ten,—forty-two in the heart-centre, ten in the throat-centre, and 
fifty-eight in the brain-centre. (Cf. pp. 217-8.) 

2 There are irreconcilable differences between the colours assigned to these 
light-paths in the Block-Print (25b) and in our MS. The Block-Print gives 
them as follows: white, from the devas; red, from the asuras; blue, from 
human beings; green, from the brutes; yellow, from the prefas; smoke- 
coloured from Hell. According to the translator, the colours should correspond 
to the colour of the Buddha of each Joka, thus: deva, white; asuva, green; 
human, yellow; brute, blue; pvefa, red; Hell, smoke-coloured or black. 
Therefore, the Block-Print is wrong in all save the first and last; and the 
MS. is wrong in assigning dull blue to the human and black or smoke-coloured 
to the animal world. On folio 23, the MS. correctly assigns yellow to the 

human world light-path, The necessary corrections have been made in the 
translation herein and in the corresponding passages in folio 46 following. 

panel] LIGHT-PATHS OF THE WISDOMS 125 

If thou art frightened by the pure radiances of Wisdom and 
attracted by the impure lights of the Six Lokas, then thou 
wilt assume a body in any of the Six Lofas and suffer sang- 
saric miseries; and thou wilt never be emancipated from the 
Ocean of Sangsara, wherein thou wilt be whirled round and 
round and made to taste of the sufferings thereof. 

O nobly-born, if thou art one who hath not obtained the 
select words of the guru, thou wilt have fear of the pure 
radiances of Wisdom and of the deities thereof. Being thus 
frightened, thou wilt be attracted towards the impure sangsdaric 
objects. Act not so. Humbly trust in the dazzling pure 
radiances of Wisdom. Frame thy mind to faith, and think, 
‘The compassionate radiances of Wisdom of the Five Orders 
of Buddhas! have come to take hold of me out of compassion ; 
I take refuge in them.’ 

Not yielding to attraction towards the illusory lights of the 
Six Lokas, but devoting thy whole mind one-pointedly towards 
the Divine Fathers and Mothers, the Buddhas of the Five 
Orders, pray thus: 

‘Alas! when wandering in the Saxgsara through the power 
of the five virulent poisons,’ 

On the bright radiance-path of the Four Wisdoms united, 

May [I] be led by the Five Victorious Conquerors, 

May the Five Orders of Divine Mothers be [my] rear- 
guard ; 

May [I] be rescued from the impure light-paths of the Six 
Lokas ; 

And, being saved from the ambuscades of the dread Bardo, 

May [I] be placed within the five pure Divine Realms.’ 

By thus praying, one recognizeth one’s own inner light ; * 

1 Text: Bde-var-gshegs-pa (pron. De-war-sheg-pa): Skt. Sugata: literally mean- 
ing ‘Those who have passed into Happiness (or attained Mirvana)’—i.e. Buddhas, 

2 The five virulent poisons, which, like drugs, enslave and bind mankind to 
the sufferings of existence within the confines of the Six Lokas, are: lust, 
hatred, stupidity, pride or egoism, and jealousy, 

8 Text: vang (‘self’) + sNang (‘light’): ‘self-light’ or ‘inner-light’, i.e. 
thoughts or ideas appearing in the radiance of the consciousness-principle. 
The Bardo state is the after-death dream state following the waking or living- 
On-earth state, as explained in our Introduction (pp. 28 ff.); and the whole 

126 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Boox 1 

and, merging one’s self therein, in at-one-ment, Buddhahood 
is attained: through humble faith, the ordinary devotee cometh 
to know himself, and obtaineth Liberation; even the most 
lowly, by the power of the pure prayer, can close the doors of 
the Six ZLokas, and, in understanding the real meaning of the 
Four Wisdoms united, obtain Buddhahood by the hollow path- 
way through Vajra-Sattva.! 

Thus by being set face to face in that detailed manner, 
those who are destined to be liberated will come to recognize 
[the Truth] ;* thereby many will attain Liberation. 

The worst of the worst, [those] of heavy evil Zarma, having 
not the least predilection for any religion—and some who have 
failed in their vows—through the power of karzzzc illusions, 
not recognizing, although set face to face [with Truth], will 
stray downwards. 

[THE SEVENTH DAY] 

On the Seventh Day, the Knowledge-Holding Deities, from 
the holy paradise realms, come to receive one. Simultaneously, 
the pathway to the brute world, produced by the obscuring 
passion, stupidity, also cometh to receive one.* The setting- 
face-to-face at that time is, calling the deceased by name, thus: 

aim of the Bardo Thédol teaching is to awaken the Dreamer to Reality—to 
a supramundane state of consciousness, to an annihilation of all bonds of 
sangsaric existence, to Perfect Enlightenment, Buddhahood, 

1 Vajra-Sattva, as a symbolic deity, the reflex of Akshobhya, is visualized, in 
Tibetan occult rituals, as being internally vacuous. As such, he represents the 
Void, concerning which there are many treatises with elaborate commentaries, 
essentially esoteric. Through Vajra-Sattva there lies a certain pathway to 
Liberation, he being the embodiment of all the one-hundred and ten deities 
constituting the mandala of the Peaceful and Wrathful Ones (see p. 1241). To 
tread this Path successfully, the Neophyte must be instructed by the Hiecrophant. 

2 This Truth is that there is no reality behind any of the phenomena of the 
Bardo plane, save the illusions stored up in one’s own mind as accretions from 
sangsaric experiences. Recognition of this automatically gives Liberation. 

° As the gross physical atoms of a life-deserted human-plane body gradually 
separate and go to their appropriate places, some as gases, some as fluids, some 
as solids, so on the after-death plane there comes about a gradual dispersion of 
the psychic or mental atoms of the Bardo thought-body, each propensity—— 
directed by karmic affinity—inevitably going to that environment most congenial 
to it. Hence, as our text suggests, the brute-passion stupidity has a natural 
tendency to gravitate to the brute kingdom and become embodied therein as 
a disintegrated part of the mentality of the deceased. (See pp. 44 ff.) 

PART II] KNOWLEDGE-HOLDING DEITIES 549) 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Seventh Day 
the vari-coloured radiance of the purified propensities will come 
to shine. Simultaneously, the Knowledge-Holding Deities,) 
from the holy paradise realms, will come to receive one. 

From the centre of the Circle [or Mandala], enhaloed in 
radiance of rainbow light, the supreme Knowledge-Holding 
[Deity], the Lotus Lord of Dance, the Supreme Knowledge- 
Holder Whe Ripens Karmic Fruits, radiant with all the five 
colours, embraced by the [Divine] Mother, the Red Dékini, 
[he] holding a crescent knife and a skull [filled] with blood,’ 
dancing and making the mudra of fascination,* [with his right 
hand held] aloft, will come to shine. 

To the east of that Circle, the deity called the Earth-Abid- 
ing Knowledge-Holder, white of colour, with radiant smiling 
countenance, embraced by the White Dékini, the [Divine] 
Mother, [he] holding a crescent knife and a skull [filled] with 
blood, dancing and making the maudra of fascination, [with his 
right hand held] aloft, will come to shine. 

To the south of that Circle, the Knowledge-Holding Deity 
called [He] Having Power Over Duration of Life, yellow in 
colour, smiling and radiant, embraced by the Yellow Dékinz, 
the [Divine] Mother, [he] holding a crescent knife and a skull 

1 Text: Rig-hdzin (pron. Rig-ein): ‘possessing (or holding) knowledge’. 
These deities are purely Tantric. (See p. 731.) 

2 The Dakinis (Tib. Mkhah-hgro-ma [or ‘Sky-goer’]: Skt. Da@kint), fairy-like 
goddesses possessing peculiar occult powers for good or for evil, are, also, 
purely Tantric; and, as such, they are invoked in most of the chief rituals of 
Northern Buddhism, (See p. 1223.) 

3 Esoterically, the skull (which is human), and the blood (also human) filling 
it, signify, in one sense, renunciation of human life, the giving up of the 
Sangsara, self-immolation on the cross of the world ; and in the mass-ritual of 
Lamaism there are resemblances between the blood (symbolized by a red fluid) 
in the skull and the wine (as blood) in the chalice of the Christian Communion, 

4 A mudra is a mystic sign made by posturing the hand and fingers or the 
body. Some mudras are used as signs of recognition by members of occult 
fraternities, after the manner of the Masonic hand-clasp. Others, chiefly 
employed by yogis as bodily postures, short-circuit or otherwise change the 
magnetic currents of the body. Placing the tip of one finger against the tip of 
another in mudra controls, likewise, the bodily forces, or life-currents. The 
mudra of fascination is of this last sort, being made (with the right hand) by 
the second finger touching the thumb, the index-finger and the little finger held 
upright, and the third finger folded in the palm of the hand. 

128 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book ! 

[filled] with blood, dancing and making the sudrd of fascina- 
tion, [with his right hand held] aloft, will come to shine. 

To the west of that Circle, the deity called the Knowledge- 
Holding Deity of the Great Symbol,' red of colour, smiling 
and radiant, embraced by the Red Dékini, the [Divine] 
Mother, [he] holding a crescent-knife and a skull [filled] with 
blood, dancing and making the mudré@ of fascination, [with his 
right hand held] aloft, will come to shine. 

To the north of that Circle, the deity called the Self- 
Evolved Knowledge-Holder, green of colour, with a half- 
angry, half-smiling radiant countenance, embraced by the 
Green Dakini, the [Divine] Mother, [he] holding a crescent- 
knife and a skull [filled] with blood, dancing and making the 
mudra of fascination, [with his right hand held] aloft, will 
come to shine. 

In the Outer Circle, round about these Knowledge-Holders, 
innumerable bands of dakinis,—dakinis of the eight places of 
cremation, @akinis of the four classes, da@kinis of the three 
abodes, @akinis of the thirty holy-places and of the twenty- 
four places of pilgrimage,*—heroes, heroines, celestial warriors, 
and faith-protecting deities, male and female, each bedecked 
with the six bone-ornaments, having drums and thigh-bone 
trumpets, skull-timbrels, banners of gigantic human|[-like] 
hides,? human-hide canopies, human-hide bannerettes, fumes 
of human-fat incense, and innumerable [other] kinds of musical 
instruments, filling [with music] the whole world-systems and 
causing them to vibrate, to quake and tremble with sounds so 
mighty as to daze one’s brain, and dancing various measures, 
will come to receive the faithful and punish the unfaithful.+ 

1 See p. 135°. 

? Herein the dakinis are represented like various orders of fairy-like beings, 
some dwelling in one place, some in another. The eight places of cremation 
are the eight known to Hindu mythology ; the three abodes are the heart-centre, 
the throat-centre, and the brain-centre, over which, esoterically speaking, 
certain dakinis (as the personification of the psychic forces resident in each 
centre) preside, just as other ¢akints preside over the holy-places and places of 
pilgrimage, 

8 That is, hides of ra@kshasas, an order of giant demoniacal beings having 
human form and possessed of certain s¢ddhis (i. e. supernormal powers). 

* Tibetan /amas, in chanting their rituals, employ seven (or eight) sorts of 

PART IT] WISDOM RADIANCES 129 

O nobly-born, five-coloured radiances, of the Wisdom of the 
Simultaneously-Born,! which are the purified propensities, 

vibrating and dazzling like coloured threads, flashing, radiant, 

and transparent, glorious and awe-inspiring, will issue from 
the hearts of the five chief Knowledge-Holding Deities and 
strike against thy heart, so bright that the eye cannot bear to 
look upon them. 

At the same time, a dull blue light from the brute world 
will come to shine along with the Radiances of Wisdom. 
Then, through the influence of the illusions of thy propensities, 
thou wilt feel afraid of the radiance of the five colours; and 
[wishing to] flee from it, thou wilt feel attracted towards the 
dull light from the brute-world. Thereupon, be not afraid of 
that brilliant radiance of five colours, nor terrified; but know 
the Wisdom to be thine own. 

Within those radiances, the natural sound of the Truth will 
reverberate like a thousand thunders. The sound will come 
with a rolling reverberation, [amidst which] will be heard, 
‘Slay! Slay!’ and awe-inspiring mantras? Fear not. Flee 
not. Be not terrified. Know them [i.e. these sounds] to be 
[of] the intellectual faculties of thine own [inner] light. 

musical instruments: big drums, cymbals (commonly of brass), conch-shells, 
bells (like the handbells used in the Christian Mass Service), timbrels, small 
clarionets (sounding like Highland bagpipes), big trumpets, and human thigh- 
bone trumpets. Although the combined sounds of these instruments are far 
from being melodious, the /@mas maintain that they psychically produce in the 
devotee an attitude of deep veneration and faith, because they are the counter- 
parts of the natural sounds which one’s own body is heard producing when the 
fingers are put in the ears to shut out external sounds. Stopping the ears thus, 
there are heard a thudding sound, like that of a big drum being beaten; 
a clashing sound, as of cymbals; a soughing sound, as of a wind moving through 
a forest—as when a conch-shell is blown; a ringing as of bells; a sharp tapping 
sound, as when a timbrel is used; a moaning sound, like that of a clarionet ; 
a bass moaning sound, as if made with a big trumpet; and a shriller sound, as 
of a thigh-bone trumpet. 

Not only is this interesting as a theory of Tibetan sacred music, but it gives 
the clue to the esoteric interpretation of the symbolical natural sounds of Truth 
(referred to in the second paragraph following, and elsewhere in our text), 
which are said to be, or to proceed from, the intellectual faculties within the 
human mentality. 

1 That is, the Wisdom which is born simultaneously with the achievement 
of Recognition; the Simultaneously-Born Wisdom, 

2 See Addenda, pp. 220-2. 

3069 tS} 

130 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

Be not attracted towards the dull blue light of the brute- 
world; be not weak. If thou art attracted, thou wilt fall into 
the brute-world, wherein stupidity predominates, and suffer the 
illimitable miseries of slavery and dumbness and stupidness ;* 
and it will be a very long time ere thou canst get out. Be 
not attracted towards it. Put thy faith in the bright, dazzling, 
five-coloured radiance. Direct thy mind one-pointedly towards 
the deities, the Knowledge-Holding Conquerors. Think, one- 
pointedly, thus: ‘These Knowledge-Holding Deities, the 
Heroes, and the Dakinis have come from the holy paradise 
realms to receive me; I supplicate them all: up to this day, 
although the Five Orders of the Buddhas of the Three Times 
have all exerted the rays of their grace and compassion, yet 
have I not been rescued by them. Alas, for a being like me! 
May the Knowledge- Holding Deities not let me go downwards 
further than this, but hold me with the hook of their com- 
passion, and lead me to the holy paradises.’ 

Thinking in that manner, one-pointedly, pray thus: 

‘O ye Knowledge-Holding Deities, pray hearken unto me ; 

Lead me on the Path, out of your great love. 

When [I am] wandering in the Sangsdara, because of intensi- 
fied propensities, 

On the bright light-path of the Simultaneously-born 
Wisdom 

May the bands of Heroes, the Knowledge-Holders, lead me; 

May the bands of the Mothers, the Dakinis, be [my] rear- 
guard ; 

May they save me from the fearful ambuscades of the Bardo, 

And place me in the pure Paradise Realms.’ 

Praying thus, in deep faith and humility, there is no doubt 
that one will be born within the pure Paradise Realms, after 

} Ch py r26:: 

? The deceased, having by now fallen to lower and lower stages of the Bardo, 
looks to the heaven-worlds (which are worlds of embodiment within the 
Sangsara) rather than to Nirvana (which is non-Sangsaric) asa place of refuge. 
Although, theoretically, Mirvdva is ever realizable from any stage of the Bardo, 
practically, for the ordinary devotee, it is not, meritorious karma being 
inadequate ; hence the /dma or reader officiating aims at making the best of the 
situation in which, it is assumed, the deceased inevitably finds himself, 

PART IT] THE WRATHFUL DEITIES 131 

being merged, in rainbow-light, into the heart of the Know- 
ledge-Holding Deities. 

All the pandit classes, too, coming to recognize at this 
stage, obtain liberation ; even those of evil propensities being 
sure to be liberated here. 

Here endeth the part of the Great 7Aédol concerned with 
the setting-face-to-face of the Peaceful [Deities] of the Chinyid 
Bardo and the setting-face-to-face of the Clear Light of the 
Chikhai Bardo. 

att DAWNING OF THE WRATHFUL DEITIES, 
PROM THE EIGHTH TO THE FOURTEENTH 
DAY] 
[INTRODUCTION] 

Now the manner of the dawning of the Wrathful Deities is 
to be shown. 

In the above Bardo of the Peaceful [Dcities] there were 
seven stages of ambuscade. The setting-face-to-face at cach 
stage should have [caused the deceased] to recognize either 
at one or another [stage] and to have been liberated. 

Multitudes will be liberated by that recognition; [and] 
although multitudes obtain liberation in that manner, the 
number of sentient beings being great, evil karma power- 
ful, obscurations dense, propensities of too long standing, 
the Wheel of Ignorance and Illusion becometh neither ex- 
hausted nor accelerated. Although [all be] set face-to-face 
in such detail, there is a vast preponderance of those who 
wander downwards unliberated. 

Therefore, after the cessation [of the dawning] of the Peace- 
ful and the Knowledge-Holding Deities, who come to welcome 
one, the fifty-eight flame-enhaloed, wrathful, blood-drinking 
deities come to dawn, who are only the former Peaceful 
Deities in changed aspect—according to the place [or psychic- 
centre of the Bardo-body of the deceased whence they 
proceed]; nevertheless, they will not resemble them." 

1 Up to this time, the fifty-two Peaceful and Knowledge-Holding Deities, 

emanations from the heart and throat psychic-centres of the Bardo-body of the 
deceased, have dawned. The Wrathful Deities now about to dawn issue from 

2 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book t 

This is the Bardo of the Wrathful Deities; and, they being 
influenced by fear, terror, and awe,! recognition becometh 
more difficult. The intellect, gaining not in independence, 
passcth from one fainting state to a round of fainting states. 
[Yet], if one but recognize a little, it is easier to be liberated 
[at this stage]. Ifit be asked why? [the answer is]: Because 
of the dawning of the radiances—[which produce] fear, terror, 
and awe—the intellect is undistractedly alert in one-pointedness ; 
that is why.? 

If at this stage one do not meet with this kind of teaching, 
one’s hearing [of religious lore]—although it be like an 
ocean [in its vastness]|—is of no avail. There are even dis- 
ciplinc-holding abbots [or dAzkkhus] and doctors in meta- 
physical discourses who err at this stage, and, not recognizing, 
wander into the Sangséara. 

As for the common worldly folk, what need is there to 
mention them! By fleeing, through fear, terror, and awe, they 
fall over the precipices into the unhappy worlds and suffer. 
But the least of the least of the devotees of the mystic 
mantrayana doctrines, as soon as he sees these blood-drinking 
deities, will recognize them to be his tutelary deities, and 
the meeting will be like that of human acquaintances. He 
will trust them ; and becoming merged into them, in at-one- 
ment, will obtain Buddhahood.® 

the brain psychic-centre ; they are the excited, or wrathful, reflex forms of the 
Peaceful Deities (who, when contrasted with their wrathful aspects, include 
the Knowledge-Holding Deities). (See p. 858 and Addenda, pp. 217-9.) 

1 The fear, terror, and awe (or fascination)—on the part of the deceased on 
beholding the deities—arise only in the case of the ordinary devotee, who, as 
the text explains, has not had adequate yogic training, ere death, to enable him 
to recognize the Bardo as such, immediately upon dying, and pass beyond it. 
For the adept in yoga, who can take the Bardo ‘by the forelock’, as the text 
puts it (p. 100), mastering Death, and who knows that all apparitional appear- 
ances are unreal and powerless, both in this world and in all other worlds, 
there is no Bardo to experience; his goal is either an immediate and conscious 
rebirth among men or in one of the paradise realms, or, if he be really ripened— 
which would be an exceedingly rare circumstance —Nivvana, 

2 No sooner does one radiance cease than another dawns; the deceased not 
having a moment of distraction, his intellect becomes concentratedly (i.e. one- 
pointedly) alert. 

8 The blood symbolizes sangsdric existence ; the blood-drinking, the thirsting 
for, the drinking of, and the quenching of the thirst for, sangsdric existence. 

PART | THE BSOTERIC DOCTRINES 133 

By having meditated on the description of these blood- 
drinking deities, while in the human world, and by having 
performed some worship or praise of them; or, at least, 
by having seen their painted likenesses and their images, upon 

witnessing the dawning of the deities at this stage, recogni- 
tion of them will result, and liberation. In this lieth the art. 

Again, at the death of those discipline-holding abbots and 

doctors in metaphysical discourses [who remain uninstructed 
in these Lardo teachings], however assiduously they may 
have devoted themselves to religious practices, and however 
clever they may have been in expounding doctrines while 
in the human world, there will not come any phenomenal 
signs such as rainbow-halo [at the funeral-pyre] nor bone- 
reliques [from the ashes]. This is because when they lived 
the mystic [or esoteric] doctrines were never held within 
their heart, and because they had spoken contemptuously 
of them, and because they were never acquainted [through 
initiation] with the deities of the mystic [or esoteric] doctrines ; 
thus, when these dawn on the Bardo, they do not recognize 
them. Suddenly [seeing] what they had never seen before, 
they view it as inimical; and, an antagonistic feeling being 
engendered, they pass into the miserable states because of 
that. Therefore, if the observers of the disciplines, and the 
metaphysicians, have not in them the practices of the mystic 
for esoteric] doctrines, such signs as the rainbow-halo come 
not, nor are bone-reliques and seed-like bones ever produced 
[from the bones of their funeral-pyre]:1 these are the reasons 
for it. 
For the devotee who—even at this stage—can be made to realize that these 
deities are thus but the karmic personifications of his own propensities, born from 
having lived and drunken life, and who has, in addition, the supreme power to 
face them unwaveringly (as in Bulwer Lytton’s Zanoni the Neophyte to succeed 
must face the ‘ Dweller on the Threshold’), meeting them like old acquaintances, 
and then losing his personality in them, enlightenment as to the true nature of 
sangsaric existence dawns, and, with it, the All-Perfect Illumination called 
Buddhahood. 

1 The belief, prevalent among almost all peoples since immemorial time, that 
unusual phenomena commonly mark the death (as the birth) and funeral of 
a great hero or saint, also prevails among the Tibetans; and the Jamas hold 

that such phenomena have a purely rational explanation, such as our text 
herein suggests. Furthermore, the /dmas maintain that, if a reputed saint be 

134 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

The least of the least of mantrayanic [devotees ],—who may 
seem to be of very unrefined manners, unindustrious, untactful, 
and who may not live in accordance with his vows, and who in 
every way may be inelegant in his habits, and even unable, 
perhaps, to carry the practices of his teachings to a successful 
issue,—let no one feel disrespect for nor doubt him, but pay 
reverence to the esoteric [or mystic] doctrines [which he 
holdeth]. By that, alone, one obtaineth liberation at this 
stage. 

Even though the deeds [of one paying such reverence] may 
not have been very elegant while in the human world, at his 
death there will come at least one kind of sign, such as rain- 
bow-radiance, bone-images, and bone-reliques. This is because 
the esoteric [or mystic] doctrines possess great gift-waves.’ 

[Those of, and] above, the mystic mantrayanic devotees 
of ordinary [psychic development], who have meditated upon 
the visualization and perfection processes and practised the 
essences [or essence mantras],? need not wander down this 
far on the Chényid Bardo. As soon as they cease to breathe, 
they will be led into the pure paradise realms by the Heroes 
and Heroines and the Knowledge-Holders.? As a sign of 

really a saint, among the charred bones from his funeral pyre there will be 
found some shaped into beautiful forms like images, and that small pearl-like 
(or, as the text has it, seed-like) nodules will appear in the ashes of the bones 
cremated. 

1 That is to say, the esoteric doctrines being realizable—because based 
on Truth itself—one who follows or even reverences them is, thereby, auto- 
matically brought into rapport with very definite psychic forces. 

2 That is to say, those devotees who have practised, in a thoroughly scientific 
manner, under a competent guru, the intonation of certain sacred mantras 
called essence mantras. Examples of such mantras are: Om Mani Padme 
Him (‘ Hail to the Jewel in the Lotus !’ or ‘Hail to Him Who is the Jewel in the 
Lotus !’); Om Wagi Short Mam (‘Hail to the Lord of Speech! Mam’); Om 
Vajra Pant Him (‘Hail to the Holder of the Dorje!’): the three essence 
mantras of ‘The Three Protectors’ of Lamaism; the first being the essence 
mantra of the Bodhisattva Chenrazee (Skt. Avalokita), ‘The Seer with keen 
eyes’, The Great Pitier; the second, that of the Bodhisattva Jampalyang (Skt. 
Maiijughosha), ‘The God of Mystic Wisdom’; and the third, that of the 
Bodhisattva Chakdor (Skt. Vajra-Pani), ‘The Wielder of the Thunderbolt’. 

8 Cf. the following passage, from a prayer on behalf of the dying person, in 
The Book of the Craft of Dying, Chap. VI, Comper’s ed. (p. 45): ‘When thy 
soul passcth out of thy body, [may] glorious companics of angels come against 
thee : the victorious host, worthy judges, and senators of the holy apostles meet 

PART II] PATHS OF LIBERATION 135 

this, the sky will be cloudless; they will merge into rainbow 
radiance; there will be sun-showers, sweet scent of incense 
[in the air], music in the skies, radiances; bone-reliques and 
images [from their funeral-pyre]. 

Therefore, to the abbots [or discipline-holders], to the 
doctors, and to those mystics who have failed in their vows, 
and to all the common people, this 7ddol is indispensable.} 
But those who have meditated upon the Great Perfection and 
the Great Symbol? will recognize the Clear Light at the 
moment of death; and, obtaining the Dharma-Kaya, all 
of them will be such as not to need the reading of this 
Thodol. By recognizing the Clear Light at the moment 
of death, they also will recognize the visions of the Peaceful 
and the Wrathful during the Chényid Bardo, and obtain the 
Sambhoga-Kaya; or, recognizing during the Szdpa Bardo, 
obtain the Virmana-K aya; and, taking birth on the higher 
planes, will, in the next rebirth, meet with this Doctrine, 
and then enjoy the continuity of karma.® 

with thee: the fair, white, shining company of holy confessors, with the 
victorious number of glorious martyrs, come about thee: the joyful company of 
holy virgins receive thee: and the worthy fellowship of holy patriarchs open to 
thee the place of rest and joy, and deem thee to be among them that they be 
among, everlastingly.’ 

1 The /émas maintain that, while mere goodness and book knowledge are 
desirable in devotees seeking Liberation, spiritual wisdom coupled with un- 
shakable faith, and the setting aside of all intellectualisms, are indispensable. 
One of the precepts of the great Tibetan yogis, taught to all neophytes, is: 
‘ Difficult indeed is it to obtain Liberation through intellectual knowledge alone ; 
through faith, Liberation is easily obtained.’ 

2 ¢The Great Perfection’ refers to the fundamental doctrine concerning the 
gaining of Perfection or Buddhahood as taught by the School of Guru Padma 
Sambhava. ‘The Great Symbol (Tib. Chhag-chhen: Skt. Maha Mudra)’ refers 
to an ancient Indian system of yoga, related to the same School, but more 
especially practised nowadays by the followers of the semi-reformed Kargyutpa 
sect, founded in the latter half of the eleventh century a.p. by the learned 
Tibetan yog? Marpa, who, having sojourned in India as the disciple of the pandtt 
Atisha and of Naropa, Atisha’s disciple, introduced the Great Symbol into Tibet. 
Milarepa, the most beloved of all Tibetan yog?s, who was Marpa’s successor, 
developed the practice of the Great Symbol and made it the foundation teaching 
of the Sect. (See pp. 78-9.) 

3 If there be recognition of Reality when it first dawns, i.e. if the Dreamer in 
sangsaric existence be awakened into the divine state of the Sambhoga-Kaya 
during the Chényid Bardo, the normal cycle of rebirth is broken; and the 
Awakened One returns voluntarily and fully conscious to the human world as 

136 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book 1 

Therefore, this 7Zcdol is the doctrine by which Buddhahood 
may be attained without meditation ; the doctrine liberating 
by the hearing [of it] alone; the doctrine which leadeth 
beings of great evil Aarvma on the Secret Path; the doctrine 
which produceth differentiation instantaneously [between 
those who are initiated into it and those who are not]: 
being the profound doctrine which conferreth Perfect En- 
lightenment instantaneously. Those sentient beings who have 
been reached by it cannot go to the unhappy states. 

This [doctrine] and the Zahdol [doctrine]', when joined to- 
gether being like unto a mandala of gold inset with turquoise, 
combine them. 

Thus, the indispensable nature of the 7ddol being shown, 
there now cometh the setting-face-to-face with the dawning of 
the Wrathful [Deities] in the Bardo. 

[THE EIGHTH DAY] 

Again, calling the deceased by name, [address him] thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. Not having been able 
to recognize when the Peaceful [Deities] shone upon thee in 
the Lardo above, thou hast come wandering thus far. Now, 
on the Eighth Day, the blood-drinking Wrathful Deities will 
come to shine. Act so as to recognize them without bcing 
distracted. 

a Divine Incarnation, to work for the uplifting of mankind. If recognition be 
delayed till the Sidpa Bardo, and the Mirmana-Kaya be attained, that is but 
a partial awakening, not an unclouded realization of Reality, the Szdpa Bardo 
being a much lower plane than the Chéuyid Bardo; but even then there will be 
won the great boon of spiritually enlightened birth on one of the higher planes— 
deva-loka, asura-loka, or the human-/oka—and, upon being born anew in the 
human world, the devotee will take up, in virtue of acquired propensities gained 
in the previous earth-life, the study of the mystic mantraydua doctrines and 
yogic practices from the point where it was broken off by death—this being the 
continuity of karma, 

* Text: Btags-grol (pron. Tah-dol), a small Tibetan work, consisting wholly 
of mantras, used as an accompaniment to the Bardo Thédol. If the deceased 
dies knowing the Tahdol mantras, they, being powerful talismans, give him safe 
passage through the Bardo and a happy rebirth. Very often a copy of the 
Tahdol (or perhaps merely some of its mantras copied on small strips of paper 
and wound together in a tiny roll) is tied to the corpse and burned or buried 
with it—just as a copy of the Egyptian Book of the Dead was ordinarily interred 
with a mummy. 

cru wae aS ety MANE DOT amt 

THE GREAT MANDALA OF THE KNOWLEDGE-HOLDING 
AND WRATHFUL DEITIES 

Described on pages xix-%%, 127-8, 217-20 

THE DORJE 
THE LAMAIC SCEPTRE 

Described on page xxiii 

PART 11} DAWNING OF HERUKA ORDER 137 

O nobly-born, the Great Glorious Buddha-Heruka,! dark- 
brown of colour; with three heads, six hands, and four 
feet firmly postured; the right [face] being white, the left, 
red, the central, dark-brown; the body emitting flames of 
radiance ; the nine eyes widely opened, in terrifying gaze; the 
eyebrows quivering like lightning; the protruding teeth 
glistening and set over one another; giving vent to sonorous 
utterances of ‘a-la-la’ and ‘ha-ha’, and piercing whistling 
sounds; the hair of a reddish-yellow colour, standing on end, 
and emitting radiance ; the heads adorned with dried [human | 
skulls, and the [symbols of the] sun and moon; black serpents 
and raw [human] heads forming a garland for the body; the 
first of the right hands holding a wheel, the middle one, a 
sword, the last one, a battle-axe; the first of the left hands, 
a bell, the middle one, a [human] scalp, the last one, a plough- 
share; his body embraced by the Mother, Buddha-Kroti- 
shaurima,”? her right hand clinging to his neck and her left 
putting to his mouth a red shell [filled with blood], [making] 
a palatal sound like a crackling [and] a clashing sound, and 
a rumbling sound as loud as thunder; [emanating from the two 
deities] radiant flames of wisdom, blazing from every hair-pore 
fof the body] and each containing a flaming dorje; [the two 
deities together thus], standing with [one] leg bent and [the 
other] straight and tense, on a dais supported by horned 
eagles,® will come forth from within thine own brain and shine 
vividly upon thee. Fear that not. Be not awed. Know it 
to be the embodiment of thine own intellect. As it is thine 
own tutelary deity, be not terrified. Be not afraid, for in 
reality it is the Bhagavan Vairochana, the Father-Mother. 
Simultaneously with the recognition, liberation will be ob- 
tained: if they be recognized, merging [thyself], in at-one- 

1 Text: Dpal-chen-po Bud-dha Heruka (pron. Pal-chen-po Bud-dha Heruka) : 
‘Great Glorious Buddha-Heruka.’ 

2 Text: Bud-dha Kro-ti-shva-ri-ma (pron. Buddha Kroti-shau-ri-ma), i.e. the 
[female] Buddha, the Mighty Wrathful Mother. 

3 These are the Garudas of Indian and Tibetan mythology. They are 
depicted with eagle head, and human-bird body, having two human-like arms, 
two eagle wings, and two eagle feet. Symbolically, they personify energy and 
aspiration. (Cf. p, 116%.) 

3069 T 

138 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [xoox 1 

ment, into the tutelary deity, Buddhahood in the Sambhoga- 
Kaya will be won. 
[THE NINTH DAY] 

But if one flee from them, through awe and terror being 
begotten, then, on the Ninth Day, the blood-drinking [deities] 
of the Vajra Order will come to receive one. Thereupon, the 
setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased by name, thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. [He] of the blood- 
drinking Vajra Order named the Bhagavan Vajra-Heruka, 
dark-blue in colour; with three faces, six hands, and four feet 
firmly postured; in the first right hand [holding] a dorze, in 
the middle [one], a [human] scalp, in the last [one], a battle- 
axe; in the first of the left, a bell, in the middle [one], 
a [human] scalp, in the last [one], a ploughshare ; his body 
embraced by the Mother Vajra-Krotishaurima, her right 
[hand] clinging to his neck, her left offering to his mouth a 
red shell [filled with blood], will issue from the eastern quarter 
of thy brain and come to shine upon thee. Fear it not. Be 
not terrified. Be not awed. Know it to be the embodiment 
of thine own intellect. As it is thine own tutelary deity, be 
not terrified. In reality [they are] the Bhagavan Vajra- 
Sattva, the Father and Mother. Believe inthem. Recogniz- 
ing them, liberation will be obtained at once. By so pro- 
claiming [them], knowing them to be tutelary deities, merging 
[in them] in at-one-ment, Buddhahood will be obtained. 

[THE TENTH DAY] 

Yet, if one do not recognize them, the obscurations of evil 
deeds being too great, and flee from them through terror 
and awe, then, on the Tenth Day, the blood-drinking [deities] 
of the [Precious|-Gem Order will come to receive one. There- 
upon the setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased by name, 
thus : 

O nobly-born, listen. On the Tenth Day, the blood-drink- 
ing [deity] of the [Precious ]-Gem Order named Ratna-Heruka, 
yellow of colour; [having] three faces, six hands, four feet 
firmly postured; the right [face] white, the left, red, the 
central, darkish yellow; enhaloed in flames; in the first of 

PART II] DAWNING OF LOTUS ORDER 139 

the six hands holding a gem, in the middle [one], a trident- 
staff, in the last [one], a baton; in the first of the left [hands], 
a bell, in the middle [one], a [human] scalp, in the last [one], 
a trident-staff; his body embraced by the Mother Ratna- 
Krotishaurima, her right [hand] clinging to his neck, her left 
offering to his mouth a red shell [filled with blood], will issue 
from the southern quarter of thy brain and come to shine 
upon thee. Fear not. Be not terrified. Be not awed. Know 
them to be the embodiment of thine own intellect. [They] 
being thine own tutelary deity, be not terrified. In reality 
[they are] the Father-Mother Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava. 
Believe in them. Recognition [of them] and the obtaining of 
liberation will be simultaneous. 

By so proclaiming [them], knowing them to be tutelary 
deities, merging in them in at-one-ment, Buddhahood will be 
obtained. 

[THE ELEVENTH DAY] 

Yet, though set face-to-face thus, if, through power of evil 
propensities, terror and awe being produced, not recognizing 
them to be tutelary deities, one flee from them, then, on the 
Eleventh Day, the blood-drinking Lotus Order will come to 
receive one. Thereupon the setting-face-to-face is, calling 
the deceased by name, thus: 

O nobly-born, on the Eleventh Day, the blood-drinking 
[deity] of the Lotus Order, called the Bhagavan Padma- 
Heruka, of reddish-black colour; [having] three faces, six 
hands, and four feet firmly postured; the right [face] white, 
the left, blue, the central, darkish red; in the first of the right 
of the six hands holding a lotus, in the middle [one], a trident- 
staff, in the last, a club; in the first of the left [hands], a bell, 
in the middle [one], a [human] scalp filled with blood,! in the 
last, a small drum; his body embraced by the Mother Padma- 
Krotishaurima, her right hand clinging to his neck, her left 
offering to his mouth a red shell [full of blood]; the Father 

1 Lit., ‘ filled with red substance’ ; and likewise for parallel passages following, 
In Jamaic rituals a fluid red pigment is commonly used to represent blood 
(symbolical of renunciation of life, or of sangsdrtc existence), as red wine is 
by Christians in the Eucharist. 

140 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [xBook I 

and Mother in union ; will issue from the western quarter of 
thy brain and come to shine upon thee. Fear that not. Be 
not terrified. Be not awed. Rejoice. Recognize [them] to 
be the product of thine own intellect ; as [they are] thine own 
tutelary deity, be not afraid. In reality they are the Father- 
Mother Bhagavan Amitabha. Believe in them. Concomitantly 
with recognition, liberation will come. Through such acknow- 
ledging, recognizing them to be tutelary deities, in at-one- 
ment thou wilt merge [into them], and obtain Buddhahood. 

[THE TWELFTH DAY] 

Despite such setting-face-to-face, being still led backwards 
by evil propensities, terror and awe arising, it may be that 
one recognize not and flee. Thereupon, on the Twelfth Day, 
the blood-drinking deities of the Karmic Order, accompanied 
by the Kerima, Htamenma, and Wang-chugma,! will come to 
receive one. Not recognizing, terror may be produced. 
Whereupon, the setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased by 
name, thus: 

O nobly-born, on the Twelfth Day, the blood-drinking deity 
of the Karmic Order, named Karma-Heruka, dark green of 
colour ; [having] three faces, six hands, [and] four feet firmly 
postured ; the right [face] white, the left, red, the middle, dark 
green; majestic [of appearance]; in the first of the right of 
the six hands, holding a sword, in the middle [one], a trident- 
staff, in the last, a club; in the first of the left [hands], a bell, 
in the middle [one], a [human] scalp, in the last, a plough- 
share; his body embraced by the Mother Karma-Kroti- 

» These three orders of deities are goddesses, Indian and Tibetan in origin, 
the Kevima having human shape, the Htamenma and the Wang-chugnia, like 
Egyptian deities (more or less totemistic), having human-like bodies and animal 
heads ; and each deity symbolizes some particular karmic impulse or propensity 
appearing as a hallucination in the Bardo consciousness of the deceased. Kerima 
seems to be a hybrid Sanskrit-Tibetan word (from Skt. Keyitr#), which, having 
become current in Tibet—like so many similar words—was incorporated into 
our text unchanged. Htamenma (as pronounced from Tib. Phra-men-ma) is 
probably the name of an order of pre-Buddhistic deities belonging to the ancient 
Bén religion of Tibet. Wang-chugma (as pronounced from Tib. Duang-phyug- 
ma) is the Tibetan rendering of the Sanskrit /shvari, meaning ‘ Mighty 
Goddesses’. 

PART 11] DAWNING OF KARMIC ORDER 141 

shaurima, her right [hand] clinging to his neck, the left 
offering to his mouth a red shell; the Father and Mother in 
union, issuing from the northern quarter of thy brain, will 
come to shine upon thee. Fear that not. Be not terrified. 
Be not awed. Recognize them to be the embodiment of thine 
own intellect. [They] being thine own tutelary deity, be not 
afraid. In reality they are the Father-Mother Bhagavan 
Amogha-Siddhi. Believe; and be humble; and be fond [of 
them]. Concomitantly with recognition, liberation will come. 
Through such acknowledging, recognizing them to be tutelary 
deities, in at-one-ment thou wilt merge [into them], and obtain 
Buddhahood. Through the gurw’s select teaching, one cometh 
to recognize them to be the thought-forms issuing from one’s 
own intellectual faculties. For instance, a person, upon recog- 
nizing a lion-skin [to be a lion-skin], is freed [from fear]; for 
though it be only a stuffed lion-skin, if one do not know it 
to be so actually, fear ariseth, but, upon being told by some 
person that it is a lion-skin only, one is freed from fear. 
Similarly here, too, when the bands of blood-drinking deities, 
huge of proportions, with very thick-set limbs, dawn as big as 
the skies, awe and terror are naturally produced in one. [But] 
as soon as the setting-face-to-face is heard [one] recognizeth 
them to be one’s own tutelary deities and one’s own thought- 
forms. Then, when upon the Mother Clear-Light—which one 
had been accustomed to formerly—a secondary Clear-Light, 
the Offspring Clear-Light, is produced, and the Mother and 
Offspring Clear-Light, coming together like two intimate 
acquaintances, blend inseparably, and [therefrom] a self-eman- 
cipating radiance dawneth upon one, through self-enlighten- 
ment and self-knowledge one is liberated. 

[THE THIRTEENTH DAY] 

If this setting-face-to-face be not obtained, good persons on 
the Path,! too, fall back from here and wander into the Sang- 
sara. Then the Eight Wrathful Ones, the Kerimas, and the 
Htamenmas, having various [animal] heads, issue from within 

1 Or ‘undergoing psychical development’, 

142 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

one’s own brain and come to shine upon one’s self. There- 
upon the setting-face-to-face is, calling the deceased by name, 
thus: 

O nobly-born, listen undistractedly. On the Thirteenth 
Day, from the eastern quarter of thy brain, the Eight Kerimas 
will emanate and come to shine upon thee. Fear that not. 

From the east of thy brain, the White Kerima,’ holding a 
human corpse, as a club, in the right [hand]; in the left, 
holding a [human] scalp filled with blood, will come to shine 
upon thee. Fear not. 

From the south, the Yellow Tseurima,? holding a bow and 
arrow, ready to shoot; from the west, the Red Pramoha,° 
holding a #akara‘-banner ; from the north, the Black Petali,° 
holding a dorje and a scalp filled with blood; from the south- 
east, the Red Pukkase,® holding intestines in the right [hand} 
and [with] the left putting them to her mouth; from the 
south-west, the Dark-Green Ghasmari,’ the left [hand] holding 
a scalp filled with blood, [with] the right stirring it with a 
dorje, and [she then] drinking it with majestic relish ; from the 
north-west, the Yellowish-White Tsandhali,’ tearing asunder 
a head from a corpse, the right [hand] holding a heart, the 
left putting the corpse to the mouth and [she then] eating 
{thereof}; from the north-east, the Dark-Blue Smasha,’ tearing 
asunder a head from a corpse and eating [thereof]: these, 

1 Text: Kerima, corrupted from Skt. Keyu#ri, name of an Indian cemetery 
goddess. 
2 The corrupted Skt. form in text, name of another Indian cemetery goddess. 
8 Tib.-Skt. of text. 
4 Text: chu-srin (pron. chu-sin): ‘water-lion’, or ‘leviathan’ (Skt. Makara), 
mythological monster. 
5, 6,7 Tib.-Skt. of text. 
8 Textual form, from Skt. Chandali, referring, apparently, to the spirit of 
female of low caste (i.e. Chandali), who, like each of the goddesses of our 
text herein, haunts cemeteries or cremation grounds. All such goddesses, here 
appearing, seem intended as symbols—each in its own way—to impress upon 
the deceased, as in an initiatory drama, the nature of sangsdric existence—its 
impermanence, its unsatisfactoriness—and the need to rise above it, conquering 
it through world-renunciation: all the goddesses emanating, as the text 
repeatedly teaches, from the mental content which the percipient’s sangsavic 
existence has bequeathed to him. 

° In place of this Tib.-Skt. form of our text, the Block-Print gives Smashali, 
which is a more correct form. 

~p 

~p 

PART II] THE EIGHT WRATHFUL ONES 143 

the Eight Kerimas of the Abodes [or Eight Directions], also 
come to shine upon thee, surrounding the Five Blood-drinking 
Fathers. Yet be not afraid. 

O nobly-born, from the Circle outside of them, the Eight 
Htamenmas of the [eight] regions [of the brain] will come to 
shine upon thee: from the east, the Dark-Brown Lion-Headed 
One, the hands crossed on the breast, and in the mouth 
holding a corpse, and shaking the mane; from the south, the 
Red Tiger-Headed One, the hands crossed downwards, grinning 
and showing the fangs and looking on with protruding eyes ; 
from the west, the Black Fox-Headed One, the right [hand] 
holding a shaving-knife, the left holding an intestine, and [she] 
eating and licking the blood [therefrom]; from the north, the 
Dark-Blue Wolf-Headed One, the two hands tearing open 
a corpse and looking on with protruding eyes; from the 
south-east, the Yellowish-White Vulture-Headed One, bearing 
a gigantic [human-shaped] corpse on the shoulder and holding 
a skeleton in the hand; from the south-west, the Dark-Red 
Cemetery-Bird-Headed One, carrying a gigantic corpse on the 
shoulder; from the north-west, the Black Crow-Headed One, 
the left [hand] holding a scalp, the right holding a sword, and 
[she] eating heart and lungs; from the north-east, the Dark- 
Blue Owl-Headed One, holding a dovje in the right [hand], 
and holding a sword in the left, and eating. 

These Eight Htamenmas of the [eight] regions, likewise 
surrounding the Blood-Drinking Fathers, and issuing from 
within thy brain, come to shine upon thee. Fear that not. 
Know them to be the thought-forms of thine own intellectual 
faculties. 

[THE FOURTEENTH DAY] 

O nobly-born on the Fourteenth Day, the Four Female 
Door-Keepers, also issuing from within thine own brain, will 
come to shine upon thee. Again recognize. From the east 
[quarter] of thy brain will come to shine the White Tiger- 
Headed Goad-Holding Goddess, bearing a scalp filled with 
blood in her left [hand]; from the south, the Yellow Sow- 
Headed Noose-Holding Goddess; from the west, the Red 

144 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

Lion-Headed Iron-Chain-Holding Goddess; and from the 
north, the Green Serpent-Headed Bell-Holding Goddess. 
Thus issue the Four Female Door-Keepers also from within 
thine own brain and come to shine upon thee; as tutelary 
deities, recognize them. 

O nobly-born, on the outer Circle of these thirty wrathful 
deities, Herukas, the twenty-eight various-headed mighty 
goddesses, bearing various weapons, issuing from within 
thine own brain, will come to shine upon thee. Fear that 
not. Recognize whatever shineth to be the thought-forms 
of thine own intellectual faculties. At this vitally important 
time, recollect the select teachings of the guru. 

O nobly-born, [there will dawn] from the east the Dark- 
Brown Yak-Headed Rakshasa-Goddess, holding a dorje and 
a skull; and the Reddish-Ycllow Serpent-Headed Brahma- 
Goddess, holding a lotus in her hand; and the Greenish- 
Black Leopard-Headed Great-Goddess, holding a trident in 
her hand; and the Blue Monkey-Headed Goddess of In- 
quisitiveness, holding a wheel ; and the Red Snow-Bear-Headed 
Virgin-Goddess, bearing a short spear in the hand; and the 
White Bear-Headed Indra-Goddess, holding an intestine-noose 
in the hand: [these], the Six Yoginis of the East, issuing from 
within the [eastern quarter of thine own]? brain, will come to 
shine upon thee ; | ? fear that not. 

O nobly-born, from the south [will dawn] the Yellow Bat- 
Headed Delight-Goddess, holding a shaving-knife in the hand ; 
and the Red Makara-Headed Peaceful-[ Goddess], holding an 
urn in the hand; andthe Red Scorpion-Headed Amrita-Goddess, 
holding a lotus in the hand ; and the White Kite- Headed Moon- 
Goddess, | holding a dorje in the hand ; and the Dark-Green 
Fox-Headed Baton-Goddess, flourishing a club in the hand ; 
and the Yellowish-Black Tiger-Headed Rakshasi, holding 
a skull [filled with] blood in the hand: [these] the Six 

} This bracketed phrase here (and in the three corresponding passages 
following in this section) is incorporated from the text of the Block-Print, our 
MS. text omitting it. 

* Between this bar and the bar after ‘ Moon-goddess’ in the sentence following 

is contained the translation of the Tibetan text of the lower folio (67%) of our 
Frontispiece. 

PART II] THE MIGHTY GODDESSES 1s 

Yoginis of the South, issuing from within the [southern 
quarter of thine own] brain, will come to shine upon thee; 
fear that not. 

O nobly-born, from the west [will dawn] the Greenish- 
Black Vulture-Headed Eater-Goddess, holding a baton in 
the hand; and the Red Horse-Headed Delight-Goddess, 
holding a huge trunk of a corpse; and the White Eagle- 
Headed Mighty-Goddess, holding a club in the hand; and 
the Yellow Dog-Headed Rakshasi, holding a dorje in the 
hand and a shaving-knife and cutting [with this]; and the 
Red Hoopoo-Headed Desire-Goddess, holding a bow and 
arrow in the hand aimed; and the Green Stag-Headed 
Wealth-Guardian Goddess, holding an urn in the hand: 
[these], the Six Yoginis of the West, issuing from within 
the [western quarter of thine own] brain, will come to shine 
upon thee; fear that not. 

O nobly-born, from the north [will dawn] the Blue Wolf- 
Headed Wind-Goddess, waving a pennant in the hand; and 
the Red Ibex-Headed Woman-Goddess, holding a pointed 
stake in the hand ; and the Black Sow-Headed Sow-Goddess, 
holding a noose of fangs in the hand; and the Red Crow- 
Headed Thunderbolt-Goddess, holding an infant corpse in the 
hand; and the Greenish-Black Elephant-Headed Big-Nosed 
Goddess,! holding in the hand a big corpse and drinking blood 
from a skull; and the Blue Serpent-Headed Water-Goddess, 
holding in the hand a serpent noose: [these], the Six Yoginis 
of the North, issuing from within [the northern quarter of] 
thine own brain, will come to shine upon thee; fear that not. 

O nobly-born, the Four Yoginis of the Door, issuing from 
within the brain, will come to shine upon thee: from the east, 
the Black Cuckoo-Headed Mystic Goddess,? holding an iron 
hook in the hand; from the south, the Yellow Goat-Headed 
Mystic Goddess, holding a noose in the hand ; from the west, 
the Red Lion-Headed Mystic Goddess, holding an iron chain 

1 Here the Block-Print gives only ‘the Big Elephant-Headed Goddess’. 

2 Text: Rdor-je-ma (pron. Dor-je-ma): ‘She {called] the Dorje’, or ‘She 
[called] the Mystic One’; hence ‘ Mystic Goddess’. The Block-Print gives 
‘White Cuckoo-Headed Mystic Goddess’. 

3069 U 

146 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book 1 

in the hand; and from the north, the Greenish-Black Serpent- 
Headed Mystic Goddess: [these], the Four Door-Keeping 
Yoginis, issuing from within the brain, will come to shine 
upon thee. 

Since these Twenty-eight Mighty Goddesses emanate from 
the bodily powers of Ratna-Sambhava, [ He] of the Six Heruka 
Deities, recognize them. 

O nobly-born, the Peaceful Deities emanate from the Void- 
ness of the Dharma-Kdaya;* recognize them. From the 
Radiance of the Dharma-K aya*® emanate the Wrathful Deities ; 
recognize them. 

At this time when the Fifty-eight Blood-Drinking Deities * 
emanating from thine own brain come to shine upon thee, 
if thou knowest them to be the radiances of thine own 
intellect, thou wilt merge, in the state of at-one-ment, into 
the body of the Blood-Drinking Ones there and then, and 
obtain Buddhahood. 

O nobly-born, by not recognizing now, and by fleeing from 
the deities out of fear, again sufferings will come to overpower 
thee. If this be not known, fear being begotten of the Blood- 
Drinking Deitics, [one is] awed and terrified and fainteth away: 
one’s own thought-forms turn into illusory appearances, and 
one wandereth into the Sauzgsara; if one be not awed and 
terrified, one will not wander into the Saugsara. 

Furthermore, the bodies of the largest of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities are equal [in vastness] to the limits of the 
heavens ; the intermediate, as big as Mt. Meru ;° the smallest, 

1 In place of this, the Block-Print gives the following synonymous sentence: 
‘Since these Twenty-eight Mighty Goddesses also are emanations from the 
power of the self-produced Wrathful Deities, recognize them.’ 

2 They are the emanations from the void, or primordial, tranquil, unshaped 
aspect of the Dharma-Kaya state, viewing man asthe microcosm ofthe macrocosm. 

3 They are the emanations from the active radiant aspect of the Dharma- 
Kaya state,—the Clear Light shining in the primordial Voidness,—man, as the 
microcosm of the macrocosm, being inseparable therefrom. 

4 The symbolism of the blood-drinking should here be kept in mind, (See 
p. 132%.) 

5 Mt. Meru (Tib. Ri-vab) is the central mystical mountain of Buddhist 
cosmography. (See pp. 62 ff.) The spinal column, the central support of the 
human bodily structure, is, analogously, symbolized in the Yantras and in 
works on Yoga as the Mt. Meru of man the microcosm. 

PART If] RECOGNITION OF THOUGHT-FORMS 147 

equal to eighteen bodies such as thine own body, set one 
upon another. Be not terrified at that; be not awed. If 
all existing phenomena shining forth as divine shapes and 
radiances be recognized to be the emanations of one’s own 
intellect, Buddhahood will be obtained at that very instant 
of recognition. The saying, ‘Buddhahood will be obtained 
ina moment [of time]’ is that which applieth now. Bearing 
this in mind, one will obtain Buddhahood by merging, in 
at-one-ment, into the Radiances and the Kdyas. 

O nobly-born, whatever fearful and terrifying visions thou 
mayst see, recognize them to be thine own thought-forms. 

O nobly-born, if thou recognize not, and be frightened, 
then all the Peaceful Deities will shine forth in the shape 
of Maha-Kala;1 and all the Wrathful Deities will shine 
[forth] in the form of Dharma-Raja, the Lord of Death ;? 
and thine own thought-forms becoming Illusions [or Maras], 
thou wilt wander into the Saugsdara. 

O nobly-born, if one recognize not one’s own thought- 
forms, however learned one may be in the Scriptures—both 
Sitras and Tantras—although practising religion for a kalpa, 
one obtaineth not Buddhahood. If one recognize one’s own 
thought-forms, by one important art and by one word, Buddha- 
hood is obtained. 

If one’s thought-forms be not recognized as soon as one 
dieth, the shapes of Dharma-Raja, the Lord of Death, will 
shine forth on the Chonyid Bardo. The largest of the bodies 
of Dharma-Raja, the Lord of Death, equalling the heavens [in 
vastness]; the intermediate, Mt. Meru; the smallest, eighteen 
times one’s own body, will come filling the world-systems. 
They will come having thcir upper teeth biting the nether 
lip; their eyes glassy ; their hairs tied up on the top of the 
head ; big-bellied, narrow-waisted ; holding a [karmic] record- 

1 Text : Mgon-po-Nag-po (pron. Gon-po-Nag-po): Skt. Kala-Nath, commonly 
known in India as Maha-Kala. At this stage, all the illusory forms of the 
Peaceful Deities blend and appear as this one deity, 

2 Text: Gshin-rje-hi-chés-kyt-rgyal-po (pron. Shin-jei-ché-kyi-gyal-po): Skt. 
Dharma-Rdaja + Yama-Raja. As described here and in the Second Book of the 
Bardo Thédol (sce p. 167!) this illusory deity commonly assumes many and 
varied forms capable of merging into a single form. 

148 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

board! in the hand; giving utterance from their mouth to 
sounds of ‘Strike! Slay!’, licking [human] brain, drinking 
blood, tearing heads from corpses, tearing out [the] hearts: 
thus will [they] come, filling the worlds. 

O nobly-born, when such thought-forms emanate, be thou 
not afraid, nor terrified; the body which now thou possessest 
being a mental-body of [karmic] propensities, though slain 
and chopped [to bits], cannot die. Because thy body is, 
in reality, one of voidness, thou needest not fear. The 
[bodies of the] Lord of Death, too, are emanations from 
the radiances of thine own intellect ; they are not constituted 
of matter; voidness cannot injure voidness. Beyond the 
emanations of thine own intellectual faculties, externally, 
the Peaceful and the Wrathful Ones, the Blood-Drinking 
Ones, the Various-Headed Ones, the rainbow lights, the 
terrifying forms of the Lord of Death, exist not in reality: 
of this, there is no doubt. Thus, knowing this, all the fear 
and terror is self-dissipated; and, merging in the state of 
at-one-ment, Buddhahood is obtained. 

If thou recognizest in that manner, exerting thy faith 
and affection towards the tutelary deities and believing that 
they have come to receive thee amidst the ambuscades of 
the Bardo, think, ‘[1] take refuge [in them]’; and remember 
the Precious Trinity, exerting towards them [the Trinity] 
fondness and faith. Whosoever thine own tutelary deity may 
be, recollect now ; [and] calling him by name, pray thus: 

' Text: khram-shing (pron. htam-shing), referring to a board—cither a flogging- 
board such as that on which culprits are stretched and flogged in Tibet, or else, 
as here, a board written over with karmic records of the deceased’s life. Khram 
is the name given to a scroll of records or an inventory like a rent-roll; shing 
alone means ‘wood’, Hence we may render the two words as ‘ wood-register’ 
or ‘record-board’. In the great Tibetan Arthurian-like saga called in Tibetan 
Ge-sar-bsgrungs (pron. Ke-sar-doong), or Kesar Saga (of unknown author, but 
probably dating from the eighth or ninth century a.p.), which is so much the 
popular saga of Tibet that many Tibetans know it by heart, a boy, thirteen 
years of age, who, when wishing to join in a battle, is held back by fond relatives, 
brushes them aside, saying, ‘ The place of illness, the place of death, and the 
place of cremation are in accordance with the [karmic] register of the Lords of 
Death’; and here the Tibetan word for register is khram. 

The verification of our rendering of this passage is important because, like 
other passages in the Bardo Thédol, particularly the closely-related passage 
describing the Judgement, coming in the Second Book (pp. 165-9), it has 
striking correspondence with parts of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, 

PART TI] PRAYERS FOR LIBERATION 149 

‘Alas !], wandering am I in the Bardo; run to my rescue ; 
Uphold me by thy grace, O Precious Tutelary!’ 

Calling upon the name of thine own gura, pray thus: 

‘[Alas!] wandering am I in the Bardo; rescue me! 
[O] let not thy grace forsake me!’ 

Have faith in the Blood-Drinking Deities, too, and offer up 
this prayer: 
‘Alas! when [I am] wandering in the Sangsara, through 
force of overpowering illusions, 
On the light-path of the abandonment of fright, fear, and awe, 
May the bands of the Bhagavans, the Peaceful and Wrathful 
Ones, lead [me] ; 
May the bands of the Wrathful Goddesses Rich in Space 
be [my] rear-guard, 
And save me from the fearful ambuscades of the Bardo, 
And place me in the state of the Perfectly-Enlightened 
Buddhas. 
When wandering alone, separated from dear friends, 
When the void forms of one’s own thoughts are shining here, 
May the Buddhas, exerting the force of their grace, 
Cause not to come the fear, awe, and terror in the Bardo. 
When the five bright Wisdom-Lights are shining here, 
May recognition come without dread and without awe ; 
When the divine bodies of the Peaceful and the Wrathful 
are shining here, 
May the assurance of fearlessness be obtained and the 
Bardo be recognized. 
When, by the power of evil karma, misery is being tasted, 
May the tutelary deities dissipate the misery ; 
When the natural sound of Reality is reverberating [like] 
a thousand thunders, 
May they be transmuted into the sounds of the Six 
Syllables." 

1 These are of the essence mantra of Chenrazee (Avalokiteshvara), being Ow- 
Ma-ni-Pad-me-Him (pron. Om-Ma-ni-Pay-mé-Hing). (See p. 1342.) Chenrazee 
being the patron-god, or national tutelary deity, of Tibet, and this being his 
mantra, its repetition, both in the human world and on the Bardo plane, is 
credited with bringing to an end the cycle of rebirth and thereby giving entrance 

150 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS [Book I 

When unprotected, Zarma having to be followed here, 

I beseech the Gracious Compassionate [One]! to protect me ; 

When suffering miseries of karmic propensities here, 

May the blissfulness of the Clear Light dawn ; 

May the Five Elements? not rise up as enemies ; 

But may I behold the realms of the Five Orders of the 
Enlightened Ones.’ 

Thus, in earnest faith and humility, offer up the prayer ; 
whereby all fears will vanish and Buddhahood in the Sambhaga- 
Kaya will undoubtedly be won: important is this. Being un- 
distracted, repeat it in that manner, three or [even] seven times. 

into Mrvdua; hence its importance in the Bardo prayer. In the Tibetan work 
called Mani-bkah-hbum (pron. Ma-nt-kah-boom), i.e. ‘ History of the Mani (or 
Mantra of Chenrazee)’ this #antra is said to be ‘the essence of all happiness, 
prosperity, and knowledge, and the great means of liberation’ ; also it is said 
that the dm closes the door of rebirth among the gods, md, among the asuras 
(or titans), ##, among mankind, pay, among sub-human creatures, mé, among 
pretas (or unhappy ghosts), and hing, among the inhabitants of Hell. Accord- 
ingly, each of the six syllables is given the colour of the light-path corresponding 
to the six states of existence, thus: 6, the white light-path of the deva-loka (or 
world of the gods); md, the green light-path of the asura-loka (or world of the 
titans) ; »?, the yellow light-path of the manaka-loka (or human world); pay, 
the blue light-path of the “#ryaka-loka (or brute world); sé, the red light-path 
of the preta-loka (or ghost world) ; and hing, the smoke-coloured or black light- 
path of the naraka-loka (or Hell world). 

There is an old Tibetan folk-tale concerning a religious devotee who tried to 
incline his irreligious mother to devotional observances and merely succeeded in 
habituating her to the recitation of this santva. Her bad karma predominating 
over her good karma, at death she passed into the Hell-world, whereupon her 
son, being proficient in yoga, went to her rescue; and she, upon seeing him, 
was able, in virtue of having recited the santra on earth, to recite it in Hell, 
and instantaneously she and all who heard it were liberated from Hell: for, as 
the tale at its end teaches, ‘Such is the power of the mantra’. 

The origin of this mantra is traceable through /evion works concerning the 
introduction (during the eighth century) of Tantric Buddhism into Tibet. Dr. 
Waddell is inclined to doubt that these feryton works were hidden away then 
(i.e. in the time of Padma Sambhava) and in later centuries recovered, as the 
tertons (i.e. ‘takers-out’ of such lost books) claim, and suggests that their 
compilation dates from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century—a tentative and 
possibly unsound theory (cf. L. A. Waddell, Lamatsm in Sikhim, in the Gaget- 
teer of Sikhim, ed. by H. H. Risley, Calcutta, 1894, p. 289 ; also our Introduction, 
Pp. 73-7). In any case, the mantra, at least by tradition (which ordinarily 
is as reliable as recorded history), seems to have come into, or been originated 
in, Tibet contemporaneously with the introduction of Buddhism into Tibct. 

1 That is, Chenrazee, 

2 These are: Earth, Air, Water, Fire, and Ether. 

PART IT] WINNING OF LIBERATION 151 

However heavy the evil kava may be and however weak 
the remaining karma may be, it is not possible that libera- 
tion will not be obtained [if one but recognize]. If, never- 
theless, despite everything done in these [stages of the Bardo], 
recognition is still not brought about, then—there being danger 
of one’s wandering further, into the third Bardo, called the 
Sidpa Bardo—the setting-face-to-face for that will be shown 
in detail hereinafter. 

[THE CONCLUSION, SHOWING THE FUNDAMEN- 
TAL IMPORTANCE OF THE BARDO TEACH- 
INGS] 

Whatever the religious practices of any one may have been, 
—whether extensive or limited,—during the moments of death 
various misleading illusions occur; and hence this 7%ddol is 
indispensable. To those who have meditated much, the real 
Truth dawneth as soon as the body and consciousness-principle 
part. The acquiring of experience while living is important : 
they who have [then] recognized [the true nature of | thcir own 
being,! and thus have had some experience, obtain great power 
during the Bardo of the Moments of Death, when the Clear 
Light dawneth. 

Again, the meditation on the deities of the Mystic Path of 
the Mantra, | both in the] visualizing and the perfecting stages, 
while living, will be of great influence when the peaceful and 
wrathful visions dawn on the Chonyid Bardo. Thus the 
training in this Bardo being of particular importance even 
while living,? hold to it, read it, commit it to memory, bear 
it in mind properly, read it regularly thrice; let the words 
and the meanings be very clear; it should be so that the 
words and the meanings will not be forgotten even though 
a hundred executioners were pursuing [thee]. 

1 Lit,, ‘intellect’ or ‘ consciousness-principle’. 

2 Cf. the following passage from The Book of the Craft of Dying, chap. V, 
Comper’s ed. (p. 37): ‘That what man that lusteth, and will gladly die well 
and surely and meritorily, without peri], he must take heed visibly, and study 
and learn diligently this craft of dying, and the dispositions thereof abovesaid, 
while he is in heal [i.e. health}; and not abide till the death entereth in him,’ 

152 BARDO OF KARMIC ILLUSIONS 

It is called the Great Liberation by Hearing, because even 
those who have committed the five boundless sins! are sure 
to be liberated if they hear it by the path of the ear. There- 
fore read it in the midst of vast congregations. Disseminate 
it. Through having heard it once, even though one do not 
comprehend it, it will be remembered in the Intermediate 
State without a word being omitted, for the intellect becometh 
ninefold more lucid [there]. Hence it should be proclaimed 
in the ears of all living persons; it should be read over the 
pillows of all persons who are ill; it should be read at the 
side of all corpses: it should be spread broadcast. 

Those who meet with this [doctrine] are indeed fortunate. 
Save for them who have accumulated much merit and absolved 
many obscurations, difficult is it to meet with it. Even when 
met with, difficult is it to comprehend it. Liberation will be 
won through simply not disbelieving it upon hearing it. There- 
fore treat this [doctrine] very dearly: it is the essence of all 
doctrines.? 

The Setting-Face-to-Face while experiencing Reality in the 
Intermediate State, called ‘The Teaching Which Liberateth 
By Merely Being Heard And That Which Liberateth By 
Merely Being Attached ’,° is finished.‘ 

1 These are: patricide, matricide, setting two religious bodies at war, killing 
a saint, and causing blood to flow from the body of a Tathagata (i.e. a Buddha). 

2 Here the Block-Print has: ‘ This is the Tantra of all doctrines.’ 

8 This refers to the Thadol. (See p. 1924.) 

4 The Block-Print text, corresponding in all essentials, and in almost every 
important detail, word for word with the text of our Manuscript, contains (on 
folio 48b), as the parallel concluding sentence of the Chénytd Bardo, the following, 
which differs from our own; ‘The Teaching for the Intermediate State, the 
Setting-Face-to-Face while experiencing Reality, from The Great Liberation by 
Hearing While in the Interinediate State, Liberating by Merely Being Heard, And 
Liberating By Merely Being Seen, is finished, 

(BOOK If) 
[PIO E Sie A BARDO| 

THIS ts KNOWN AS THE GOOD HEAD-PART 
Om THAT GALEED ‘THE PROFOUND BSSENGE 
OF THE LIBERATION BY HEARING’,—THE RE- 
MINDER, THE CLEAR SETTING-FACE-TO-FACE 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE STATE WHEN SEEKING 
REBIRTH? 

1 Text: SRID-PA BAR-DOHI NGO-SPROD GSAL-HDEBS THOS- 
GROL ZHES-BYA-VA ZAB-PAHI NYING-KHU ZHES-BYA-VAHI DVU- 
PHYOGS LEGS (pronounced: SID-PA BAR-DOI NGO-TOD SAL-DEB 
THO-DOL SHAY-CHA-WA ZAB-PAI NYING-KHU SHAY-CHA-WAI 
U-CHO LAY). 

In the Block-Print, the Bardo Thédol being divided into two distinctly 
separate books—-whereas in our MS. Book II is an unbroken continuation of 
Book I—the first four folios of its second book contain—unlike our MS.—a 
summary of the introductory parts of the first book; and the title of Book II 
of the Block-Print is as follows: Bar-do Thés-grol Chen-mo Las Srid-pa Bar- 
dohit Ngo-Spréd Bzhugs-so (pronounced: Bar-do Thé-dol Chen-mo Lay Sid-pa 
Bar-doi Ngo-Téd Zhu-so), which means, ‘Herein Lieth the Setting-Face-to- 
Face in the Intermediate State of [or when seeking] Worldly Existence (i. e. 
Rebirth), from “The Great Liberation by Hearing on the After-Death Plane’’’. 

3069 x 

‘The essence of all things is one and the same, perfectly calm and tranquil, 
and shows no sign of ‘‘becoming” ; ignorance, however, is in its blindness and 
delusion oblivious of Enlightenment, and, on that account, cannot recognize 
truthfully all those conditions, differences, and activities which characterize the 

phenomena of the Universe.’—Ashvaghosha. Zhe Awakening of Faith 
(Suzuki’s Translation). 

INTRODUCTORY SECTIONS 155 

[THE OBEISANCES] 

To the assembled Deities, to the Tutelaries, to the Gurus, 

Humbly is obeisance paid: 

May Liberation in the Intermediate State be vouchsafed by 
nem 

[INTRODUCTORY VERSES] 

Above, in the Great Bardo-Thodol, 
The Bardo called Chonyid was taught ; 
And now, of the Bardo called Sidpa, 
The vivid reminder is brought. 

(PAs ST} 

[THE AFTER-DEATH WORLD) 

[Introductory Instructions to the Officiant]: Although, 
herctofore, while in the Chédnyid Bardo, many vivid re- 
mindings have been given,—setting aside those who have 
had great familiarity with the real Truth and those who 
have good karma,—for them of evil karma who have had 
no familiarity, and for them of evil karma who because 
of the influence thereof become stricken with fear and terror, 
recognition is difficult. These go down to the Fourtecnth 
Day; and, to reimpress them vividly, that which follows is 
to be read. 

Wipes k DO BODY: lTseBittieAND Irs 
SUPEKRNORMAL BPACULTINS| 

Worship having been offered to the Trinity, and the prayer 
invoking the aid of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas having been 
recited, then, calling the deceased by name, three or seven 
times, speak thus: 

O nobly-born, listen thou well, and bear at heart that birth 

1 Lit., ‘ Act so as to liberate in the Intermediate State ’—a direct supplication 

to the Deities, Tutelaries, and Gurus, rendered by us in the third person to fit 
the context better. 

156 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book II 

in the Hell-world, in the Deva-world, and in this Bardo-body 
is of the kind called supernormal birth.! 

Indeed, when thou wert experiencing the radiances of the 
Peaceful and the Wrathful, in the Chényid Bardo, being unable 
to recognize, thou didst faint away, through fear, about three? 
and one-half days [after thy decease]; and, then, when thou 
wert recovered from the swoon, thy Knower must have risen 
up in its primordial condition and a radiant body, resembling 
the former body, must have sprung forth °—as the Zanira says, 

‘Having a body [seemingly] fleshly [resembling] the former 
and that to be produced, 

Endowed with all sense-faculties and power of unimpeded 
motion, 

Possessing karmic miraculous powers, 

Visible to pure celestial eyes [of Bardo beings] of like 
nature.’ 

Such, then, is the teaching. 

That [radiant body ]|—thus referred to as [resembling] ‘the 
former and that to be produced’ (meaning that one will have 
a body just like the body of flesh and blood, the former human, 
propensity body)—will also be endowed with certain signs and 
beauties of perfection such as beings of high destiny possess. 

This body, [born] of desire, is a thought-form hallucination 
in the Intermediate State, and it is called desire-body. 

At that time—if thou art to be born as a deva—visions 
of the Deva-world will appear to thee; similarly—wherever 
thou art to be born—if as an asura, or a human being, or 

1 Text: rdztis-skyes (pron, 2i%-kye), meaning ‘to be born in disguise ’—rdziis = 
‘to disguise’ + skyes = ‘to be born’—or ‘to be born in a supernormal manner’, 
i.e. ‘supernormal birth’. As the text will proceed to explain, the birth-process 
in the after-death states is quite unlike that known on earth. 

2 In error, probably in transcribing, the text here has ‘ four’ instead o1 
‘three. 

5 This springing forth, or birth of the Bardo-body, about three and one-half 
days after death, i.e. upon the expiration of the three and one-half (or four) 
days (comparable to the pre-natal period, normally passed in sleep, or dream, 
or unconsciousness, on the human-plane), mentioned on pages 93 and 105, is 
said to occur instantaneously. ‘Like a trout leaping forth from water’ is the 
simile used by Tibetan gurus to explain it ; it is the actual process of being born 
in the Intermediate State, paralleling birth in our world. 

PART I] VISIONS OF BIRTHELRACE 157 

a brute,’ or a preta, or a being in Hell, a vision of the place 
will appear to thee. 

Accordingly, the word ‘former’ [in the quotation] implieth 
that prior to the three and one-half days thou wilt have been 
thinking thou hadst the same sort of a body as the former 
body of flesh and blood, possessed by thee in thy former 
existence because of habitual propensities;? and the word 
‘produced’ is so used because, afterwards, the vision of 
thy future place of birth will appear to thee. Hence, the 
expression as a whole, ‘former and that to be produced’, 
referreth to these |i.e. the fleshly body just discarded and 
the fleshly body to be assumed at rebirth]. 

At that time, follow not the visions which appear to thee. 
Be not attracted; be not weak: if, through weakness, thou 
be fond of them, thou wilt have to wander amidst the Six 
Lokas and suffer pain. 

Up to the other day thou wert unable to recognize the 
Choinyid Bardo, and hast had to wander down this far. 
Now, if thou art to hold fast to the real Truth, thou must 
allow thy mind to rest undistractedly in the nothing-to-do, 
nothing-to-hold condition of the unobscured, primordial, bright, 
void state of thine intellect, to which thou hast been introduced 
by thy guru® [Thereby] thou wilt obtain Liberation without 
having to enter the door of the womb. But if thou art unable 
to know thyself, then, whosoever may be thy tutelary deity 
and thy gurz, meditate on them, in a state of intense fendness 

1 That is to say, esoterically, a human brute-like being (cf. pp. 126, 129; 
and 39-61). 

2 That is to say, the habitual (or kaymic) predilection for sangsdric existence 
arising from the thirst for life, from the wish to be born, is the sole cause of 
one’s possessing a body, human or any other. The Goal which the devotee 
must gain is ‘the Unbecome, the Unborn, the Unmade, the Unformed ’— Mirvana. 

3 It is herein assumed that the deceased has had, when in the human world, 
some elementary teachings, at least, concerning mental concentration, or control 
of the thinking processes, sufficient to have realized the state of non-thought 
formation described as that of ‘the nothing-to-do, nothing-to-hold condition’ of 
the unmodified, primordial mind, which is the state of Yoga defined by Patanjali 
(in his Yoga Aphorisnis, i. 2) as ‘the suppression of the transformations of the 
thinking principle’, Another rendering of the same passage is, ‘ Yoga is the 
restraint of mental modifications’ (Rama Prasad, Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras in The 
Sacred Books of the Hindus, Allahabad, 1912, iv. 5). 

158 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book II 

and humble trust, as overshadowing the crown of thy head. 
This is of great importance. Be not distracted. 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Thus speak, and, if recogni- 
tion result from that, Liberation will be obtained, without 
need of the wandering in the Six Lokas. If, however, through 
influence of bad arma, recognition is made difficult, thereupon 
say as follows: 

O nobly-born, again listen. ‘Endowed with all sense- 
faculties and power of unimpeded motion’ implicth [that 
although] thou mayst have been, when living, blind of the 
cye, or deaf, or lame, yet on this After-Death Plane thine 
eyes will see forms, and thine ears will hear sounds, and all 
other sense-organs of thine will be unimpaired and very keen 
and complete. Wherefore the Bardo-body hath been spoken 
of as ‘endowed with all sense-faculties’, That [condition of 
existence, in which thou thyself now art] is an indication that 
thou art deceased and wandering in the bardo. Act so as to 
know this. Remember the teachings ; remember the teachings. 

O nobly-born, ‘unimpeded motion’ implieth that thy present 
body being a desire-body—thine intellect having been separated 
from its seat 2—is not a body of gross matter, so that now thou 
hast the power to go right through any rock-masses, hills, 
boulders, carth, houses, and Mt. Mcru itself without being im- 
peded.’ Ixcepting Budh-Gaya and the mother’s womb,* even 

1 Or ‘directly above’ ; or lit., ‘as being upon the crown of thy head’. The 
significance herein is occult: the Brahmanic Aperture, through which the 
consciousness-principle normally departs from the human body, either tem- 
porarily in yogic trance or permanently at death, is upon the crown of the head ; 
and if the visualization be centred directly over that aperture very definite 
psychic or spiritual benefit accrues to the visualizer. (Cf. p. 92!.) 

2 The ‘seat’ is the human body which has been left behind. 

8 This power, supernormal in the human world, is normal in the fourth- 
dimensional after-death state. In the human world, such powers, innate in all 
persons, can be developed and exercised through proficiency in yoga. The 
Buddha describes some of them thus: ‘In this case suppose that a being 
enjoyeth the possession, in various ways, of mystic power: from being one, he 
becometh multiform; from being multiform, he becometh one ; from being visible, 
he becometh invisible; he passeth without hindrance to the further side of 
a wall or battlement, or a mountain, as if through air; he walketh on water 
without dividing it, as if on solid ground; he travelleth cross-legged through 
the sky, like the birds on the wing’—(Brahmana Vagga, Anguttara Nikaya). 

* Unless previously endowed with a very high degree of spiritual enlighten- 

PART T] MIRACULOUS POWERS 159 

the King of Mountains, Mt. Meru itself, can be passed through 
by thee, straight forwards and backwards unimpededly. That, 
too, is an indication that thou art wandering in the Szdpa 
Bardo. Remember thy guru’s teachings, and pray to the 
Compassionate Lord. 

O nobly-born, thou art actually endowed with the power 
of miraculous action,’ which is not, however, the fruit of any 
samadhi, but a power come to thee naturally; and, there- 
fore, it is of the nature of karmic power.2 Thou art able 
in a moment to traverse the four continents round about 
Mt. Meru.? Or thou canst instantaneously arrive in whatever 
place thou wishest; thou hast the power of reaching there 
within the time which a man taketh to bend, or to stretch 
forth his hand. These various powers of illusion and of 
shape-shifting desire not, desire not.* 

None is there [of such powers] which thou mayst desire 
which thou canst not exhibit. The ability to exercise them 
unimpededly existeth in thee now. Know this, and pray to 
the guru. 

O nobly-born, ‘ Visible to pure celestial eyes of like nature’ 

ment, the deceased cannot consciously go to these two places at will; for from 
Budh-Gaya (as a great psychic-centre) and from the mother’s womb (as being 
the destined path to rebirth) radiate such psychically-blinding radiances that 
the ordinary mentality would be overcome with fear in the same manner as 
when in the Bardo various radiances dawn, and so would avoid them. (Cf, 
stanza 6, ‘The Path of Good Wishes Which Protecteth from Fear in the 
Bardo’, p. 206.) 

1 Text: rdeu-hphrul (pron. eu-til); rdeu meaning ‘power to change one’s 
shape’; and Apfhrul meaning ‘power to change one’s size and number’, by 
appearing or disappearing at will, as one or as many, large or small, - If 
developed on the earth-plane, through yogic practices, such miraculous power 
becomes a permanent endowment, and can be employed in the body or out of 
the body (as when in the Bardo), 

2 The text implies that the deceased is possessed of the miraculous power as 
a result of his being—through the workings of karma—in the Intermediate 
State, wherein such power is natural, and not because of merit acquired through 
the practice of yoga when in the human body. 

3 See pp. 62-5, concerning Cosmography. 

4 The most advanced of the /amas teach the disciple not to strive after psychic 
powers of this nature for their own sake ; for until the disciple is morally fit to use 
them wisely they become a serious impediment to his higher spiritual develop- 
ment: not until the lower or passional nature of man is completely mastered is 
he safe in using them. 

160 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

implieth that those [beings] of like nature, being those of 
similar constitution [or level of knowledge] in the Inter- 
mediate State, will individually see each other.1 For example, 
those beings who are destined to be born amongst devas will 
see each other [and so on]. Dote not on them [seen by 
thee], but meditate upon the Compassionate One. 

‘Visible to pure celestial eyes’ [also] implieth that the 
devas, being born [pure] in virtue of merit, are visible to 
the pure celestial eyes of those who practise dhyana. These 
will not see them at all times: when mentally concentrated 
[upon them] they see [them], when not, they see [them] not. 
Sometimes, even when practising dhyana, they are liable to 
become distracted [and not see them ].? 

[CHARACTERISTICS OF EXISTENCE IN THE 
INTERMEDIATE STATE] 

O nobly-born, the possessor of that sort of body will see 
places [familiarly known on the earth-plane] and relatives 
[there] as one seeth another in dreams. 

Thou seest thy relatives and connexions and speakest to 
them, but receivest no reply. Then, seeing them and thy 
family weeping, thou thinkest, ‘I am dead! What shall 
I do?’ and feelest great misery, just like a fish cast out 

1 In addition to the normal human eyes with their limited vision, Jamas say 
that there are five sorts of eyes: (1) Eyes of Instinct (or Eyes of the Flesh), 
like those of birds and beasts of prey, which, in most cases, possess a greater 
range of vision than human eyes; (2) Celestial Eyes, like the eyes of the devas, 
capable of seeing the human world as well as their own, and the past and 
future births of beings in both worlds throughout many lifetimes; (3) Eyes of 
Truth, like the eyes of Bodhisattvas and Arhants, capable of seeing throughout 
hundreds of world-periods (or £al/pas) backwards and in the future; (4) Divine 
Eyes, of the most highly advanced Bodhisattvas, capable of seeing throughout 
millions of world-periods that which has been and that which will be; and 
(5) Eyes of Wisdom of the Buddhas, capable of seeing, in like manner, through- 
out eternity. 

2 Ordinarily it is only when clairvoyant vision is induced by dhyana, or exists 
naturally in certain specially gifted clairvoyants, and directed to the deva-world, 
that the devas are seen; sometimes, however, the devas appear unexpectedly. 
The T7i-Pitaka, like the canonical literature of Northern Buddhism, is replete 
with visions and unexpected visitations of devas, as Christian and Moslem 
sacred literature is replete with lore concerning angels. 

PART T] THE WIND OF KARMA 161 

{of water] on red-hot embers. Such misery thou wilt be 
experiencing at present. But feeling miserable will avail 
thee nothing now. If thou hast a divine guruz,) pray to him. 
Pray to the Tutelary Deity, the Compassionate One. Even 
though thou feelest attachment for thy relatives and con- 
nexions, it will do thee no good. So be not attached. 
Pray to the Compassionate Lord; thou shalt have nought 
of sorrow, or of terror, or of awe. 

© nobly-born, when thou art driven [hither and thither] 
by the ever-moving wind of karma, thine intellect, having 
no object upon which to rest, will be like a feather tossed 
about by the wind, riding on the horse of breath.2 Cease- 
lessly and involuntarily wilt thou be wandcring about. To 
all those who are weeping [thou wilt say], ‘ Here Iam; weep 
not. But they not hearing thee, thou wilt think, ‘I am 
dead!’ And again, at that time, thou wilt be feeling very 
miserable. Be not miserable in that way. 

There will be a grey twilight-like light, both by night 
and by day, and at all times.’ In that kind of Intermediate 
State thou wilt be either for one, two, three, four, five, six, 
or seven weeks, until the forty-ninth day.* It hath been said 
that ordinarily the miseries of the Szdpa Pardo are experienced 
for about twenty-two days; but, because of the determining 
influence of Zarma, a fixed period is not assured. 

O nobly-born, at about that time, the fierce wind of karma, 
terrific and hard to endure, will drive thee [onwards], from 
behind, in dreadful gusts. Fear it not. That is thine own 

1 This refers to a superhuman guru of the Divyaugha Order. (See Addenda, 
p- 222.) 

2 Like the restless wind, karma is ever in motion, and the intellect, when 
without the support of the human body, is its plaything. 

2 Yowis explain this by saying that in the Bardo-budy, which is a mind-born 
desire-body, the nervous system of the earth-plane body being lacking, the 
light of the sun and moon and stars is not visible to the deceased. Only the 
natural light of nature ‘referred to by medieval alchemists and mystics as the 
‘astral light’, is to be seen in the after-death state; and this ‘astral light’ is 
said to be universally diffused throughout the ether, like an earth twilight, yet 
quite bright enough for the eyes of the ethereally constituted beings in the 
Bardo. (Cf. p. 924.) 

* See our Introduction, pp. 6~7. 

2069 Y 

162 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK Il 

illusion. Thick awesome darkness will appear in front of 
thee continually, from the midst of which there will come 
such terror-producing utterances as ‘Strike! Slay!’ and 
similar threats.! Fear these not. 

In other cases, of persons of much evil karma, karmically- 
produced flesh-eating rakshasas [or demons] bearing various 
weapons will utter, ‘Strike! Slay!’ and so on, making 
a frightful tumult. They will come upon one as if com- 
peting amongst themselves as to which [of them] should 
get hold of one. Apparitional illusions, too, of being pursued 
by various terrible beasts of prey will dawn. Snow, rain, 
darkness, fierce blasts [of wind], and hallucinations of being 
pursued by many people likewise will come; [and] sounds as 
of mountains crumbling down, and of angry overflowing seas, 
and of the roaring of fire, and of fierce winds springing up.” 

When these sounds come one, being terrified by them, 
will flee before them in every direction, not caring whither 
one flecth. But the way will be obstructed by three awful 
precipices—white, and black, and red. They will be terror- 
inspiring and deep, and one will feel as if one were about to 
fall down them. O nobly-born, they are not really preci- 
pices; they are Anger, Lust, and Stupidity.* 

1 The dweller in the Bardo, because of the karmic effects of selfishness when 
living in the human world, is obsessed with the belief that all other Bardo 
beings are at enmity with him; hence he has these frightful hallucinations, as in 
anightmare. (Cf. p. 148.) 

2 In The Six Doctrines, a treatise on the practical application of various yogas, 
which we have translated out of the original Tibetan, there is a parallel passage 
which amplifies this, as follows: ‘If one findeth not the Path during the Second 
Bardo (i.e. during the Chényid Bardo), then four sounds called ‘‘awe-inspiring 
sounds”? [are heard]: from the vital-force of the earth-element, a sound like the 
crumbling down of a mountain; from the vital-force of the water-element, 
a sound like the breaking of [storm-tossed| ocean-waves ; from the vital-force of 
the fire-element, a sound as of a jungle afire; from the vital-force of the air- 
element, a sound like a thousand thunders reverberating simultaneously.’ 
Herein are described the psychic resultants of the disintegrating process called 
death as affecting the four grosser elements composing the human body 
aggregate ; the ether-element is not named, because in that element alone— 
1,e. in the ethereal, or Bardo-body—the consciousness-principle continues to 
exist. (Cf. page 933.) 

3 The precipices are karmic illusions, symbolical of the three evil passions , 
and the falling down them symbolizes the entrance into a womb prior to rebirth. 
(See page 125%.) 

Para il SIDPA BARDO EXPERIENCES 163 

Know at that time that it is the Sidpa Bardo [in which 
thou art]. Invoking, by name, the Compassionate One, pray 
earnestly, thus: ‘O Compassionate Lord, and my Guru, and 
the Precious Trinity, suffer it not that I (so-and-so by name) 
fall into the unhappy worlds.’ Act so as to forget this not. 

Others who have accumulated merit, and devoted them- 
selves sincerely to religion, will experience various delightful 
pleasures and happiness and ease in full measure. But that 
class of neutral beings who have neither earned merit nor 
created bad karma will experience neither pleasure nor pain, 
but a sort of colourless stupidity of indifference. O nobly- 
born, whatever cometh in that manner—whatever delightful 
pleasures thou mayst experience—be not attracted by them ; 
dote not {on them]: think, ‘May the Gurz and the Trinity 
be worshipped [with these merit-given delights]’. Abandon 
all dotings and hankerings, 

Even though thou dost not experience pleasure, or pain, 
but only indifference, keep thine intellect in the undistracted 
state of the [meditation upon the] Great Symbol, without 
thinking that thou art meditating.’ This is of vast im- 
portance. 

O nobly-born, at that time, at bridge-heads, in temples, 
by stiépas of eight kinds,? thou wilt rest a little while, but 
thou wilt not be able to remain there very long, for thine 

1 Text: bsgom-mced-yengs-med (pron. yom-med-yeng-med) = ‘non-meditation + 
non-distraction’; referring to a state of mental concentration in which no 
thought of meditation itself is allowed to intrude. This is the state of Samadhi. 
If one thinks one is meditating, the thought alone inhibits the meditation; 
hence the warning to the deceased, 

2 This refers to the eight purposes for which a sf#pa (or pagoda) is built. 
Two such instances may be cited in elucidation: (1) rnam-rgyal-mchod-rten 
(pron. vam-gyal-chéd-ten) : mchod-rten (or chorten = stupa) is here translatable as 
‘object of worship’, and rnam-rgyal as ‘victory’; hence this sort of pagoda is 
one for marking a victory, i.e. a monument ; (2) myang-hdas-mchod-rien (pron. 
nyang-day-chéd-ten) refers to a stupa used as a monument for marking the spot 
where a saint or sage died, or the place of burial of the urn containing such 
a one’s ashes. Other pagodas are purely symbolical structures erected—as 
Christian crosses are—as objects of worship or veneration. In Ceylon many 
stiipas are erected solely to enshrine sacred books or reliques. The great stapas 
of North -west India, near Peshawar and at Taxila, lately opened, contained 

bone-reliques and other objects. Two of them contained authentic bits of the 
bones of the Buddha. 

164 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book I! 

intellect hath been separated from thine [earth-plane] body." 
Because of this inability to loiter, thou oft-times wilt feel per- 
turbed and vexed and panic-stricken. At times, thy Knower 
will be dim; at times, fleeting and incoherent. Thereupon this 
thought will occur to thee, ‘Alas! I am dead! What shall 
I do?’ and because of such thought the Knower will become 
saddened and the heart chilled, and thou wilt experience 
infinite misery of sorrow.? Since thou canst not rest in 
any one place, and feel impelled to go on, think not of 
various things, but allow the intellect to abide in its own 
[unmodified] state. 

As to food, only that which hath been dedicated to thee 
can be partaken of by thee, and no other food.? As to 
friends at this time, there will be no certainty.‘ 

These are the indications of the wandering about on the 
Sidpa Bardo of the mental-body. At the time, happiness 
and misery will depend upon karma. 

Thou wilt see thine own home, the attendants, relatives, 
and the corpse, and think, ‘Now I am dead! What shall 
I do?’ and being oppressed with intense sorrow, the thought 

1 Like a person travelling alone at night along a highway, having his attention 
arrested by prominent landmarks, great isolated trees, houses, bridge-heads, 
temples, sftpas, and so on, the dead, in their own way, have similar experiences 
when earth-wandering. They are attracted, by karmic propensities, to familiar 
haunts in the human world, but being possessed of a mental or desire body 
cannot remain long at any one place. As our text explains, they are driven 
hither and thither by the winds of karmic desires—like a feather before a gale. 

2 It should be remembered here that all the terrifying phenomena and the 
unhappiness are entirely karmic. Had the deceased been developed spiritually, 
his Bardo existence would have been peaceful and happy from the first, and he 
would not have wandered down so far as this. The Bardo Thédol is concerned 
chiefly with the normal individual, and not with highly developed human beings 
whom death sets free into Reality. 

5 Like fairies and spirits of the dead according to Celtic belief, or the daemons 
of ancient Greek belief, the dwellers in the Bardo are said to live on invisible 
ethereal essences, which they extract either from food offered to them on the 
human plane or else from the general store-house of nature. In Zhe Six 
Doctrines, already referred to above (p. 1627), there is this reference to the 
inhabitants of the Bardo: ‘They live on odours [or the spiritual essences of 
material things].’ 

4 Friends may or may not exist in the Intermediate State, as on earth; but 
even if they do, they are powerless to counteract any bad karma of the deceased. 
He must follow his own path, as marked out by harma., 

PART I] ToS DESIRE FOR A BODY 165 

will occur to thee, ‘O what would I not give to possess 
a body!’ And so thinking, thou wilt be wandering hither 
and thither seeking a body. 

Even though thou couldst enter thy dead body nine times 
over—owing to the long interval which thou hast passed in 
the Chonyid Bardo—it will have been frozen if in winter, been 
decomposed if in summer, or, otherwise, thy relatives will 
have cremated it, or interred it, or thrown it into the water, 
or given it to the birds and beasts of prey.! Wherefore 
finding no place for thyself to enter into, thou wilt be dis- 
satisfied and have the sensation of being squeezed into cracks 
and crevices amidst rocks and boulders.?, The experiencing 
of this sort of misery occurs in the Intermediate State 
when seeking rebirth. Even though thou seekest a body, 
thou wilt gain nothing but trouble. Put aside the desire for 
a body; and permit thy mind to abide in the state of resigna- 
tion, and act so as to abide therein. 

By thus being set face to face, one obtaincth liberation 
from the Bardo. 

[THE JUDGEMENT] 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Yet, again, it may be possible 
that because of the influence of bad karma one will not 
recognize even thus. Therefore, call the deceased by name, 
and speak as follows: 

O nobly-born, (so-and-so), listen. That thou art suffering 
so cometh from thine own karma; it is not due to any one 
else’s: it is by thine own karma. Accordingly, pray earnestly 
to the Precious Trinity; that will protect thee. If thou 
neither prayest nor knowest how to meditate upon the Great 
Symbol nor upon any tutelary deity, the Good Genius,’ who 

1 All known forms of disposal of a corpse are practised in Tibet, including 
mummification. (See pp. 25-8.) 

2 This symbolizes the getting into undesirable wombs, such as those of human 
beings of animal-like nature. 

8 Text: Lhan-chig-skyes-pahi-lha (pron. Lhan-chig-kye-pai-lha) = ‘simultaneous- 
ly-born god (or good spirit, or genius)’, the personification of a human being’s 
higher, or divine, nature; popularly known in Sikkimese as Lha-kar-chung, 
‘Little white god’, 

166 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

was born simultaneously with thee, will come now and count 
out thy good deeds [with] white pebbles, and the Evil Genius,' 
who was born simultaneously with thee, will come and count 
out thy evil deeds [with] black pebbles. Thereupon, thou 
wilt be greatly frightened, awed, and terrified, and wilt 
tremble; and thou wilt attempt to tell lies, saying, ‘I have 
not committed any evil deed’. 

Then the Lord of Death will say, ‘I will consult the Mirror 
of Karma’. 

So saying, he will look in the Mirror, wherein every good 
and evil act is vividly reflected. Lying will be of no avail. 

Then [one of the Executive Furies of] the Lord of Death 
will place round thy neck a rope and drag thee along; he will 
cut off thy head, extract thy heart, pull out thy intestines, lick 
up thy brain, drink thy blood, eat thy flesh, and gnaw thy 
bones ;? but thou wilt be incapable of dying. Although 
thy body be hacked to pieces, it will revive again. ‘The re- 
peated hacking will cause intense pain and torture. 

Even at the time that the pebbles are being counted out, 
be not frightened, nor terrified ; tell no lies; and fear not the 
Lord of Death. 

Thy body being a mental body is incapable of dying even 
though beheaded and quartcred. In reality, thy body is of 
the nature of voidness;? thou needst not be afraid. The 

1 Text: Lhan-chig-skyes-paht-hdve (pron. Lhan-chig-kye-pat-de) = ‘simultaneous- 
ly-born demon (or evil spirit, or genius)’, the personification of a human being’s 
lower, or carnal, nature; popularly known in Sikkimese as Bdud-nag-chung 
(pron. Diid-nag-chung), ‘ Little black mara (or demon)’, 

2 These tortures symbolize the pangs of the deceased’s conscience; for the 
Judgement, as hercin described, symbolizes the rising up of the Good Genius in 
judgement against the Evil Genius, the Judge being the conscience itself in its 
stern aspect of:impartiality and love of righteousness; the Mirror is memory. 
One element—the purely human clement—of the consciousness-content of the 
deceased, comes forward, and, by offering lame excuses, tries to meet accusations 
against it, saying, ‘ Owing to such-and-such circumstances I had to do so-and- 
so’, Another element of the consciousness-content comes forward and says, 
‘You were guided by such-and-such motives; your deeds partake of the black 
colour’, Then some more friendly one of such clements arises and protests, 

‘But I have such-and-such justification; and the deceased deserves pardon on 
these grounds’. And so—as the lamas explain—the Judgement proceeds. 

(Cf. pp. 35-7.) 
3 Meaning that the ‘astral’ or desire-body is incapable ot ordinary physical 

THE JUDGEMENT 

Described on pages *%-#x111, 35-8, 165-7, 240 

THE MANTRA OF CHENRAZEE 

Fanaad 

“OM MA-NI PAD-ME HUM 

Described on page xxiv 

PART 1] NATURE OF THE VOIDNESS 167 

Lords of Death! are thine own hallucinations. Thy desire- 
body is a body of propensities, and void. Voidness cannot 
injure voidness ; the qualityless cannot injure the qualityless. 

Apart from one’s own hallucinations, in reality there are 
no such things existing outside oneself as Lord of Death, or 
god, or demon, or the Bull-headed Spirit of Dcath.? Act so 
as to recognize this. 

At this time, act so as to recognize that thou art in the 
Bardo. Meditate upon the Samadhi of the Great Symbol. 
If thou dost not know how to meditate, then merely analyse 
with care the real nature of that which is frightening thee. 
In reality it is not formed into anything, but is a Voidness 
which is the Dharma-K aya? 

That Voidness is not of the nature of the voidness of 
nothingness, but a Voidness at the true nature of which 
thou feelest awed, and before which thine intellect shineth 
clearly and more lucidly: that is the [state of] mind of the 
Sambhoga-K aya. 

In that state wherein thou art existing, there is being 
experienced by thee, in an unbearable intensity, Voidness 
and Brightness inseparable,—the Voidness bright by nature 
and the Brightness by nature void, and the Brightness in- 
separable from the Voidness,—a state of the primordial 
[or unmodified] intellect, which is the Adi-Kaya.t And the 

injury. ‘As through a cloud, a sword can be plunged through the Bardo-body 
without harming it’—the /a@mas explain; or it is like the forms seen in material- 
izing seances of necromancers and spirit-mediums. 

1 These Lords of Death are Yama-Raja and his Court of Associates, including, 
perhaps, the Executive Furies, These last are, as Tormenting Furies, compar- 
able to the Eumenides of Aeschylus’ great drama—elements of one’s own 
consciousness-content. Following the Abhidhamma, of Southern Buddhism, 
there are mind (Skt. chit, Tib. sevzs—pron. sem) and impulses of mind (Skt. 
chittavritti, Tib. sems-hbyung—pron. sem-jung) ; and the impulses of mind are the 
Furies. (Cf. pp. 147-8.) 

2 Text: Ragsha-glang-mgo (pron. Ragsha-lang-go): ‘Bull-headed Spirit of 
Death’, commonly depicted as having a buffalo-head. The chief tutelary deity 
of the Gelugpa or Yellow Hat Sect, called Jampal Shinjeshed (Tib. Hjam-dpal 
Gshin-vje-gshed), meaning ‘ Jampal (Skt. Matjusrhi), the Destroyer of the Lord 
of Death (Skt. Yamdntaka)’, is often represented as a blue buffalo-headed deity. 

3 See pp. 10-15. 

4 Tib. Gowo-nyidku: Skt. Adi-Kaya (‘First Body’), which is synonymous 
with the Dharma-Kaya. 

168 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [book 1 

power of this, shining unobstructedly, will radiate every- 
where; it is the Mirmana-K aya. 

O nobly-born, listen unto me undistractedly. By merely 
recognizing the Four Kayas, thou art certain to obtain perfect 
Emancipation in any of Them. Be not distracted. The line 
of demarcation between Buddhas and sentient beings lieth 
herein.! This moment is one of great importance; if thou 
shouldst be distracted now, it will require innumerable aeons 
of time for thee to come out? of the Quagmire of Misery. 

A saying, the truth of which is applicable, is: 

‘In a moment of time, a marked differentiation is created ; 
In a moment of time, Perfect Enlightenment is obtained.’ 

Till the moment which hath just passed, all this Bardo 
hath been dawning upon thee and yet thou hast not re- 
cognized, because of being distracted. On this account, thou 
hast experienced all the fear and terror. Shouldst thou be- 
come distracted now, the chords of divine compassion of the 
Compassionate I‘yes will break, and thou wilt go into the 
place from which there is no [immediate] liberation, There- 
fore, be careful. Even though thou hast not recognized ere 
this—despite thus being set face to face—thou wilt recognize 
and obtain liberation here. 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: If it be an illiterate boor 
who knoweth not how to meditate, then say this: 

O nobly-born, if thou knowest not how thus to meditate, 
act so as to remember the Compassionate One, and the Sangha, 
the Dharma, and the Buddha, and pray. Think of all these 
fears and terrifying apparitions as being thine own tutelary 
deity, or as the Compassionate One.* Bring to thy recollec- 
tion the mystic name that hath been given thee at the time 

1 In virtue of knowing the true nature of sangsarvic existence—that all pheno- 
mena are unreal—Buddhas, or Perfectly Enlightened Ones, are beings quite apart 
from unenlightened sentient beings. 

2 Lit., ‘there will be no time when thou canst get out’. 

3 This is a literal rendering, meaning that the rays of grace or compassion of 
Chenrazee will cease to dawn. 

* The idea meant to be conveyed is that trials and tribulations, although 

karmic, act as divine tests, and so, being for the good of the deccased, ought 
even to be visualized as such, i.e, as the tutelary deity, or as Chenrazee. 

PART I] THE INITIATORY NAME 169 

of thy sacred initiation when thou wert a human being, and 
the name of thy guru, and tell them to the Righteous King 
of the Lord[s] of Death.) Even though thou fallest down preci- 
pices, thou wilt not be hurt. Avoid awe and terror. 

[THE ALL-DETERMINING INFLUENCE 
OF THOUGHT] 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Say that; for by such set- 
ting-face-to-face, despite the previous non-liberation, libera- 
tion ought surely to be obtained? here. Possibly, [however,} 
liberation may not be obtained even after that setting-face- 
to-face ; and earnest and continued application being essential, 
again calling the deceased by name, speak as follows: 

O nobly-born, thy immediate experiences will be of momen- 
tary joys followed by momentary sorrows, of great intensity, 
like the [taut and relaxed] mechanical actions of catapults? 
Be not in the least attached [to the joys] nor displeased 
[by the sorrows] of that. 

If thou art to be born on a higher plane, the vision of that 
higher plane will be dawning upon thee. 

Thy living relatives may—by way of dedication for the 
benefit of thee deceased—be sacrificing many animals, and 
performing religious ceremonies, and giving alms. Thou, 

1 This revealing of the initiatory name is for the purpose of establishing 
occult connexion between the deceased and the King of Death—i.e, between 
the human and the divine in man—in much the same way as a Freemason will 
make himself known to another Freemason by giving some secret password. 

2 Lit., ‘ will be obtained’. 

8 That is to say, at one time good karma will be operative and raise the 
deceased to a spiritual state of mind, and at another time, bad karma becoming 
predominant, the deceased will be pulled down in mental depression. The 
operator of the catapult is Zara, who stretches out the catapult to its limit and 
then relaxes it, alternately. 

4 Each time an animal is sacrificed—presumably to be prepared for food 
afterwards—the deceased is said to be unable to escape the karmzc result, the 
sacrifice being done in his name, so that horrors come upon him directly. He 
calls to the living to cease, but, they not hearing him, he is inclined to grow 
angry; and anger he must avoid at all costs, for if allowed to arise on the 
Bardo-pliane, like a heavy weight, it forces him down to the lowest mental state 
called Hell. 

Animal sacrifice to the dead, in Tibet as in India, originated in ancient times, 
far prior to the rise of Buddhism, which, of course, prohibits it, Survivals of it 

3069 Z 

170 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

because of thy vision not being purified, mayst be inclined 
to grow very angry at their actions and bring about, at this 
moment, thy birth in Hell: whatever those left behind thee 
may be doing, act thou so that no angry thought can arise in 
thee, and meditate upon love for them. 

Furthermore, even if thou feelest attached to the worldly 
goods thou hast left behind, or, because of seeing such 
worldly goods of thine in the possession of other people and 
being enjoyed by them, thou shouldst feel attached to them 
through weakness, or feel angry with thy successors, that 
feeling will affect the psychological moment in such a way 
that, even though thou wert destined to be born on higher 
and happier planes, thou wilt be obliged to be born in Hell, 
or in the world of prezas [or unhappy ghosts]. On the other 
hand, even if thou art attached to worldly goods left behind, 
thou wilt not be able to possess them, and they will be of no 
use to thee. Thercfore, abandon weakness and attachment for 
them; cast them away wholly; renounce them from thy 
heart. No matter who may be enjoying thy worldly goods, 
have no feeling of miserliness, but be prepared to renounce 
them willingly. Think that thou art offering them to the 
Precious Trinity and to thy guru, and abide in the feeling 
of unattachment, devoid of weakness [of desire]. 

have persisted in Tibet, but without the approval of the /amas, as our text clearly 
proves; and, if practised nowadays, it is only rarely, and by the rude folk of 
remote districts, who are Buddhist merely in name. 

Save for the yogi or lama eager for the highest spiritual development—with 
which flesh-eating is said to be incompatible —Tibetans, being confirmed eaters 
of animal corpses, like the Brahmins of Kashmir (who are, consequently, not 
recognized as Brahmins by the pure-living Brahmins of India), excuse their 
meat-eating on the grounds of climatic and economic necessity. Although 
Tibet is poor in cereals and vegetables and fruits, this seems to be chiefly an 
unconscious attempt to cover up a racial predisposition, inherited from nomadic 
and pastoral ancestors, for a flesh diet. Even in Ceylon, where there can be no 
such excuse for Buddhists to disobey the precept prohibiting the taking of life, 
flesh-eating has already made rapid progress since the advent of Christianity, 
which, unlike Buddhism, does not, unfortunately, teach kindness to animals as 
a religious tenet, St. Paul himself being of opinion that God cares not for oxen 
(see z Cor. ix.g), And yet on Ceylon’s Sacred Mount of Mihintale still stands, 
as witness of a purer Buddhism, the ancient edict, cut on a stone slab, pro- 
hibiting—as the Edicts of Asoka prohibit—the slaying of any animal, either in 
sacrifice or for food. 

rae!) TEE DIRECTING OF THOUGHT rj 

Again, when any recitation of the Kamkani Mantra is 
being made on thy behalf as a funeral rite, or when any 
rite for the absolving of bad karma liable to bring about 
thy birth in lower regions is being performed for thee, the 
sight of their being conducted in an incorrect way, mixed 
up with sleep and distraction and non-observance of the 
vows and lack of purity [on the part of any officiant], and 
such things indicating levity—all of which thou wilt be able 
to see because thou art endowed with limited Larmic power 
of prescience *—thou mayst feel lack of faith and entire dis- 
belief {in thy religion]. Thou wilt be able to apprehend 
any fear and fright, any black actions, irreligious conduct, 
and incorrectly recited rituals? In thy mind thou mayst 
think, ‘ Alas! they are, indeed, playing me false’. Thinking 
thus, thou wilt be extremely depressed, and, through great 
resentment, thou wilt acquire disbelief and loss of faith, 
instead of affection and humble trustfulness. This affecting 
the psychological moment, thou wilt be certain to be born 
in one of the miserable states. 

Such [thought] will not only be of no use to thee, but will 
do thee great harm. However incorrect the ritual and im- 
proper the conduct of the priests performing thy funeral 
rites, [think], ‘What! mine own thoughts must be impure! 
How can it be possible that the words of the Buddha should 
be incorrect? It is like the reflection of the blemishes on mine 
own face which IJ see in a mirror; mine own thoughts must 
[indeed] be impure. As for these [i.e. the priests], the Sangha 
is their body, the Dharma their utterance, and in their mind 
they are the Buddha in reality: I will take refuge in them’. 

1 This mantra is believed to have the magical power of so transmuting food 
sacrificed to the dead as to make it acceptable to them. 

2 In its fullness, this power of prescience includes knowledge of the past, 
present, and future, the ability to read others’ thoughts, and the unobscured 
knowing of one’s own capabilities and limitations. Only highly developed 
beings, such, for example, as adepts in yoga, enjoy such complete power of 
prescience. On the Bardo plane—unlike the human world—every being 
possesses, in virtue of freedom from the impeding gross physical body, a certain 
degree of the power, as the text makes clear. 

3 That is, fear and fright, or impropriety, or carelessness on the part of any 
person conducting the funeral rites. 

2, BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book Ir 

Thus thinking, put thy trust in them and exercise sincere 
love towards them. Then whatever is done for thee [by those] 
left behind will truly tend to thy benefit. Therefore the exercise 
of that love is of much importance; do not forget this. 

Again, even if thou wert to be born in one of the miserable 
states and the light of that miserable state shone upon thee, 
yet by thy successors and relatives performing white! religious 
rites unmixed with evil actions, and the abbots and learned 
priests devoting themselves, body, speech, and mind, to the 
performance of the correct meritorious rituals, the delight 
from thy feeling greatly cheered at seeing them will, by 
its own virtue, so affect the psychological moment that, even 
though thou deservest a birth in the unhappy states, there will 
be brought about thy birth on a higher and happier plane. 
[Therefore] thou shouldst not create impious thoughts, but 
exercise pure affection and humble faith towards all impartially. 
This is highly important. Hence be extremely careful. 

O nobly-born, to sum up: thy present intellect in the Inter- 
mediate State having no firm object whereon to depend, 
being of little weight and continuously in motion, whatever 
thought occurs to thee now—be it pious or impious—will 
wield great power; therefore think not in thy mind of im- 
pious things, but recall any devotional exercises ; or, if thou 
wert unaccustomed to any such exercises, [show forth] pure 
affection and humble faith; pray to the Compassionate One, 
or to thy tutelary deities; with full resolve, utter this prayer : 

‘ Alas! while wandering alone, separated from loving friends,? 
When the vacuous, reflected body of mine own mental 
ideas dawneth upon me, 
May the Buddhas, vouchsafing their power of compassion, 
Grant that there shall be no fear, awe, or terror in the Bardo. 
When experiencing miseries, through the power of evil 
karma, 
May the tutelary deities dispel the miseries. 
1 “White’ as opposed to ‘ black’ (as in black magic or sorcery). 
* Cf. the following from the Orologium Sapientiae, Comper’s ed. (p. 119) : 

‘Where is now the help of my friends? Where be now the good behests of 
our kinsmen and others?’ 

PART I] PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE 173 

When the thousand thunders of the Sound of Reality re- 
verberate, 

May they all be sounds of the Six Syllables. 

When Karma follows, without there being any protector, 

May the Compassionate One protect me, I pray. 

When experiencing the sorrows of karmic propensities here, 

May the radiance of the happy clear light of Samadhi 
shine upon me.’ 

Earnest prayer in this form will be sure to guide thee 
along; thou mayst rest assured that thou wilt not be deceived. 
Of great importance is this: through that being recited, again 
recollection cometh; and recognition and liberation will be 
achieved. 

(tHe DAWNING OF THE LIGHTS OF 
tilt ols LOLKAS 

[Instructions to the Officiant] : Yet—though this [instruction ] 
be so oft repeated—if recognition be difficult, because of the 
influence of evil karma, much benefit will come from repeating 
these settings-face-to-face many times over. Once more, | then, | 
call the deceased by name, and speak as follows: 

O nobly-born, if thou hast been unable to apprehend the 
above, henceforth the body of the past life will become more 
and more dim and the body of the future life will become 
more and more clear. Saddened at this [thou wilt think], 
‘O what misery I am undergoing! Now, whatever body 
I am to get, I shall go and seek [it]’. So thinking, thou wilt 
be going hither and thither, ceaselessly and distractedly. 
Then there will shine upon thee the lights of the Six Sangsaric 
Lokas. The light of that place wherein thou art to be born, 
through power of karma, will shine most prominently. 

O nobly-born, listen. If thou desirest to know what those 
six lights are: there will shine upon thee a dull white light 
from the Deva-world, a dull green light from the Asura- 
world, a dull yellow light from the Human-world, a dull blue 

1 See p, 149). 

174 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book II 

light from the Brute-world, a dull red light from the Preza- 
world, and a smoke-coloured light from the Hell-world.* At 
that time, by the power of karma, thine own body will partake 
‘ of the colour of the light of the place wherein thou art to be 
born. 

O nobly-born, the special art of these teachings is especially 
important at this moment: whichever light shineth upon thee 
now, meditate upon it as being the Compassionate One; from 
whatever place the light cometh, consider that [place] to be 
[or to exist in] the Compassionate One. This is an exceedingly 
profound art; it will prevent birth. Or whosoever thy tute- 
lary deity may be, meditate upon the form for much time,— 
as being apparent yet non-existent in reality, like a form 
produced by a magician. That is called the pure illusory 
form. Then let the [visualization of the] tutelary deity melt 
away from the extremities, till nothing at all remaineth 
visible of it; and put thyself in the state of the Clearness and 
the Voidness *—which thou canst not conceive as something— 
and abide in that state for a little while. Again meditate 
upon the tutelary deity; again meditate upon the Clear 
Light: do this alternately. Afterwards, allow thine own 
intellect also to melt away gradually,’ [beginning] from the 
extremities. 

Wherever the ether* pervadeth, consciousness pervadeth ; 
wherever consciousness pervadeth, the Dharma-Kaya per- 
vadeth. Abide tranquilly in the uncreated state of the 
Dharma-Kaya. In that state, birth will be obstructed and 
Perfect Enlightenment gained. 

1 Here as before (see p. 1247) the MS. is faulty. It gives the lights as 
follows: white for the Deva-world, red for the Asura-world, blue for the 
Human-world, green for the Brute-world, yellow for the Preta-world, smoke- 
coloured for the Hell-world. This error, apparently on the part of the copyist 
of the MS., has been corrected by the translator. 

* This expression, ‘the Clearness and the Voidness’, from the instructions 
following, seems to be synonymous with ‘the Clear Light’, or ‘the Clear Light 
and the Voidness’, 

3 This process corresponds to the two stages of Samddhi: the visualization 
stage, and the perfected stage, (See p. r1g!.) 

* Text : nam-mkhah (pron, nam-kha): Skt. Akdshas ‘ether’, or ‘sky’. 

PART II] VITAL TEACHINGS 175 

[PART 11] 

[iE PROCESS OF REBIRTH 
[THE CLOSING OF THE DOOR OF THE WOMB] 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Again, if through great weak- 
ness in devotions and lack of familiarity one be not able to 
understand, illusion may overcome one, and one will wander 
to the doors of wombs. The instruction for the closing of 
the womb-doors becometh very important: call the deceased 
by name and say this: 

O nobly-born, if thou hast not understood the above, at 
this moment, through the influence of Zarma, thou wilt have 
the impression that thou art either ascending, or moving along 
on a level, or going downwards. Thereupon, meditate upon 
the Compassionate One. Remember. Then, as said above, 
gusts of wind, and icy blasts, hail-storms, and darkness, and 
impression of being pursued by many people will come upon 
thee. On fleeing from these [hallucinations], those who are 
unendowed with meritorious £arma will have the impression 
of fleeing into places of misery ; those who are endowed with 
meritorious arma will have the impression of arriving in 
places of happiness. Thereupon, O nobly-born, in whatever 
continent or place thou art to be born, the signs of that birth- 
place will shine upon thee then. 

For this moment there are several vital profound teachings. 
Listen undistractedly. Even though thou hast not appre- 
hended by the above settings-face-to-face, here [thou wilt, 
because] even those who are very weak in devotions will 
recognize the signs. Therefore listen. 

{Instructions to the Officiant]: Now it is very important 
to employ the methods of closing the womb-door. Where- 
fore it is necessary to exercise the utmost care. There are 
two [chief] ways of closing: preventing the being who would 
enter from entering, and closing the womb-door which might 
be entered. 

176 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK I! 

[METHOD OF PREVENTING ENTRY INTO A WOMB} 

The instructions for preventing the being from entering are 
thus: 

O nobly-born, (so-and-so by name,) whosoever may have been 
thy tutelary deity, tranquilly meditate upon him,—as upon the 
reflection of the moon in water, apparent yet non-existent 
[as a moon], like a magically-produced illusion. If thou 
hast no special tutelary, meditate either upon the Com- 
passionate Lord or upon me; and, with this in mind, meditate 
tranquilly. 

Then, causing the [visualized form of the] tutelary deity to 
melt away from the extremities, meditate, without any thought- 
forming, upon the vacuous Clear Light. This is a very profound 
art; in virtue of it, a womb is not entered. 

{THE FIRST METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB-DOOR] 

In that manner meditate; but even though this be found 
inadequate to prevent thee from entering into a womb, and 
if thou findest thyself ready to enter into one, then there is 
the profound teaching for closing the womb-door. Listen 
thou unto it: 

‘When, at this time, alas! the Sidpa Bardo is dawning 
upon oneself, 

Holding in mind one single resolution, 

Persist in joining up the chain of good karma;} 

Close up the womb-door, and remember the opposition.? 

This is a time when earnestness and pure love are 
necessary ; 

Abandon jealousy, and meditate upon the Guru Father- 
Mother.’ 

Repeat this, from thine own mouth, distinctly; and re- 

1 To obtain results, the accumulated merit, born of good actions done in the 
earth-life, must be made operative, that is, it must be linked with the Bardo 
existence of the deceased. 

2 Normally, existence in the Bardo ever tends to lead the deceased back to 
birth ; and this is due to karmic propensities, which are the opposition, the 
forces opposing the Enlightenment of Buddhahood. Hence the deceased must 
oppose this innate tendency with every help available. 

PART II] ONE-POINTEDNESS OF MIND 177 

member its meaning vividly, and meditate upon it. The 
putting of this into practice is essential. 

The significance of the above teaching, ‘ When, at this time, 
the Szdpa Bardo is dawning upon me [or upon oneself |’, is 
that now thou art wandering in the Szdpa Bardo. As a sign 
of this, if thou lookest into water, or into mirrors, thou wilt 
see no reflection of thy face or body; nor doth thy body 
cast any shadow. Thou hast discarded now thy gross material 
body of flesh and blood. These are the indications that thou 
art wandering about in the Sidpa Bardo. 

At this time, thou must form, without distraction, one single 
resolve in thy mind. The forming of one single resolve is 
very important now. It is like directing the course of a horse 
by the use of the reins. 

Whatever thou desirest will come to pass. Think not 
upon evil actions which might turn the course [of thy mind]. 
Remember thy [spiritual] relationship with the Reader of 
this Bardo Thodol, or with any one from whom thou hast 
received teachings, initiation, or spiritual authorization for 
reading religious texts while in the human world; and per- 
severe in going on with good acts: this is very essential. Be 
not distracted. The boundary line between going upwards 
or going downwards is here now. If thou givest way to 
indecision for even a second, thou wilt have to suffer misery 
for a long, long time. This is the moment. Hcld fast 
to one single purpose. Persistently join up the chain of 
good acts. 

Thou hast come now to the time of closing the womb-door. 
‘This is a time when earnestness and pure love are necessary’, 
which implieth that now the time hath come when, first of all, 
the womb-door should be closed, there being five methods of 
closing. Bear this well at heart. 

[THE SECOND METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB-DOOR} 

O nobly-born, at this time thou wilt see visions of males 
and females in union. When thou seest them, remember to 
withhold thyself from going between them. Regarding the 

3069 Aa 

178 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book II 

father and mother as thy Gwrw and the Divine Mother,’ 
meditate upon them and bow down; humbly exercise thy 
faith ; offer up mental worship with great fervency; and 
resolve that thou wilt request [of them] religious guidance. 

By that resolution alone, the womb ought certainly to be 
closed ; but if it is not closed even by that, and thou findest 
thysclf ready to enter into it, meditate upon the Divine Gurz 
Father-Mother,? as upon any tutelary deity, or upon the 
Compassionate Tutelary and S#akiz; and meditating upon 
them, worship them with mental offerings. Resolve earnestly 
that thou wilt request [of them] a boon. By this, the womb- 
door ought to be closed. 

[THE THIRD METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB-DOOR] 

Still, if it be not closed even by that, and thou findest 
thyself ready t6 enter the womb, the third method of re- 
pelling attachment and repulsion is hereby shown unto thee: 

There are four kinds of birth: birth by egg, birth by 
womb, supernormal birth,® and birth by heat and moisture.* 
Amongst these four,® birth by egg and birth by womb agree 
in character. 

As above said, the visions of males and females in union 
will appear. If, at that time, one entereth into the womb 
through the feelings of attachment and repulsion, one may 
be born either as a horse, a fowl, a dog, or a human being.® 

1 ¢The father and mother’ are the male and female seen in union; the Guru 
is the celestial or spiritual Guru, not the human guru; and the Divine Mother 
is the Guru’s Shaktz, 

2 That is, the Guru with the Shakh, as above directed. 

3 Text : breus-skyes (pron. au-kye): Skt. Svayambhi: ‘supernormal (or mira- 
culous) birth’, by translation or transference of the consciousness-principle 
from one Joka to another. (See pp. 85-6.) 

4 This refers to the germination of seeds and spores, or the processes of birth 
in the vegetable kingdom. 

® ‘Brahmanism, likewise, recognizes four kinds of birth: svedaja (sweat- 
born, or moisture-born), andaja (egg-born), araywja (womb-born), and udbhigja 
(vegetation).’—Sj. Atal Behari Ghosh. 

° Esoterically, this passage implies that, in accordance with karma, one may 
be reborn with the peculiar propensities which the various animals named 
symbolize, Plato in The Republic has employed animal symbols in the same 
way. (See p. 179'.) 

PART IT] SEX AT BIRTH 179 

If [about] to be born as a male, the feeling of itself being 
a male dawneth upon the Knower, and a feeling of intense 
hatred towards the father and of jealousy and attraction towards 
the mother is begotten. If [about] to be born as a female, the 
feeling of itself being a female dawneth upon the Knower, 
and a feeling of intense hatred towards the mother and of 
intense attraction and fondness towards the father is be- 
gotten. Through this secondary cause—[when] entering upon 
the path of ether, just at the moment when the sperm and the 
ovum are about to unite—the Knower experienceth the bliss 
of the simultaneously-born state, during which state it fainteth 
away into unconsciousness. [Afterwards] it findeth itself 
encased in oval form, in the embryonic state, and upon 
emerging from the womb and opening its eyes it may find itself 
transformed into a young dog. Formerly it had been a human 
being, but now if it have become a dog it findeth itself under- 
going sufferings in a dog’s kennel; or [perhaps] as a young 
pig in a pigsty, or as an ant in an ant-hill, or as an insect, 
or a grub in a hole, or as a calf, or a kid, or a lamb,! from 
which shape there is no [immediate] returning. Dumbness, 
stupidity, and miserable intellectual obscurity are suffered, and 
a variety of sufferings experienced. In like manner, one may 
wander into hell, or into the world of unhappy ghosts, or 
throughout the Six Zokas, and endure inconceivable miseries. 

Those who are voraciously inclined towards this [i.e. sazgsavic 
existence], or those who do not at heart fear it——O dreadful ! 
O dreadful! Alas !—and those who have not received a curu’s 

1 Herein we see the animal symbolism expanded in such manner as quite to 
parallel the passage in Plato’s Republic describing the choosing of animal bodies 
for the next incarnation. (See p. 1788; also pp. 49-53.) The popular or 
exoteric interpretation of such passages in our text as this passage (cf. pp. 126, 
129, 156-7 herein) would seem to be as reasonable as it would if applied to similar 
passages in Plato; and, furthermore, the copyist, and possibly the composer or 
composers of the Bardo Thédol, may have been exotericists, or at least intended 
their text to emphasize the exoteric interpretation, holding as priests often have 
held, and as some hold even nowadays, that fear-producing doctrines (e.g. 
the Christian doctrine that hell is an eternal condition), although literally untrue, 
are, nevertheless, like whips to keep the lower mentalities alert and possibly 
more virtuous. Nevertheless, for our own (more or less corrupted) text, as for 
Plato’s, there does exist the esoteric key to the real meaning, such as we have 
given in our Introduction, pp. 55-9. 

180 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

teachings, will fall down into the precipitous depths of the 
Sangsava in this manner, and suffer interminably and un- 
bearably. Rather than meet with a like fate, listen thou unto 
my words and bear these teachings of mine at heart. 

Reject the feelings of attraction or repulsion, and remember 
one method of closing the womb-door which I am going to 
show to thee. Close the womb-door and remember the 
opposition. This is the time when earnestness and pure love 
are necessary. As hath been said, ‘Abandon jealousy, and 
meditate upon the Guru Father-Mother.’ 

As above explained, if to be born as a male, attraction 
towards the mother and repulsion towards the father, and 
if to be born as a female, attraction towards the father and 
repulsion towards the mother, together with a feeling of 
jealousy [for one or the other] which ariseth, will dawn 
upon thee. 

For that time there is a profound teaching. O nobly-born, 
when the attraction and repulsion arise, meditate as follows: 

‘Alas! what a being of evil karma am I! That I have 
wandered in the Sazxgsara hitherto, hath been owing to 
attraction and repulsion. If I still go on feeling attraction 
and repulsion, then I shall wander in endless Sangsara and 
suffer in the Ocean of Misery for a long, long time, by sinking 
therein. Now I must not act through attraction and repulsion. 
Alas, for me! Henceforth I will never act through attraction 
and repulsion.’ 

Meditating thus, resolve firmly that thou wilt hold on to 
that [resolution]. It hath been said, in the Tantras, ‘The 
door of the womb will be closed up by that alone.’ 

O nobly-born, be not distracted. Hold thy mind one- 
pointedly upon that resolution. 

[THE FOURTH METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB-DOOR] 

Again, even if that doth not close the womb, and one 
findeth [oneself] ready to enter the womb, then by mcans 
of the teaching [called] ‘The Untrue and the Illusory’? 

* Text: Bden-ned-sgyu-ma-ltabu (pron. Den-ned-gyu-ma-tabu) : ‘Non-true 
[and] Illusion-like’, the title of a Tibetan treatisc on the unreality of phenomena, 

PART Wm] UNREALITY OF PHENOMENA 181 

the womb should be closed. That is to be meditated as 
follows: 

‘QO, the pair, the father and the mother, the black rain, 
the storm-blasts, the clashing sounds, the terrifying appari- 
tions, and all the phenomena, are, in their true nature, illusions. 
Howsoever they may appear, no truth is there [in them]; 
all substances are unreal and false. Like dreams and like 
apparitions are they ; they are non-permanent; they have no 
fixity. What advantage is there in being attached [to them]! 
What advantage is there in having fear and terror of them! 
It is the seeing of the non-existent as the existent. All 
these are hallucinations of one’s own mind. The illusory 
mind itself doth not exist from eternity; therefore where 
should these external [phenomena] exist ? 

‘I, by not having understood these [things] in that way 
hitherto, have held the non-existent to be the existent, the 
unreal to be the real, the illusory to be the actual, and have 
wandered in the Sangsadra so long. And even now if I do 
not recognize them to be illusions, then, wandering in the 
Sangsara for long ages, [I shall be] certain to fall into the 
morass of various miseries. 

‘Indeed, all these are like dreams, like hallucinations, like 
echoes, like the cities of the Odour-eaters,! like mirage, like 
mirrored forms, like phantasmagoria, like the moon seen in 
water—not real even for a moment. In truth, they are 
unreal; they are false.’ 

By holding one-pointedly to that train of thought, the 
belicf that they are real is dissipated ; and, that being impressed 
upon the inner continuity [of consciousness], one turneth 
backwards: if the knowledge of the unreality be impressed 
deeply in that way, the womb-door will be closed. 

[THE FIFTH METHOD OF CLOSING THE WOMB-DOOR] 
Still, even when this is done, if the holding [phenomena] 
as real remaineth undissolved, the womb-door is not closed ; 
and, if one be ready to enter into the womb, thereupon one 

1 Text: Dri-za (pron. Di-za): ‘Odour-eaters’ ; Skt. Gandharva, the Fairies of 
Indian and Buddhist mythology. Their cities are fantastically-shaped clouds, 
which dissolve in rain and vanish. (Cf. p. 1648.) 

182 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

should close the womb-door by meditating upon the Clear 
Light, this being the fifth [method]. The meditation is per- 
formed as follows: 

‘Lo! all substances are mine own mind;! and this mind 
is vacuousness, is unborn, and unceasing.’ 

Thus meditating, allow the mind to rest in the uncreated 
[state|—like, for example, the pouring of water into water. 
The mind should be allowed its own easy mental posture, 
in its natural [or unmodified] condition, clear and vibrant. 
By maintaining this relaxed, uncreated [state of mind], 
the womb-doors of the four kinds of birth? are sure to be 
closed. Meditate thus until the closing is successfully 
accomplished. 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Many very profound teach- 
ings for closing the womb-door have been given above. It is 
impossible that they should not liberate people of the highest, 
the average, and the lowest intellectual capacity. If it be 
asked why this should be so, it is because, firstly, the con- 
sciousness in the Bardo possessing supernormal powcr of 
perception® of a limited kind, whatever is spoken to one 
then is apprehended. Secondly, because—although [formerly] 
deaf or blind—here, at this time, all one’s faculties are perfect, 
and one can hear whatever is addressed to one. Thirdly, 
being continually pursued by awe and terror, onc thinketh, 
‘What is best?’ and, being alertly conscious, one is always 
coming to hear whatever may be told to one. Since the 
consciousness is without a prop,* it immediately goeth to 
whatever place the mind directeth. Fourthly, it is casy 

1 Text: rNam-shes (pron. Nam-she) : ‘consciousness-principle’: Skt. Vijzana 
Skandha. The translator preferred to follow the context here and rendered 
this as ‘mind’, as synonymous with ‘consciousness’. 

2 As mentioned above, on p. 178. 

8 Text: mzngon-shes (pron. ngon-she), referring to certain gifts of supernormal 
perception (Skt. Abhynd), of which six are commonly enumerated: (1) super- 
normal vision and (2) hearing ; (3) thought-reading; (4) knowledge of miraculous 
power ; (5) recollection of former existences; (6) knowledge of the destruction 
ofthe passions. For the ordinary deceased person such ‘supernormal power of 
perception’ is limited (or exhaustible), and only operative in the after-dcath 
state ; whereas for a Buddha, or a devotee perfected in yoga, it is a permanent 

and unlimited possession on all planes of consciousness. 
‘ That is, without the human-plane body to depend upon. 

PARTI] WHY THESE TEACHINGS LIBERATE 183 

to direct it? The memory? is ninefold more lucid than 
before. Even though stupid [before], at this time, by the 
workings of karma, the intellect becometh exceedingly clear 
and capable of meditating whatever is taught to it. [Hence 
the answer is], it is because it [i.e. the Knower] possesseth 
these virtues. 

That the performance of funeral rites should be efficacious, 
is, likewise, because of that reason. Therefore, the perseverance 
in the reading of the Great Bardo Thidol for forty-nine days 
is of the utmost importance. Even if not liberated at onc 
setting-face-to-face, one ought to be liberated at another: this 
is why so many different settings-face-to-face are necessary. 

[THE CHOOSING OF THE WOMB-DOOR}] 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: There are, nevertheless, 
many classes of those who—though reminded, and instructed 
to direct their thoughts one-pointedly—are not liberated, owing 
to the great force of evil karmic obscurations, and because 
of being unaccustomed to pious deeds, and of being much 
accustomed to impious deeds throughout the aeons. Therefore, 
if the womb-door hath not been closed ere this, a teaching 
also for the selection of a womb-door is going to be given 
hereinafter. Now, invoking the aid of all the Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas, repeat the Refuge; and, once more catling the 
deceased by name thrice, speak as follows: 

O nobly-born, (so-and-so), listen. Although the above 
setting-face-to-face teachings have been given one-pointedly, 
yet thou hast not understood them. Therefore, if the womb- 
door hath not been closed, it is almost time to assume a 
body. Make thy selection of the womb [according to] this 
best teaching. Listen attentively, and hold it in mind. 

[THE PREMONITORY VISIONS OF THE PLACE OF REBIRTH] 
O nobly-born, now the signs and characteristics of the 

1 Lit., ‘ Fourthly, turning the mouth [of the consciousness-principle or Knower, 
as of a horse with a bit] is easy.’ 

2 Text: dranpa (pron. tanpa), lit. ‘train (or stream) of consciousness’ ; usually 
meaning ‘ consciousness’, or ‘ recollection’, or ‘memory’: Skt. ssyrst7. 

184 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

place of birth will come. Recognize them. In observing 
the place of birth, choose the continent too. 

If to be born in the Eastern Continent of Liipah, a lake 
adorned with swans, male and female, [floating thereon], will 
be seen. Go not there. Recollect the revulsion [against 
going there].2 If one goeth there, [that] Continent—though 
endowed with bliss and ease—is one wherein religion doth 
not predominate. Therefore, enter not therein. 

If to be born in the Southern Continent of Jambu, grand 
delightful mansions will be seen. Enter therein, if one is to 
enter. 

If to be born in the Western Continent of Balang-Chod, 
a lake adorned with horses, male and female, [grazing on its 
shores], will be seen. Go not even there, but return here. 
Although wealth and abundance are there, that being a land 
wherein religion doth not prevail, enter not therein. 

If to be born in the Northern Continent of Daminyan, 
a lake adorned with male and female cattle, [grazing on its 
shores], or trees, [round about it], will be seen. Although 
duration of life, and merits are there, yet that Continent, 
too, is one wherein religion doth not predominate. Therefore 
enter not. 

These are the premonitory signs [or visions] of the taking 
rebirth in those [Continents]. Recognize them. Enter not.’ 

If one is to be born as a deva, delightful temples [or 
mansions] built of various precious metals also will be seen.* 
One may enter therein; so enter therein. 

1 In the description of these Continents which follows, Tibetan names are 
given ; in our Introduction (pp. 64-5) the Sanskrit names are given along with 
complementary description. 

2 Text: rulog: ‘rebellion’ or ‘revulsion’, By recollecting the revulsion, 
i.e. the mental attitude which will oppose entering there, the deceased is put on 
his guard. 

8 This paragraph is misplaced in the MS., having been copied as coming after 
‘will be seen’ in the paragraph immediately above, following our rendering. 

* The Christian conception of Heaven, as a definite place, having streets of 
gold and walls of precious stones, probably owes its origin to pre-Christian 
beliefs parallel to the Hindu and Buddhist beliefs concerning the Heaven of the 
Devas. Nirvana misleadingly has been called the Buddhist Heaven: a Heaven 
implies a place and sangsaric phenomena, whereas Nirvana is non-sangsaric, is 
beyond all phenomena, being ‘the Unbecome, the Unborn, the Unmade, the 

PART IT] SIGNS OF BIRTHPLACE 185 

If to be born as an asura, either a charming forest will 
be seen or else circles of fire revolving in opposite directions. 
Recollect the revulsion; and do not enter therein by any 
means. 

If to be born amongst beasts,! rock-caverns and deep holes 
in the earth and mists will appear. Enter not therein. 

If to be born amongst pretas, desolate treeless plains and 
shallow caverns, jungle glades and forest wastes will be seen. 
If one goeth there, taking birth as a preta, one will suffer 
various pangs of hurger and thirst. Recollect the revulsion ; 
and do not go there by any means. Exert great energy [not 
to enter therein]. 

If to be born in Hell, songs [like wailings], due to evil 
karma, will be heard. [One will be] compelled to enter 
therein unresistingly. Lands of gloom, black houses and white ~ 
houses, and black holes in the earth, and black roads along 
which one hath to go, will appear. If one goeth there, one 
will enter into Hell; and, suffering unbearable pains of heat 
and cold, one will be very long in getting out of it.2 Go not 
there into the midst of that. It hath been said, ‘Exert thine 
energy to the utmost’: this is needed now. 

[THE PROTECTION AGAINST THE TORMENTING FURIES] 

O nobly-born, although one liketh it not, nevertheless, being 
pursued from behind by karmic tormenting furies,° one feeleth 
compelled involuntarily to go on; [and with] tormenting furies 
in the front, and life-cutters as a vanguard leading one, and 
darkness and farmic tornadoes, and noises and snow and rain 

Unformed’—a concept altogether foreign to popular, or exoteric, Christianity 
and found only in esoteric Christianity, i.e. Gnosticism, which, very unwisely, 
the councils of exoteric Christianity have officially repudiated as being ‘heretical’. 

1 Or, as in the text on p. 194 (wherein the clue to the esotericism underlying 
the references to birth ‘amongst beasts’ is given), amongst human beings ‘ re- 
sembling the brute order’. 

2 Lit., ‘there will be no time [soon] when one can get out of it’. Buddhism 
(and Hinduism, too,) does not postulate eternal condemnation to a state of hell, 
and is, in this respect, more logical than Christian theology which has in the past 
postulated it. 

8 Text: gshed-ma (pron. shed-ma) : ‘ tormentors’ or ‘life-takers’, used here 
to mean ‘tormenting furies’, (Cf. p. 167%.) 

3069 Bb 

186 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [800K II 

and terrifying hail-storms and whirlwinds of icy blasts occur- 
ring, there will arise the thought of fleeing from them. 

Thereupon, by going to seek refuge because of fear, [one 
beholdeth] the aforesaid visions of great mansions, rock- 
caverns, earth-caverns, jungles, and lotus blossoms which close 
[on entering them]; and one escapeth by hiding inside [one 
of such places] and fearing to come out therefrom, and 
thinking, ‘To go out is not good now’. And fearing to 
depart therefrom, one will feel greatly attracted to one’s place 
of refuge [which is the womb]. Fearful lest, by going out, 
the awe and terror of the Bardo will mect one, and afraid to 
encounter them, if one hide oneself within [the place or womb 
chosen], one will thereby assume a very undesirable body and 
suffer various sufferings. 

That [condition] is an indication that evil spirits and rak- 
shasas [or demons] are interfering with one.’ For this time 
there is a profound teaching. Listen; and heed it: 

At that time—when the tormenting furies will be in pursuit 
of thee, and when awe and terror will be occurring—instan- 
taneously [visualize] either the Supreme Heruka, or Haya- 
griva, or Vajra-Pani,? or [any other] tutelary deity if thou 
hast such, perfect of form, huge of body, of massive limbs, 
wrathful and terrifying in appearance, capable of reducing to 
dust all mischievous spirits. Visualize it instantaneously. 
The gift-waves and the power of its grace will separate thee 
from the tormenting furies and thou wilt obtain the power to 
select the womb-door. This is the vital art of the very 
profound teaching ; therefore bear it thoroughly well in mind. 

O nobly-born, the dhyani and other deities are born of the 
power of Samadhi [or meditation]. Pvretas [or unhappy 
spirits or shades] and malignant spirits of certain orders are 
those who by changing their feeling [or mental attitude] while 
in the Intermediate State assumed that very shape which 
they thereafter retained, and became gret¢as, evil spirits, and 
vrakshasas, possessed of the power of shape-shifting. All 

1 That is to say, interfering in such a way as to prevent birth or a good birth. 
* Each of these three deities, who dawn in the Chényid Bardo (sec pp. 1164, 
120‘, 137'), is held to be particularly potent as an exorcizer of evil spirits. 

PART IT] BARDO-BOUND SPIRITS 187 

bretas, who exist in space, who traverse the sky, and the 
eighty thousand species of mischievous sprites, have become 

so by changing their feelings [while] in the mental-body [on 
the Bardo-plane}.! 

1 Owing to having arrived at the false concept that the Intermediate State is 
a desirable or fixed state of existence, all dwellers therein,—sprites, prefas, 
demons, and deceased human entities,—becoming thereby habituated to the 
Bardo, their normal evolution is retarded. According to the most enlightened 
of the /amas, whenever a spirit is called up, as in such spirit-evocations as are 
nowadays common throughout the West, that spirit, through contact with this 
world and the prevailing traditional animistic beliefs concerning the hereafter, 
being strengthened in the illusion that the Bardo is a state wherein real spiritual 
progress is possible, makes no attempt to quit it. The spirit called up ordinarily 
describes the Bardo (which is pre-eminently the realm of illusion), in which it 
is a dweller, more or less after what it had believed whilst in the fleshly body 
concerning the hereafter; for just as a dreamer in the human world lives over 
again in the dream-state the experience of the waking state, so the inhabitant 
of the Bardo experiences hallucinations in kavmic accord with the content of his 
consciousness created by the human world. His symbolic visions, as the Bardo 
Thédol repeatedly emphasizes, are but the psychic reflexes of thought-forms 
carried over from earth-life as mental deposits or seeds of karma. (See 
pp. 31-5.) This is said to explain why none but very exceptional spirits 
when evoked have any rational philosophy to offer concerning the world in 
which they exist; they are regarded as being merely the playthings of karma, 
lacking in mental coherence and stability of personality—more often than not, 
as being senseless ghosts, or psychic ‘shells’ which have been cast off by 
the consciousness-principle, and which, when coming into rapport with a human 
‘medium’, are galvanized into automaton-like life. 

It is true that spirit-evocation of a kind is practised in Tibet, as throughout 
Mongolia and China, by /am#as who form a class of oracular priests, consulted on 
important problems of political policy even by the Dalai Lama himself. But the 
spirits called up are tutelary deities of a low order called the ‘executive-order’ 
(Tib. bkah-dod—pron. ka-dét, meaning ‘ one awaiting orders’) and never intention- 
ally the spirits or ghosts of men or women recently deceased. Some of these 
bkahdods are, so the Tibetans believe, the spirits of /émas and devotees who 
have failed—often through practising black magic—to obtain spiritual enlighten- 
ment when in the human world, or who otherwise, in the manner described in 
the text here, have been diverted from the normal path of progress, Thus, in 
many instances, they have become demoniacal and malignant spirits, whose 
progress has been arrested not by being bound to the earth-plane through having 
been called up by ‘mediums’ soon after their decease, but naturally through very 
evil karma. Such bkahdods, thus often presenting themselves with ordinary 
spirits of the dead, are, as obsessing demons, said to do much harm mentally and 
psychically to the untrained ‘medium’ and clients, insanity and moral irresponsi- 
bility not infrequently resulting. For these reasons, the /@mas maintain that 
psychic research should be conducted only by masters of the occult, or magical, 
sciences, and not indiscriminately by the guru-less multitude. 

In Sikkim, where our translation was made, necromancy precisely like that 
now practised in the West has been practised for unknown centuries, as it still 

188 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [Book I! 

At this time, if one can recollect the Great Symbol | teach- 
ings] concerning the Voidness, that will be best. If one be 
not trained in that, train the [mental] powers + into [regarding] 
all things as illusion [or maya]. Even if this be impossible, 
be not attracted by anything, By meditating upon the 
Tutelary Deity, the Great Compassionate [One], Buddhahood 
will be obtained in the Sambhoga-K aya. 

[THE ALTERNATIVE CHOOSING: SUPERNORMAL 
BIRTH; OR WOMB-BIRTH] 

If, however, O nobly-born, thou hast, because of the influence 
of karma, to enter into a womb, the teaching for the selection 
of the womb-door will be explained now. Listen. 

Do not enter into any sort of womb which may be come 
by. If compelled by tormenting furics to enter, meditate 
upon Hayagriva. 

Since thou now possessest a slender supernormal power of 
foreknowledge, all the places [of birth] will be known to thee, 
one after another.? Choose accordingly. 

There are two alternatives: the transference [of the conscious- 
ness-principle] to a pure Buddha realm, and the sclection of 
the impure sangsaric womb-door, to be accomplished as 
follows: 

is. The Lepchas, descendants of the primitive races of Sikkim, who still form 
a large part of the rural population, are as thoroughly animistic in their worships 
as the American Red Men; and, largely through their influence, the evocation 
of the dead has become rather widespread among the Sikkimese Buddhist lay- 
folk, many of whom are of both Tibetan and Lepcha blood. Similarly, in 
Buddhist Bhutan, such spirit-evocation iscommon. In both countries, however, 
the /amas strenuously, though rather ineffectually, oppose it. 

It is said that the retardation of a Bardo-bound spirit may be for any time from 
five hundred to one thousand years; and, in exceptional cases, for ages. All 
the while, escape from the Bardo being prevented, the deceased can neither 
pass on to a paradise realm nor be reborn in the human world. Ultimately, 
however, the womb will be entered and the Bardo come to an end. 

1 Text: rtsal (pron, sal): ‘powers’; elsewhere in our text dvang-po (pron. 
wang-po) being rendered as ‘ faculties’. 

# In a series of visions, the Knower will become aware of the lot or destiny 
associated with cach womb or place of birth seen. Here again we are reminded 
of the episode in the tenth book of Plato’s Republic, describing a band of Greek 
heroes in the Otherworld choosing their bodies for the next incarnation. 

PART II] CONSCIOUSNESS PROJECTION 189 

[SUPERNORMAL BIRTH BY TRANSFERENCE TO A 
PARADISE REALM] 

In the first—the transference to a pure paradise—the pro- 
jection is directed [by thinking or meditating] thus: 

‘Alas! how sorrowful it is that I, during all the innumerable 
kalpas since illimitable, beginningless time, until now, have 
been wandering in the Quagmire of Sangs@ra! O how pain- 
ful that I have not been liberated into Buddhahood by knowing 
the consciousness to be the self! hitherto cre this! Now doth 
this Sangsara disgust me, horrify me, sicken me; now hath 
the hour come to prepare to flee from it. I mysclf will so act 
as to be born in The Happy Western Realm, at the feet of 
the Buddha Amitabha,? miraculously from amidst a lotus 
blossom.’ ® 

Thinking thus, direct the resolution [or wish] earnestly 
[to that Realm]; or, likewise, to any Realm thou mayst 
desire,—The Pre-eminently Happy Realm, or The Thickly- 
Formed Realm, or The Realm [of Those] of Long Hair,* 

1 Text: vig-pa (‘consciousness’) + bdag (pro. dag, meaning ‘self’: Skt. 
dima). Should we consider ‘consciousness’ in this context to be the essential 
or true consciousness, i. e. the subconsciousness—and this meaning is implied— 
the passage would be in direct accord with the psychology of the West, which, 
on the basis of much accumulated data, might very well postulate that the sub- 
consciousness, being the storehouse of all memory-records, from this life or 
from hypothetical past lives, is the real self—the bed in which flows on un- 
brokenly the ‘life-flux’, from one state of existence to another, aud which, 
when transmuted by the alchemy of Perfect Enlightenment, becomes the supra- 
mundane consciousness, i. e, the Buddha consciousness. (Cf. W.Y.Evans-Wentz, 
The Fairy-laith in Celtic Countries, Oxford University Press, 1911, chap. XII.) 

That this view is in keeping with the recorded teachings of the Buddha 
Himself is evident from the Lonaphala Vagga of the Anguttara Nikaya, wherein 
He expounds the yogic method of recovering memories, innate in the sub- 
consciousness (see our Introduction, pp. go-1). Sobhita, one of the Buddha’s 
disciples, was declared, by the Buddha Himself, to be pre-eminent in ‘ ability to 
remember former existences’ (cf. Etaddagga Vagga, Anguttara Nikdya), being 
credited with ability to recall systematically his former existences throughout 
soo falpas; and, in the same Vagga, the Buddha names, from among His female 
disciples, Bhadda Kapilanit as being pre-eminent ‘in ability to trace lineage of 
prior sandhas (or human bodies)’. 

2 Here, as elsewhere through this treatise, the Buddha Amitabha is to be 
regarded not as a personal deity, but as a divine power or principle inherent 
in or emanating from The Happy Western Realm. 

8 See p. 190%. 

4 This is the Paradise of Vajra-Pani (sec p. 116+), and is not a Buddha Realm. 

190 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BOOK II 

or The Illimitable Vihara of the Lotus Radiance,! in Urgyan’s 
presence; or direct thy wish to any Realm which thou desirest 
most, in undistracted one-pointedness [of mind]. By doing 
so, birth will take place in that Realm instantaneously. 

Or, if thou desirest to go to the presence of Maitreya, 
in the Tushita Heavens,? by directing an earnest wish in 
like manner and thinking, ‘I will go to the presence of 
Maitreya in the Tushita Heavens, for the hour hath struck 
for me here in the Intermediate State’, birth will be obtained 
miraculously inside a lotus blossom? in the presence of 
Maitreya. 

[WOMB-BIRTH: THE RETURN TO THE HUMAN WORLD] 

If, however, such [a supernormal birth] be not possible, and 
one delighteth in entering a womb or hath to enter, there is 
a teaching for the selection of the womb-door of impure 
Sangsara. Listen: 

Looking with thy supernormal power of foresight over the 
Continents, as above, choose that in which religion prevaileth 
and enter therein. 

If birth is to be obtained over a heap of impurities,* a sensa- 
tion that it is sweet-smelling will attract one towards that 
impure mass, and birth will be obtained thereby. 

Whatsoever they [the wombs or visions] may appear to be, 
do not regard them as they are [or seem]; and by not 
being attracted or repelled a good womb should be chosen. 
In this, too, since it is important to direct the wish, direct it 
thus: 

‘Ah! I ought to take birth as a Universal Emperor ; 

If, as seems probable, the ‘long hair’ refers to wearing the hair in ‘ pigtails’ 
after the Chinese fashion, that would provide further internal evidence of our 
text having taken form in Tibet rather than in India, 

' This is the Realm wherein the Great Guru Padma Sambhava (here called 
Urgyan) now reigns, 

* Maitreya, the next Bodhic World-Teacher, now bides his time in the 
Tushita Heavens, where He reigns as King. (See p. 1085.) 

8 Birth from within a lotus blossom, in the Tushita Heavens, as in the Deva- 
world, esoterically implies pure birth, that is, birth without entrance into 
a womb, womb-birth being considered impure. 

4 That is, the sperm and the ovum in the impregnated womb. 

PART 11] ART OF CHOOSING A WOMB 1g! 

or as a Brahmin, like a great sal-tree;! or as the son of 
an adept in séddhic powers;? or in a spotless hierarchical 
line; or in the caste of a man who is filled with [religious] 
faith; and, being born so, be endowed with great merit so 
as to be able to serve all sentient beings.’ 

Thinking thus, direct thy wish, and enter into the womb. 
At the same time, emit thy gift-waves [of grace, or good-will] 
upon the womb which thou art entering, [transforming it 
thereby] into a celestial mansion.? And believing that the 
Conquerors and their Sons [or Bodhisattvas] of the Ten 
Directions, and the tutelary deities, especially the Great 
Compassionate [One], are conferring power thereon, pray 
unto Them, and enter the womb. 

In selecting the womb-door thus, there is a possibility of 
error: through the influence of farma, good wombs may 
appear bad and bad wombs may appear good; such error 
is possible. At that time, too, the art of the teaching being 
important, thereupon do as follows: 

Even though a womb may appear good, do not be attracted ; 
if it appear bad, have no repulsion towards it. To be free from 
repulsion and attraction, or from the wish to take or to avoid, 
—to enter in the mood of complete impartiality,—is the most 
profound of arts. Excepting only for the few who have had 
some practical experience [in psychical development], it is 
difficult to get rid of the remnants of the disease of evil 
propensities. 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Therefore, if unable to part 
with the attraction and repulsion, those of the least mentality 

1 Text: sala: Skt. shala (the shorea robusta), one of the hardwood forest- 
trees of India, growing to great size; the Tibetan word for Brahmin is Bramze 
(pron. Tamze). The ancient Indians regarded the sal-tree, with its splendid 
foliage and beautiful blossoms, as the best of trees; and for the Buddhists it is 
sanctified by the birth and death of the Enlightened One which took place under 
its protecting shade. 

2 Text : grub-pa-thob-pa (pron. dub-pa-thob-pa) : Skt. Siddha-purusha: ‘adept 
in siddhic (or yogic) powers.’ 

8 The meaning may otherwise be put thus: By exercise of thy supernormal 
powers, visualize, as a celestial mansion, the womb thou art entering. 

4 These are: the four cardinal points, the four midway points, and the nadir 
and zenith. 

192 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [B0oK II 

and of evil karma will be liable to take refuge amongst brutes.? 
The way to repel therefrom is to call the deceased by name 
again, thus: 

O nobly-born, if thou art not able to rid thyself of attrac- 
tion and repulsion, and know not the [art of] selecting the 
womb-door, whichever of the above visions may appear, call 
upon the Precious Trinity and take refuge [therein]. Pray 
unto the Great Compassionate One. Walk with thy head 
erect. Know thyself in the Bardo. Cast away all weakness 
and attraction towards thy sons and daughters or any relations 
left behind thee; they can be of no use to thee. Enter upon 
the White Light-[Path] of the devas, or upon the Yellow 
Light-[Path]? of human beings; enter into the great mansions 
of precious metals and into the delightful gardens. 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: Repeat that [address to the 
deceased] seven times over. Then there should be offered 
‘The Invocation of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas’; ‘The 
Path of Good Wishes Giving Protection from Fears in the 
Bardo’; ‘The Root Words [or Verses] of the Bardo’; and 
‘The Rescuer [or Path of Good Wishes for Saving] from 
the Ambuscades [or Dangerous Narrow Passage-Way] of 
the Bardo’.® These are to be read over thrice. ‘The Zahdol’, 
which liberateth the body-aggregate,* should also be read out. 

1 Or, esoterically, amongst wombs of brute-like human beings. (Cf. p. 1851.) 

2 The text here contains, instead of Yellow Light, ‘ Blue Light’, evidently, as 
in like instances above, through error in copying. 

3 These four Prayers (or ‘ Paths of Good Wishes’) are given in the Appendix, 
pp. 197-208. 

4 The aggregate of a living human body, according to some Tibctan systems 
of yoga, is composed of twenty-seven parts: (1) the five elements (earth, water, 
fire, air, ether); (2) the five skandhas (body-aggregate, sensation-aggregate, 
feelings-aggregate, volition-aggregate, consciousness-aggregate); (3) the five airs 
(downward-air, warmth-equalizing-air, the pervader, upward-moving-air, life- 
holding air); (4) the five sense-organs (nose, ears, eyes, tongue, skin); (5) the 
six faculties (sight, smell, hearing, tasting, perception, reasoning); and (6) the 
mentality. These twenty-seven parts constitute the impermanent personality. 
Behind them all stands the subconsciousness, the Knower, which, unlike the 
personality, is the principle capable of realizing Nirvana. 

Some portions of the text of the Zahdol are made into Yantras (or talismans— 
see p. 136!) and attached to the body, both of the living and dead; and at the 
time of a person’s death are either cremated or interred with the corpse, the 
popular belief being that thus liberation is conferred upon the body-agercgate. 

PART IT] FATHS TO LIBERATION 193 

Then ‘ The Rite which Conferreth of Itself Liberation in [Virtue 
of | Propensity’! should be read too. 

[THE GENERAL CONCLUSION] 

By the reading of these properly, those devotees [or yogis] 
who are advanced in understanding can make the best use of 
the Transference? at the moment of death. They need not 
traverse the Intermediate State, but will depart by the 
Great Straight-Upward [Path]. Others who are a little 
less practised [in things spiritual], recognizing the Clear 
Light in the Chonyid Bardo, at the moment of death, will 
go by the upward [course]. Those lower than these will be 
liberated—in accordance with their particular abilities and 
karmic connexions—when one or other of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities dawneth upon them, during the succeeding 
[two] weeks, while in the Chényid Bardo. 

There being several turning-points,* liberation should be 
obtained at one or other of them through recognizing. But 
those of very weak armic connexion, whose mass of obscura- 
tions is great [because of] evil actions, have to wander down- 
wards and downwards to the Szdpa Bardo. Yet since there 
are, like the rungs of a ladder, many kinds of settings-face-to- 
face [or remindings], liberation should have been obtained at 
one or at another by recognizing. But those of the weakest 
karmic connexions, by not recognizing, fall under the in- 
fluence of awe and terror. [For them] there are various graded 

The Astrology for the Dead—a Tibetan work, in many versions, for determining 
(by using the moment of death as a basis for astrological calculations) the 
appropriate time, place, and method for the disposal of the corpse, and the 
after-death realm to which the deceased is destined and the land and condition 
in which he will be reborn on earth—prescribes such use of the Tahdol. 

1 Text: Chds-spyod-bag-chags-vang-grol (pron. Chi-chod-bag-chah-rang-dot),the 
title of a metrical version, in brief form, of the Bardo Thédol, which, being easy 
to memorize and thereafter recite as a matter of habit, is referred to as liberating 
because of such acquired habit or propensity on the part of the deceased, it being 
supposed that the deceased knows the ritual by heart and that its reading will 
remind him of it and thereby bring about his liberation. 

2 See pp. 85-6, above. 

3 See p. 89°, above. 

4 Or ‘narrow passages’, or ‘ambuscades’, 

3069 Cc 

194 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH _ [BooK II 

teachings for closing the womb-door and for selecting the 
womb-door; and, at one or other of these, they should 
have apprehended the method of visualization and [applied | 
the illimitable virtues [thereof] for exaiting one’s own con- 
dition. Even the lowest of them, resembling the brute order, 
will have been able—in virtue of the application of the 
Refuge—to turn from entering into misery ; and, [obtaining] 
the great [boon] of a perfectly endowed and freed human 
body,! will, in the next birth, meeting with a guru who is 
a virtuous friend, obtain the [saving] vows. 

If this Doctrine arrive [while one is] in the Szdpa Bardo, 
it will be like the connecting up of good actions, resembling 
[thus] the placing of a trough in [the break of] a broken drain: 
such is this Teaching. 

Those of heavy evil karma cannot possibly fail to be 
liberated by hearing this Doctrine [and recognizing]. If it 
be asked, why? it is because, at that time, all the Peaceful 
and Wrathful Deities being present to receive [one], and the 
Maras and the Interrupters likewise coming to receive [one] 
along with them, the mere hearing of this Doctrine then 
turneth one’s views, and liberation is obtained; for there 

1 Text: dal-hbyor-phun-sum-tshogs-paht-mt-liis (pron. tal-jor-phiin-sum-tsho- 
pat-mi-lit) : ‘a perfectly endowed and freed human body’; ‘freed’ implying 
freedom from the eight thraldoms: (1) the ever-recurring round of pleasure 
concomitant with existence as a deva; (2) the incessant warfare concomitant 
with existence as an asura; (3) the helplessness and slavery concomitant with 
existence under conditions like those prevailing in the world of brutes; (4) the 
torments of hunger and thirst concomitant with existence as a prefa; (5) the 
extremes of heat and cold concomitant with existence in Hell; (6) the irreligion 
or perverted religion concomitant with existence amongst certain races of man- 
kind, or (7) the physical or (8) other impediments concomitant with certain 
sorts of human birth. 

To win a perfectly endowed human body, one must inherently possess faith, 
perseverance, intellect, sincerity, and humility as a religious devotee, and be 
born at a time when religion prevails (i.e. when an Enlightened One shall be 
incarnate or when His teachings are the driving force of the world) and meet 
then a great, spiritually developed guru. 

? If a drain be broken, the continuity in the flow of the water is broken. 
The Teaching is, in its effects, like repairing the drain by insertion of a trough 
to conduct the water across the break (which is symbolical of the break in the 
stream of consciousness caused by death). Thereby is the merit of good deeds 

done in the human world made to carry the deceased forward: the continuity 
is re-established. 

rape) LFRICACY OF THE BARDO THODOL 1095 

is no flesh and blood body to depend upon, but a mental 
body, which is [easily] affected. At whatever distance one 
may be wandering in the Bardo, one heareth and cometh, 
for one possesseth the slender sense of supernormal per- 
ception and foreknowledge; and, recollecting and appre- 
hending instantaneously, the mind is capable of being changed 
[or influenced]. Therefore is it [i.e. the Teaching] of great 
use here. It is like the mechanism of a catapult! It is like 
the moving of a big wooden beam [or log] which a hundred 
men cannot carry, but which by being floated upon water can 
be towed wherever desired in a moment.” It is like the con- 
trolling of a horse’s mouth by means of a bridle.* 

Therefore, going near [the body of] one who hath passcd 
out of this life—if the body be there,—impress this [upon the 
spirit of the deceased] vividly, again and again, until blood 
and the yellowish water-secretion begin to issue from the 
nostrils, At that time the corpse should not be disturbed. 
The rules to be observed for this [impressing to be efficacious] 
are: no animal should be slain on account of the deceased ;+* 
nor should relatives weep or make mournful wailings near the 
dead body ;° [let the family] perform virtuous deeds as far as 
possible.® 

1 As a catapult enables one to direct a great stone at a definite target or goal, 
so this Doctrine enables the deceased to direct himself to the Goal of Liberation. 

2 As water makes the moving of the beam possible, so this doctrine makes 
possible the conducting of the deceased to the place or state of existence most 
appropriate, or even to Buddhahood. 

8 As with a bridle, controlling the bit and the course of the horse, so with 

this Doctrine the deceased can be directed or turned in his after-death pro- 
gression. 

4 This does not refer to animal-sacrifice for the dead, but to the non-Buddhist 
habit of slaying animals to provide meat for the /amas and the guests at the 
house of death while the funeral rites are being conducted. Unfortunately, 
this prohibition is often overlooked ; and, though no killing of animals may take 
place there, slaughtered animals may be brought from a distance—an observance 
after the letter, but not in the spirit of this Buddhist precept of non-killing. 
(See p. 1694.) 

5 Wailings and lamentations have been customary amongst Tibetans and 
related Himalayan peoples, as amongst the peoples of India and of Egypt, since 
immemorial times ; but Buddhism, like the Islamic Faith, discountenances them. 

8 Such deeds are, for example, the feeding of /amas and of the poor, alms- 
giving, the presentation of religious texts or images to monasteries, and the 
endowment of monasteries if the deceased left much wealth. 

196 BARDO OF SEEKING REBIRTH [BK. It, PT. 11] 

In other ways, too, this Great Doctrine of the Bardo Thédol, 
as well as any other religious texts, may be expounded [to the 
dead or dying]. If this [Doctrine] be joined to the end of The 
Guide} and recited [along with The Guide] it becometh very 
efficacious. In yet other ways it should be recited as often as 
possible.2 The words and meanings should be committed to 
memory [by every one]; and, when death is inevitable and the 
death-symptoms are recognized,—strength permitting—one 
should recite it oneself, and reflect upon the meanings. If 
strength doth not permit, then a friend should read the Book 
and impress it vividly. There is no doubt as to its liberating. 

The Doctrine is one which liberateth by being seen, 
without necd of meditation or of sa@dhand;* this Profound 
Teaching liberatecth by being heard or by being seen. This 
Profound Teaching liberateth those of great evil karma 
through the Secret Pathway. One should not forget its 
meaning and the words, even though pursued by seven 
mastiffs.* 

By this Select Teaching, one obtaincth Buddhahood at the 
moment of death. Were the Buddhas of the Three Times 
[the Past, the Present, and the Future] to seek, They could 
not find any doctrine transcending this. 

Thus is completed the Profound Hcart-Drops of the Bardo 
Doctrine, called The Bardo Thodol, which liberateth embodied 
beings, 

[Here endeth the Tibetan Book of the Dead] 

u See jo, Gig. 

2 Lit., ‘ be recited always’. 

® Text: Bsgrub (pron. Dub): Skt. Sadhana, ‘perfected devotion’, which 
ordinarily requires the very careful performance of a ritual more or less technical 
and elaborate. 

* Fierce mastiffs are numerous in most Tibetan villages, and travellers protect 
themselves by special charms against them. This reference to seven mastiffs is 
purely Tibetan, and is additional internal evidence that the Bardo Thédol took 
form in Tibet itself, deriving much of its matter from Indian mythology and 
systems of Yoga philosophy. 

Men EP APPENDIX} 

[In our Manuscript (but not in the Block-Print), directly 
following the text of the Bardo Théodol, there are thirteen 
folios of rituals and prayers (lit.,‘ paths of good wishes’), which 
all professional readers of the Bardo Thédol must know, 
usually from memory, and apply as needed;} and they are 
here rendered into English as follows:] 

[I: THE INVOCATION OF THE BUDDHAS AND 
BODHISATTVAS] 

[Instructions to the Officiant]: The invoking of the Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas for assistance, when [any one is] dying, 
is [thus] : 

Offer up to the Trinity whatever actual offerings can be 
offered [by the dying person, or by his family], together with 
mentally-created offerings; and, holding in the hand swect- 
smelling incense, repeat, with great fervency, the following : 

O ye Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, abiding in the Ten Direc- 
tions,? endowed with great compassion, endowed with fore- 
knowledge, endowed with the divine eye, endowed with love, 
affording protection to sentient beings, condescend through 
the power of your great compassion to come hither; conde- 
scend to accept these offerings actually laid out and mentally 
created. 

O ye Compassionate Ones, ye possess the wisdom of under- 
standing, the love of compassion, the power of [doing] divine 
deeds and of protecting, in incomprehensible measure. Ye 
Compassionate Ones, (such-and-such a person) is passing from 
this world to the world beyond. He is leaving this world. 
He is taking a great leap. No friends [hath he]. Misery is 
great. [He is without] defenders, without protectors, without 
forces and kinsmen. The light of this world hath set. He 

1 The directions for employing these rituals and prayers are contained in the 

Bardo Thédol above (pp. 88, 192). 
2SCiapy rot. 

198 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

goeth to another place. He entereth thick darkness. He 
falleth down a steep precipice. He entereth into a jungle 
solitude. He is pursued by Karmic Forces. He goeth into 
the Vast Silence. He is borne away by the Great Ocean. 
He is wafted on the Wind of Karma. He goeth in the direc- 
tion where stability existeth not. He is caught by the Great 
Conflict. He is obsessed by the Great Afflicting Spirit. He 
is awed and terrified by the Messengers of the Lord of Death. 
Existing Karma putteth him into repeated existence. No 
strength hath he. He hath come upon a time when he hath 
to go alone. 

O ye Compassionate Ones, defend (so-and-so) who is defence- 
less. Protect him who is unprotected. Be his forces and his 
kinsmen. Protect [him] from the great gloom of the Bardo. 
Turn him from the red [or storm] wind of Karma, Turn him 
from the great awe and terror of the Lords of Death. Save 
him from the long narrow passage-way of the Bardo. 

O ye Compassionate Ones, let not the force of your com- 
passion be weak; but aid him. Let him not go into misery 
[or the miserable states of existence]. Forget not your ancient 
vows; and let not the force of your compassion be weak. 

O ye Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, let not the might of the 
method of your compassion be weak towards this one. Catch 
hold of him with [the hook of] your grace.’ Let not the 
sentient being fall under the power of evil karma. 

O ye Trinity, protect him from the miseries of the Bardo.” 

Saying this with great humility and faith, let thyself and 
[all] others [present] repeat it thrice. 

1 See p. 109%. 

? It is interesting to compare with this Northern Buddhist prayer the following 
medieval Christian prayer, to Saint Michael, from The Craft to Know Weill to 
Die, chap. VI, Comper’s ed. (pp. 84-5): ‘Saint Michael Archangel of God, 
succour us now before the right high Judge. O champion invincible, be thou 
present now and assist thou this (Name), our brother, which strongly labourcth 
towards his end, and defend him mightily from the dragon infernal, and from 
all the frauds of the evil spirits. O yet furthermore, we pray thee, which art 
the right clear and much fair shower of the divinity, to the end that in this last 
hour of the life of this (Name), our brother, thou wilt benignly and swectly 
receive his soul into thy right holy bosom; and that thou wilt bring him in the 
place of refreshing, of peace and rest. Amen,’ 

PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE 199 

(l:] (TE PATH OF GOOD WISHES FOR*SAVING 
FROM THE DANGEROUS NARROW PASSAGE- 
Way OF THE BARDO’ 

’ is [as follows]: 

[1] 
O ye Conquerors and your Sons, abiding in the Ten 
Directions, 
O ye ocean-like Congregation of the All-Good Conquerors, 
the Peaceful and the Wrathful, 
O ye Gurus and Devas, and ye Dakinis, the Faithful Ones, 
Hearken now out of [your] great love and compassion : 
Obeisance, O ye assemblage of Gurus and Déakinis ; 
Out of your great love, lead us along the Path. 

[2] 

When, through illusion, I and others are wandering in the 
Sang sara, 

Along the bright light-path of undistracted listening, reflection, 
and meditation, 

May the Gurus of the Inspired Line lead us, 

May the bands of Mothers be our rear-guard, 

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of 
the Bardo, 

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[3] 

When, through violent anger, [we are] wandering in the 
Saugsara, 

Along the bright light-path of the Mirror-like Wisdom, 

May the Bhagavan Vajra-Sattva lead us, 

May the Mother Mamaki be our rear-guard, 

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of 
the Bardo, 

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

200 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

[4] 
When, through intense pride, [we are] wandering in the 
Sangsara, 
Along the bright light-path of the Wisdom of Equality, 
May the Bhagavan Ratna-Sambhava lead us, 
May the Mother, She-of-the-Buddha-Eye, be our rear-guard, 
May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 
May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[5] 
When, through great attachment, [we are] wandering in the 
Sangsara, 
Along the bright light-path of the Discriminating Wisdom, 
May the Bhagavan Amitabha lead us, 
May the Mother, [She]-of-White-Raiment, be our rear-guard, 
May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 
May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[5] 
When, through intense jealousy, [we are] wandering in the 
Saugsara, 
Along the bright light-path of the All-Performing Wisdom, 
May the Bhagavan Amogha-Siddhi lead us, 
May the Mother, the Faithful Tara, be our rear-guard, 
May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 
May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[7] 

When, through intense stupidity, [we are] wandering in the 
Sangsara, 

Along the bright light-path of the Wisdom of Reality, 

May the Bhagavan Vairochana lead us, 

May the Mother of Great Space be our rear-guard, 

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE 201 

[8] 

When, through intense illusion, [we are] wandering in the 
Sangsara, 

Along the bright light-path of the abandonment of hallucina- 
tory fear, awe, and terror, 

May the bands of the Bhagavans of the Wrathful Ones 
lead us, 

May the bands of the Wrathful Goddesses Rich-in-Space be 
our rear-guard, 

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[9] 

When, through intense propensities, [we are] wandering in 
the Sangsara, 

Along the bright light-path of the Simultaneously-born 
Wisdom, 

May the heroic Knowledge-Holders lead us, 

May the bands of the Mothers, the Dé@kinis, be our rear-guard, 

May we be saved from the fearful narrow passage-way of the 
Bardo, 

May we be placed in the state of the perfect Buddhahood. 

[10] 
May the ethereal elements not rise up as enemies ; 
May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Blue Buddha. 
May the watery elements not rise up as enemies; 
May it come that we shall see the Realm of the White 
Buddha. 
May the earthy elements not rise up as enemies ; 
May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Yellow 
Buddha. 
May the fiery elements not rise up as enemies; 
May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Red Buddha. 
3069 Dd 

202 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

May the airy elements not rise up as enemies; 

May it come that we shall see the Realm of the Green 
Buddha. 

May the elements of the rainbow colours not rise up as 
enemies ; 

May it come that all the Realms of the Buddhas will be seen. 

May it come that all the Sounds [in the Bardo] will be known 
as one’s own sounds; 

May it come that all the Radiances will be known as one’s 
own radiances ; 

May it come that the Z7vz-Kaya will be realized in the 
Bardo. 

[III:] Here beginneth 
‘THE ROOT VERSES OF Tit SAE S=. 

[x] 
O now, when the Birthplace Bardo upon me is dawning! 
Abandoning idleness—there being no idleness in [a devotee’s] 
life— 
Entering into the Reality undistractedly, listening, reflecting, 
and meditating, 
Carrying on to the Path [knowledge of the true nature of] 
appearances and of mind, may the 77z-K aya be realized : 
Once that the human form hath been attained, 
* May there be no time [or opportunity] in which to idle it [or 
human life] away. 
[2] 
O now, when the Dream Bardo upon me is dawning! 
Abandoning the inordinate corpse-like sleeping of the sleep of 
stupidity, 
May the consciousness undistractedly be kept in its natural 
state ; 

» The Blue Buddha is Samanta-Bhadra; the White Buddha, Vajra-Sattva ; 
the Yellow Buddha, Ratna-Sambhava; the Red Buddha, Amitabha; the Green 
Buddha, Amogha-Siddhi. Herein Samanta-Bhadra occupies the position often 
given to Vairochana, both deities being in essence the same, although sometimes 

Vairochana is depicted as being white in colour instead of blue. (Cf. the Bardo 
Thédol, the First to the Fifth Day.) 

PRAYER FOR RIGHT-KNOWLEDGE 203 

Grasping the [true nature of] dreams, [may I] train [myself] 
in the Clear Light of Miraculous Transformation: 

Acting not like the brutes in. slothfulness, 

May the blending of the practising of the sleep [state] and 
actual [or waking] experience be highly valued [by me]. 

[3] 

O now, when the Dhyana Bardo upon me is dawning! 

Abandoning the whole mass of distractions and illusions, 

May [the mind] be kept in the mood of endless undistracted 
Samadhi, 

May firmness both in the visualizing and in the perfected 
[stages] be obtained : 

At this time, when meditating one-pointedly, with [all other] 
actions put aside, 

May I not fall under the power of misleading, stupefying 
passions. 

[4] 

O now, when the Bardo of the Moment of Death upon 
me is dawning! 

Abandoning attraction and craving, and weakness for all 
[worldly things], 

May I be undistracted in the space of the bright [enlightening] 
teachings,? 

May I [be able to] transfuse myself into the heavenly space 
of the Unborn: 

The hour hath come to part with this body composed of flesh 
and blood; 

May I know the body to be impermanent and illusory. 

[5] 

O now, when the Bardo of the Reality upon me is dawning, 
Abandoning all awe, fear, and terror of all [phenomena], 

1 There is a very profound system of yoga in which the devotee’s aim is to 
enter the dream-state at will and carry on experiments therein in full conscious- 
ness of being in the dream-state, and then return to the waking-state with com- 
plete memory of the experience ; thereby is realized the unreality of both states— 
that both are merely illusory, being based wholly upon phenomena. 

2 Or, ‘ May I enter into the bright space of undistractedness [and enlightening] 
teachings’, 

204 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

May I recognize whatever appeareth as being mine own 
thought-forms, 

May I know them to be apparitions in the Intermediate 
State; 

[It hath becn said], ‘There arriveth a time when the chief 
turning-point is reached ; 

Fear not the bands of the Peaceful and Wrathful, Who are 
thine own thought-forms’. 

[5] 

O now, when the Bardo of [taking] Rebirth upon me is 
dawning ! 

One-pointedly holding fast to a single wish, 

{May I be able to] continue the course of good deeds through 
repeated efforts ;1 

May the womb-door be closed and the revulsion recollected : 

The hour hath come when energy and pure love are needed ; 

[May I] cast off jealousy and meditate upon the Guru, the 
Father-Mother. 

[7] 
[‘O] procrastinating one, who thinketh not of the coming of 
death, 
Devoting thyself to the useless doings of this life, 
Improvident art thou in dissipating thy great opportunity ; 
Mistaken, indeed, will thy purpose be now if thou returnest 
empty-handed [from this life]: 
Since the Holy Dharma is known to be thy true need, 
Wilt thou not devote [thyself] to the Holy Dharma even 
now ?’ 

[EPILOGUE] 

Thus say the Great Adepts? in devotion. 
If the chosen teaching of the gurz be not borne in mind, 
Wilt thou not [O skzskya] be acting even as a traitor to 
thyself ? 
1 Lit., ‘{May I be able to] join with the remnants of good deeds by re- 

peated effort’, (Cf. p. 135%.) 
? Text: Grub-chen (pron. Dub-chen): Skt. Maha-siddhas. 

PRAYER FOR PROTECTION 205 

It is of great importance that these Root Words be known. 

[IV :] Here beginneth 

ite Path OF GOOD WISHES WHICH PRO- 
TEGVETH BROM FEAR IN THE LAKRDO’: 

[1] 
When the cast [of the dice] of my life hath become exhausted, 
The relatives in this world avail me not; 
When I wander alone by myself in the Bardo, 
[O] ye Conquerors, Peaceful and Wrathful, exercising the 
power of your compassion, 
Let it come that the Gloom of Ignorance be dispelled. 

[2] 

When wandering alone, parted from loving friends, 

When the shapes of mine empty thought-forms dawn upon 
me here, 

{May the] Buddhas, exerting the power of their divine com- 
passion, 

Cause it to come that there be neither awe nor terror in the 
Bardo. 

[3] 

When the bright radiances of the Five Wisdoms shine upon 
me now, 

Let it come that I, neither awed nor terrified, may recognize 
them to be of myself; 

When the apparitions of the Peaceful and Wrathful forms are 
dawning upon me here, 

Let it come that I, obtaining the assurance of fearlessness, 
may recognize the Bardo. 

[4] 

When experiencing miseries, because of the force of evil 
karma, 

Let it come that the Conquerors, the Peaceful and Wrathful, 
may dispel the miseries ; 

206 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

When the self-existing Sound of Reality reverberates [like] 
a thousand thunders, 

Let it come that they be transmuted into the sounds of the 
Mahayana Doctrines.? 

[5] 

When {I am] unprotected, [and] £armic influences have to be ~ 
followed here, 

I beseech the Conquerors, the Peaceful and the Wrathful, to 
protect me; 

When suffering miseries, because of the Zarmic influence of 
propensities, 

Let it come that the blissful Samadhi of the Clear Light 
may dawn [upon mel. 

[6] 
When assuming supernormal rebirth in the Szdpa Bardo, 
Let it come that the perverting revelations of Mara occur not 
therein; 
When I arrive wheresoever I wish to, 
Let it come that I experience not the illusory fright and awe 
from evil arma. 

[7] 
When the roarings of savage beasts are uttered, 
Let it come that they be changed into the sacred sounds of 
the Six Syllables ; ? 
When pursued by snow, rain, wind, and darkness, 
Let it come that I see with the celestial eyes of bright 
Wisdom. 
[8] 

Let it come that all sentient beings of the same harmonious 
order in the Bardo, 

Without jealousy [towards one another],° obtain birth on the 
higher planes ; 

? That is, into the sounds of the mantra Om-md-ni-pay-mé-Hing! and of 
other mantras of the Mahayana and Mantraydna Doctrines ; (cf. stanza 9 
below; also pp. 1491, 134”). 

* These are: Om-md-ni-pay-mé-Hing! (Cf. p. 1491.) 

° This may also refer to the jealousy arising when one is taking rebirth either 
as a male or a female. (See p. 179.) 

PRAYER FOR PROTECTION 207 

When [destined to] suffering from intense miseries of hunger 
and thirst, 

Let it come that I experience not the pangs of hunger and 
thirst, heat and cold.! 

[9] 

When I behold the future parents in union, 

Let it come that I behold them as the [Divine] Pair, the 
Conquerors, the Peaceful and the Wrathful Father and 
Mother; 

Obtaining the power of being born anywhere, for the good of 
others, 

Let it come that I obtain the perfect body, adorned with the 
signs and the graces,? 

[10] 
Obtaining for myself the body of a male [which is] the 
better, 
Let it come that I liberate all who see or hear me; 
Allowing not the evil Zarma to follow me, 
Let it come that whatever merits [be mine] follow me and be 
multiplied. 

[11] 
Wherever I be born, there and then, 
Let it come that I meet the Conquerors, the Peaceful and the 
Wrathful Deities ; 
Being able to walk and to talk as soon as [I am] born,’ 
Let it come that I obtain the non-forgetting intellect and 
remember my past life* [or lives]. 

1 ‘Hunger and thirst’ refer to the sufferings concomitant with existence as 
a preta (or unhappy ghost); ‘heat and cold’, to existence in the hot and cold 
Hells. 

2 This refers to the body of a Buddha, in which appear various supernormal 
signs and powers. 

3 This is a reference to the Buddha, Who when born is said to have taken 
fifty-six steps, seven forwards and seven backwards in each of the four cardinal 
directions, and to have uttered a divine premonitory sentence at the end of 
each fourteen steps. After that supernormal performance He, like an ordinary 
babe, was unable to walk or to talk until normally old enough. 

In the Samgiti Satta, Digha Nikaya, of the Pali Canon of Southern 

208 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: APPENDIX 

[12] 
In all the various lores, great, small, and intermediate, 
Let it come that I be able to obtain mastery merely upon 
hearing, reflecting, and seeing ; 
In whatever place I be born, let it be auspicious ; 
Let it come that all sentient beings be endowed with happiness. 

[33] 
Ye Conqucrors, Peaceful and Wrathful, in likeness to your 
bodies, 
[Number of your] followers, duration of your life-period, limit 
of your realms, 
And [in likeness to the] goodness of your divine name, 
Let it come that I, and others, equal your very selves in all these. 

[14] 

By the divine grace of the innumerable All-Good Peaceful 
and Wrathful [Ones], 

And by the gift-waves of the wholly pure Reality, 

[And] by the gift-waves of the one-pointed devotion of the 
mystic devotees, 

Let it come that whatsoever be wished for be fulfilled here 
and now. 

‘The Path of Good Wishes Affording Protection from Fears 
in the Bardo’ is finished. 

Buddhism, there is the following explanation from the Buddha Himself as to 
the non-forgetting (and the forgetting) of past incarnations: 

‘There are four conditions of entrance of the embryo into the womb: 

‘Brethren, in this world, one cometh into existence in the mother’s womb 
without knowing, remaineth in it without knowing, and cometh out from the 
mother’s womb without knowing; this is the first. 

‘Brethren, one cometh into existence in the mother’s womb knowingly, 
remaineth in it without knowing, and cometh out from it without knowing ; 
this is the second. 

‘Brethren, one cometh into existence in the mother’s womb knowingly, 
remaineth in it knowingly, and cometh out from it without knowing ; this is the 
third, 

‘Brethren, in this world, one cometh into existence in the mother’s womb 
knowingly, remaineth in it knowingly, and cometh out from it knowingly ; this 
is the fourth,’ 

(Cf. the method, taught by the Buddha, of remembering past lives, pp. 40-1.) 

ibe CONCLUDING SEVEN VERSES 209 

[Vs THE COLOPHON] 

[The Manuscript concludes with the following seven verses 
by the dama or scribe who compiled it, but he—faithful to the 
old /amaic teaching that the human personality should be 
self-abased and the Scriptures alone exalted before the gaze of 
sentient creatures—has not recorded his name :] 

Through the perfectly pure intention of mine 

In the making of this, through the root of the merits 
thereof, 

[May] those protectorless sentient beings, Mothers, 

[Be] placed in the State of the Buddha:! 

Let the radiant glory of auspiciousness come to illuminate 
the world ;? 

Let this Book be auspicious ; # 

Let virtue and goodness be perfected in every way. 

[Here endeth the Manuscript of the Bardo Thodol.| 

1 In dedicating the whole of the spiritual merit, derived from the task of tran- 
scribing our copy of the Bardo Thédol, to mothers, irrespective of race or religion, 
to the end that they may be helped to attain Buddhahood, the scribe testifies to 
the position of respect and honour which the democracy of Buddhism has always 
assigned to woman, 

2 Lit. ‘ Jambudvipa’, the proper Sanskrit name given to the realm of human 
beings, 

3 The text of this verse is Mangalam: dGeho (pron. Gewo), the Sanskrit and the 
Tibetan term (each meaning ‘Let it [i.e. this Book] be auspicious’), in apposition, 
suggesting that the scribe possessed at least a limited knowledge of Sanskrit. 

3069 18; (2 

‘Fill up, Punna, the orb of holy life, 
E’en as on fifteenth day the full-orb’d moon. 
Fill full the perfect knowledge of the Path, 
And scatter all the gloom of ignorance.’— 
Punna, a Bhikkhuni. 
Psalms of the Early Buddhists, 1. iii 
(Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Translation), 

Oe Dien 1) A 

These Addenda consist of seven sections, complementary to 
our Introduction and Commentary, concerning (1) Yoga, 
(2) Tantricism, (3) Mantras, or Words of Power, (4) the Gurz 
and Skiskya (or Chela) and Initiations, (5) Reality, (6) Northern 
and Southern Buddhism and Christianity, and (7) the Medieval 
Christian Judgement. 

YOGA 

The word Yoga (frequently appearing in our annotations to 
the Bardo Thodol text), derived from the Sanskrit root yw, 
meaning ‘to join’, closely allied with the English verb Zo yoke, 
implies a joining or yoking of the lower human nature to the 
higher or divine nature in such manner as to allow the higher 
to direct the lower;! and this condition—essential to the 
successful application of the Bardo doctrines—is to be brought 
about by control of the mental process. So long as the field 
of the mind is occupied by such thought-forms and thought- 
processes as arise from the false concept, universally dominat- 
ing mankind, that phenomena and phenomenal appearances 
are real, a state of mental obscuration called ignorance, 
which prevents true knowledge, exists. It is only when all 
obscuring and erroneous concepts are totally inhibited and 
the field of the mind is swept clean of them that the primor- 
dial or unmodified condition of mind, which is ever devoid of 
these thought-formations and thought-processes arising from 
ignorance, is realizable ; and, in its realization, there dawns Illu- 
mination, symbolized in the Bardo Thodol as the Primal Clear 
Light of the Dharma-K aya. 

A mirror covered with a thick deposit of dust, or a crystal 
vase filled with muddied water, symbolize the mind of the 
normal human being darkened with the nescience arising from 

1 Some scholars question this generally accepted explanation and think that 
the term yoga probably means ‘practice’ as opposed to theory in religion. If 
so, it would then imply yogic practice such as will produce indomitable control 
over the mental processes and lead to realization of Reality. In this sense, 

yoga may be regarded asa system of applied psychology far more highly developed 
than any known to Western Science, 

212 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

heresies and false knowledge. Yoga is a scientific method of 
removing the dust from the mirror and the earthy particles 
from the water. It is only when the mind is thus made clear 
and limpid that it can reflect the Light of Reality and man 
can come to know himself. J/aya, or Illusion, is the Veil of 
Isis hiding from man the Unsullied and Unsulliable Reality ; 
the piercing of this Veil and the secing of that which it hides 
is accomplished through methods as definite and certain in 
psychical results as those employed in a European or American 
chemical laboratory are in physical results. As gold can be 
separated from impurities by methods of chemistry, so can 
Truth be divorced from Error by methods of Yaga. 

Like the root teachings of Buddhism, the root teachings of 
the Bardo Thodol are incapable of being practically applied 
without Right Knowledge; Right Knowledge to be at all 
effective in a devotee’s life should not depend merely upon 
belief or theory, but upon realization; and realization of Right 
Knowledge is impossible without such mind control as Yaga 
implics. That this is so, the canonical scriptures of all schools 
of Buddhism confirm.! 

It is not our purpose to discuss here the intricacies of the 
various aspects and schools of Yoga; for, though technical 
terms and some of the purely philosophical or theoretical parts 
of the Hindu, Buddhist, and other systems of the science of 
mind-control often differ widely, we are convinced, after much 
research carried on while living among yogis of various 
schools, that the goal for all yogis is, in the last analysis of 
esotcricism, idcntical, namely, emancipation from the thraldom 
of sangsaric, or phenomenal, existence, the Hindus calling it 
Mukti and the Buddhists Mirvana? 

Intellectual understanding of much of the Bardo Thédol is, 

1 Yoga practice was introduced into Mahdyaua Buddhism by Asanga, a monk 
of Gandhara (Peshawar, India). He is said to have been inspired directly by 
the Bodhisat Maitreya, the coming Buddha, and so produced the Scriptures of 
the Yoga-carya (i. e. ‘Contemplative ’) School called The Five Books of Maitreya 
(cf. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, p. 128). 

* The editor possesses a number of very important translations, by the late 
Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, of Tibetan treatises on Yoga, one of them having 
originated in ancient India. If there should be encouragement to publish them, 

the editor hopes then to put’on record in more detail the results of his own 
researches in Yoga, 

YOGA 213 

therefore, obviously dependent upon at least some elementary 
explanation of Yoga, such as we have herein given. The 
Clear Light, so often referred to in our text—to take but one 
of the outstanding yogic doctrines—is best interpreted from 
the standpoint of the devotee of Yoga, though for all mankind 
alike it dawns at the all-determining moment of death. As 
such, the Clear Light symbolizes the visual condition in which 
one finds oneself at the moment of death and afterwards in 
the Intermediate State. If the vision be unclouded by karmic 
propensities, which are the source of all phenomena and appari- 
tional appearances in the Bardo, the deceased sees Reality as 
the Primordial Clear Light, and, if he so wills, can renounce 
the Sazgsaéra and pass into Mirvaua, beyond the Circle of 
Death and Rebirth. 

Such clarity of spiritual insight is, of course, extremely 
rare, being the fruit of innumerable lifetimes of right living ; 
nevertheless, the aim of the Bardo Thédol teachings is to 
attempt to place every one, when dying or deceased, in the 
Path leading to its realization. Unless, through the practice 
of mental-concentration, complete control over the thinking 
process be achieved, so as to arrive at Right Knowledge ere 
death, in virtue of having experienced Illumination (i.e. recog- 
nition of the Clear Light in an ecstatic condition while still in 
the human body), the /amas maintain that comprehension of 
the nature of the Clear Light is quite impossible for the 
unilluminated. 

Il. TANTRICISM ? 

The Bardo Thidol being itself a work more or less Tantric,? 
and consequently largely based upon the Yoga Philosophy, 
some general acquaintance with Tantricism, as with Yoga, is 

1 General references (also for Sections III and IV following): A. Avalon 
(Sir John Woodroffe), Tantra of the Great Liberation (London, 1913), Introduc- 
tion; and The Six Centres and the Serpent Power (London, 1919), passim ; Sir 
John Woodroffe, Shakti and Shékta (London, 1920), passim; also Rama 
Prasad, Nature’s Finer Forces (London, 1890), passim. 

2 To define what is and is not a Zantra is noteasy. According to its Tibetan 
etymology, Tantra (Tib. Rgyud—pron, Gyud) literally means ‘treatise’, or ‘ dis- 
sertation’, of a religious nature, usually belonging to the School of Yoga called 
Yoga-carya Mahayana (see p. 2t2!). Religiously considered, there are two 

a14 TIBETAN BOOK OF ZHE DEAD: ADDENDS 

desirable for all readers of this book. So we record here—in 
mere outline, and, therefore, more often than not undetailed 
and incomplete—the following complementary matter con- 
cerning Tantricism. 

In the preliminary instructions, the Bardo Thédol makes 
reference to the vital-force or vital-airs, which, following the 
Tantras, may be described as follows: 

The Vital-Force (Skt. Prana).—The human principle of 
consciousness, the Knower, clothes itself, when incarnate, in 
five sheaths (Skt. Kosha), which are: (1) the physical-sheath 
(Anna-maya-kosha) ; (2) the vital-sheath (Praza-maya-kosha) ; 
(3) the sheath in which resides the ordinary human conscious- 
ness (Mano-maya-kosha); (4) that of the subconsciousness 
(Vijnana-maya-kosha); and (5) that of the all-transcending 
blissful consciousness of Reality (Azanda-maya-kosha). 

In the vital-sheath resides the vital-force (Skt. raza) divided 
into ten vital-airs (vaya, derived from the root va, ‘to breathe’ 

chief groups of Tatras, one Hindu, the other Buddhist. The Hindu Janira is 
generally cast in the form of a dialogue between the god Shiva, as the Divine 
Guru, and his Shaktt Parvati, often in their wrathful forms as Bhairava and 
Bhairavi. In the Buddhist Tantra, these purely Hindu deities are replaced by 
Buddhist deitics, Buddhas and their Shakds, or by gods and goddesses. One 
characteristic of both classes of Tantras is that usually they are based upon the 
Yoga Philosophy. Which of the two classes is older is a disputed question ; but 
the oldest Tantras are probably far older than European critics (who have placed 
their origin well within the Christian era) have thought. Some Tatras are indis- 
putably quite modern. According to orthodox Hindus, the Zan/ras are of Vedic 
origin, and designed to serve as the chief Scriptures for this age, the Kali Yuga. 
Some Buddhists claim a purcly Buddhist origin for the Yantras. The Hindu 
view is, however, the commonly accepted view. 

As encyclopaedias of the knowledge of their times, the Zantras are very 
numerous. Some are concerned with the nature of the cosmos, its evolution 
and dissolution; the classification of sentient beings and of the various heavens, 
hells, and worlds; the divinely instituted rules governing human relations and 
conduct ; the numerous forms of worship and spiritual training, ceremonial rites, 
meditation, yoga, duties of kings, law, custom, medicine, astrology, astronomy, 
magic ; and, in short, the whole cycle of the sciences of the East. 

In so far as the Bardo Thédol is a ritual based upon Yoga, and has for its 
chief matter the science of birth, death, and rebirth, interwoven with deserip- 
tions of the various states of existence and beings pcopling the universe, and 
teaches of the ways of obtaining salvation, it is a Tantric work, although, strictly 
speaking, not a Tantra. 

For detailed knowledge concerning the Tantras, the student is referred to 
Principles of Tantra, Part 1, by Arthur Avalon (London, 1914). 

TANTRICISM 315 

or ‘to blow’, refers to the motive power of praza). As the 
daemons of Plato’s occultism are said to control the operations 
of the Cosmic Body, so these vayu, composed of negative 
praua, control the operations of the human body. Five are 
fundamental: (1) the praza, controlling inspiration; (2) the 
udana, controlling the ascending vital-force (or vital-air) ; 
(3) the apana, controlling the downward vital-force, which 
expels wind, excrement, urine, and semen; (4) the samdna, as 
the collective force of the vay, kindles the fire of the body 
whereby food is digested and then distributed by the blood ; 
and (5) the vyaua, controlling division and diffusion in all 
metabolic processes. The five minor airs are the WVaga, 
kurmma, krikara, deva-datia, and dhananjaya, which produce, 
respectively, hiccuping, opening and closing of the eyes, 
assistance to digestion, yawning, and distension. 

The Psychic Nerves or Channels (Skt. Nadi).—There are next 
mentioned in our text the Psychic Nerves. Sanskrit works 
on Yoga say that there are fourteen principal #@d@z and hun- 
dreds of thousands of minor z@dz in the human body, just as 
Western physiologists say that there are so many chief nerves 
and minor nerves. But the za@d@z of the East and the nerves of 
the West, although literally the same in name, are not syn- 
onymous. The zddz are invisible channels for the flow of 
psychic forces whose conducting agents are the vital-airs (vdyz). 

Of the fourteen principal 2é@dz, there are three which are of 
fundamental importance. These are, to follow our text, the 
median-nerve (Skt. sushumna-nadi), the left nerve (7da-ndadi), 
and the right nerve (pimgala-ndadi). The sushumua-nadi is 
the chief or median-nerve, situated in the hollow of the spinal 
column (Skt. Brahma-danda), the Mt. Meru of the human 
body, man being regarded as the microcosm of the macrocosm. 
The ida-nadi, to the left, and the pingala-nadi, to the right, 
coil round it as the two serpents coil round the caduceus 
carried by the messenger-god Hermes. It is believed that 
this ancient herald’s wand symbolizes the sushumna-nddi, and 
the twining serpents the zda-nadi and the pingala-nadi. If so, 
we see again how the esoteric symbol-code of the West corre- 
sponds to that of the East. 

216 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDS 

The Psychic-Nerve Centres (Skt. Chakra).—The sushumna- 
nadi forms the great highway for the passage of the psychic 
forces of the human body. These forces are concentrated in 
centres, or chakra, like dynamos, ranged along the szsheumna- 
nadi and interconnected by it, wherein are stored the vital- 
force or vital-fluid upon which all psycho-physical processes 
ultimately depend. Of these, six are of fundamental impor- 
tance. The first is known as the Root-support (A/i#ladhara) 
of the sushumnda-nddi, situated in the perineum; and in the 
Miladharaé is the secret Fountain of Vital-Force, presided 
over by the Goddess Kundalini. Next above, lies the second 
chakra, or lotus, called the Svadhishthana, which is the centre 
of the sex-organs. The navel nerve-centre is above, and 
called in Sanskrit Waut-pira-chakra. The next is the heart 
nerve-centre, the Azdhata-chakra. In the throat is located 
the fifth, called the Vishuddha-chakra. In the Ajua-chakra, 
which is the sixth, situated between the eyebrows, as depicted 
by the ‘third eye’ on images of the Buddha and of Hindu 
deities, the three chief psychic nerves (adi), seushumnd, ida, 
and pingald, come together and then separate. Above all, in 
the causal region of psychic man, as the sun of the body, 
sending its rays downwards over the human-body cosmos, is 
the Supreme or Seventh Chakra, the thousand-petalled lotus 
(or chakra) called Sahasrara Padma; through it the sushumna- 
wadi has its exit, the Aperture of Brahma (Skt. Brahkma- 
vandhra) referred to in our text, through which the conscious- 
ness-principle normally goes out from the body at death. 

The initial aim of the practitioner of Yoga is to awaken what 
in the Yantras is called the Serpent Power, personified as the 
Goddess Kundalini. It is in the Wiladhara-chakra, at the 
base of the spinal column, containing the root of the sushaummna- 
zadi, that this mighty occult power lies coiled, like a serpent 
asleep. Once the Serpent Power is aroused into activity, it is 
made to penetrate, one by one, the psychic-nerve centres, 
until, rising like mercury in a magic tube, it reaches the 
thousand-petalled lotus in the brain-centre. Spreading out in 
a fountain-like crest, it falls thence as a shower of heavenly 
ambrosia to feed all parts of the psychic body. Thus becom- 

TANTRICISM 217 

ing filled with supreme spiritual power, the yogi experiences 
Illumination. 

Mandalas.—Of the Psychic-Centres, or Chakra, the Bardo 
Thodol is concerned chiefly with three: (1) the Heart-centre 
(Anahata-chakra) ; (2) the Throat-centre (Vishuddha-chakra) ; 
and (3) the Brain-centre (Sakasrara Padma). Of these, two 
are of chief importance: the Brain-centre, sometimes called 
the Northern Centre, and the Heart-centre, or Southern 
Centre. These two constitute the two poles of the human 
organism. They are said to be the first centres to form 
in the embryo, and the terrestrial praua, derived from the 
central srauic reservoir in the sun of our planetary system, is 
said to direct their formation. 

Related to these three principal chakra, there are three 
chief mandalas or mystic groupings of deities divided into 
fourteen subsidiary mandalas corresponding to the first 
Fourteen (7 +7) Days of the Bardo as described in our text. 

The first of these three chief sandalas contains 42 deities, 
distributed in six subordinate mandalas corresponding to the 
first Six Days of the Chonyzd Bardo ; and they emanate from 
the Heart-centre. The second mandala contains Io principal 
deities, which dawn on the Seventh Day; and these emanate 
from the Throat-centre. The third mandala contains 58 
principal deities, distributed in seven subordinate maudalas, 
corresponding to the last Seven Days of the Chényid Bardo, 
and emanating from the Brain-centre. The first 42 and the 
last 58 comprise the Great Mandala of the 100 superior 
deities, the 42 being called peaceful and the 58 wrathful 
deities. The other 10 deities, related to the Throat-centre, 
which dawn intermediately between the 42 of the Heart- 
centre and the 58 of the Brain-centre, are classed with the 
42 peaceful deities. Thus, when united in the Greater 
Mandala of the whole of the Chényid Bardo, there are 
IIo principal deities. 

It will be observed, too, that there is definite orientation in 
all the mandalas. 

The Five Dhyani Buddhas with their skakécs' are the chief 

! The Sanskrit term Shakéz (literally ‘{ Divine] Power’) refers to the female, 
3069 : Ff 

218 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

deities dawning on the first Five Days. On the First Day, 
Vairochana and his shaktz alone dawn. Then on each of 
the four succeeding days, along with one of the remaining 
four of the Dhyani Buddhas and the skakt, there dawn 
two Bodhisattvas and their shakéis. Then, on the Sixth 
Day, all of these deities, dawning in one mandala, are joined 
by 16 additional deities: 8 Door-keepers, the 6 Buddhas of 
the Six Lokas, and the Adi-Buddha and shakiz; and all these 
deities together compose the 42 deities of the Heart-centre. 
Then, after the dawning of the 10 Knowledge-Holding Deities 
(called, in the Obeisances, p. 85, the Lotus Deities) of the 
Throat-centre, on the intervening Seventh Day, there dawn 
during the remaining Seven Days the 58 deities of the Brain- 
centre, as follows: on each of the first five days, or from the 
Eighth to the Twelfth Day, one of the Herukas with his shakiz, 
in all ro deities ; on the Thirteenth Day, the 8 Kerima and the 
8 Htamenma; on the Fourteenth Day, 4 Door-keepers and 
the 28 animal-headed Deities. Behind the symbolism of 
deities and zzandalas and psychic-centres there lies the rational 
explanation, namely, that each deity, as it dawns from its 
appropriate psychic-centre, represents the coming into after- 
death karmic activity of some corresponding impulse or 

or negative, phase of that divine force or power concentrated in or personified 
by the consort of a god, the god representing the positive phase; the Tantric 
worshipper of Shakti (Power), or divine universal forces, personified as 
a Mother-Goddess, being called a shakta. The Tantrics—like the ancient 
Egyptians—exalt right knowledge of the reproductive processes, as no doubt 
it should be exalted, to the Jevel of a religious science; and in this science, as 
illustrated in the Bardo Thédol, the union of the male and female principles of 
nature, in what is called in Tibetan the yab (Skt. deva) -yum (Skt. shaktz) 
attitude, symbolizes completeness, or at-one-ment, Power, symbolized by the 
male (ab, or deva), and Wisdom, symbolized by the female (yuuz, or shakti), are 
said, esoterically, to be ever in union. 

It is much to be regretted that actual abuse of Tantric doctrine, due either to 
wilful perversion or, as is commonly the case, to misunderstanding, resulting 
in practices (like those of certain decadent sects or individuals in India) 
improperly called Tantric, by non-initiates in America and in Europe, in some 
instances under the aegis of organized societies, has brought upon Tantricism 
undeserved odium. Such unfortunate outcome of lack of guidance under properly 
trained gurits tends to justify the high initiate of Oriental occultism in his stern 
refusal to divulge the inner teachings of his cult to any save carefully prepared 
pupils who have been long on probation and found worthy; this was the view 
both of the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup and of his late guru in Bhutan, 

TANTRICISM 219 

passion of the complex consciousness. As though in an 
initiatory mystery-play, the actors for each day of the Bardo 
come on the mind-stage of the deceased, who is their sole 
spectator; and their director is Karma. The higher or more 
divine elements of the consciousness-principle of the deceased 
dawn first in the full glory of the primal Clear Light; and 
then, in ever diminishing glory, the visions grow less and less 
happy—the Peaceful Deities of the Heart-centre, and then of 
the Throat-centre, merge into the Wrathful Deities of the 
Brain-centre. Finally, as the purely human and brutish pro- 
pensities, personified, in the fiercest of the Wrathful Deitics,! 
as horror-producing and threatening spectral hallucinations, 
come into the field of mental vision, the percipient flees in 
dismay from them—his own thought-forms—to the refuge 
of the womb, thereby making himself to be the plaything 
of Maya and the slave of Ignorance. In other words, in 
a manner similar to that in which the earth-plane body 
grows to maturity and then withers and after its dcath 
disintegrates, the after-death body, called the mental-body, 
grows from the heavenly days of its Bardo childhood to 
the less idealist days of its Bardo maturity, then fades and 
dies in the Intermediate State, as the Knower, abandoning 
it, is reborn. 

Some clue to the separable elements of consciousness as 
they manifest themselves in the Intermediate State is gained 
from the significance of the Tantric divisions into petals 
of the lotuses, or chakras. For example, the Heart-centre 
Lotus, or Anahata-chakra, is described as a red-coloured lotus 
of twelve petals, each petal representing one of the chief 
elements of personality (vrit¢2) as follows: (1) hope (ashd@) ; 
(2) care or anxiety (chin7a) ; (3) endeavour (cheshia) ; (4) feeling 
of mineness (amaia) ; (5) arrogance or hypocrisy (dambha) ; 
(6) languor (vikalata) ; (7) conceit (ahangkara); (8) discrimina- 
tion (viveka) ; (9) covetousness (lolata) ; (10) duplicity (Lapa- 
tata) ; (11) indecision (vztarka); (12) regret (anutapa). 

The Throat-centre Lotus, or Vishuddha-chakra, also called 

1 Of the Wrathful Deities there are two classes, the less wrathful (Tib. To’- 
wo) and the more wrathful (Tib. Drag-po). See Waddell, op. cit., pp. 332-3: 

220 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

Bharatisthana, consists of sixteen petals. The first seven 
symbolize the seven Sanskrit musical notes. The eighth 
symbolizes the ‘venom’ of mortality. The next seven re- 
present the seven seed mantras, and the sixteenth is the 
symbol for the nectar of immortality (amyrzta). 

To each of the thousand petals of the Brain-centre Lotus 
variously coloured letters of the Sanskrit or Tibetan alphabet, 
and other symbols, are esoterically assigned ; and this chakra 
is said to contain in potential state all that exists in the other 
chakras (of which it is the originator) or in the universe. 

Each of the Dhyani Buddhas, likewise, as elsewhere ex- 
plained from a different view-point, symbolizes definite spiritual 
attributes of the cosmos. Thus, Vairochana is appealed to by 
the Tantrics of Northern Buddhism as the universal force 
producing or giving form to everything both physical and 
spiritual; Vajra-Sattva (as the reflex of Akshobhya) is the 
universal force invoked for neutralizing by merit evil karma; 
Ratna-Sambhava, for the reproduction of all things desired ; 
Amitabha, for long life and wisdom; Amogha-Siddhi, for 
success in arts and crafts. In Vajra-Sattva, in his purely 
esoteric aspect, all the other Peaceful and Wrathful Deities 
of the Mandala of the Bardo Thédol are said to merge or be 
contained. 

III. MANTRAS, OR WORDS OF POWER 

A clue to the power of mantras, as referred to throughout 
the Bardo Thodol, lies in the ancient Greek theory of music ; 
namely, that, if the key-note of any particular body or substance 
be known, by its use the particular body or substance can be 
disintegrated. Scientifically, the whole problem may be under- 
stood through understanding the law of vibration. Each 
organism exhibits its own vibratory rate, and so does every 
inanimate object from the grain of sand to the mountain and 
even to each planet and sun. When this rate of vibration 
is known, the organism or form can, by occult use of it, be 
disintegrated. 

For the adept in occultism, to know the mantra of any 
deity is to know how to set up psychic or gift-wave com- 

MANTRAS 221 

munication similar to, but transcending, wireless or telepathic 
communication with that deity. For example, if the adept 
be of the left-hand path, that is to say, a black magician, 
he can, by mantras, call up and command elementals and 
inferior orders of spiritual beings, because to each belongs 
a particular rate of vibration, and this being known and 
formulated as sound in a mantra gives the magician power 
even to annihilate by dissolution the particular elemental or 
spirit to whom it belongs. As a highwayman at the point 
of a gun compels a traveller to give up money, so a black 
magician with a mantra compels a spirit to act as he wills. 

On account of this supreme power of sound, when formulated 
in mantras corresponding to the particular rate of vibration 
of spiritual beings and of spiritual and physical forces, the 
mantras are jealously guarded. And, for the purpose of main- 
taining this guardianship, lines of gurus (i.e. religious teachers) 
are established in whose keeping the words of power are 
placed. Candidates for initiation into this Brotherhood of 
Guardians of the Mysteries must necessarily be well tested 
before the Treasures can be entrusted to them, and they them- 
selves, in turn, be made Guardians. 

Unto the shishya, after he has been well tested, the mantra 
which confers power over the sleeping Goddess Kundalini is 
transmitted ; and when he utters it the Goddess awakens and 
comes to him to be commanded. Then is the need of the 
guru great; for the awakened Goddess can destroy as well 
as save—according as the mantra is wisely or unwisely used. 

As the outer air vibrates to gross sounds, the inner vital- 
airs (prama-vdyu) are set in motion and utilized by the use of 
the sounds of mantras: the Goddess first catches up the subtle 
occult sound, and, in tones of divine music, she causes it to 
ascend from her throne in the Root-Support Psychic-Centre 
to one after another of the Centres above, until its music fills 
the Lotus of a Thousand Petals and is there heard and re- 
sponded to by the Supreme Guru. 

The visualization of a deity, as frequently directed in our 
text, is often but another way of thinking of the essential 
characteristics of that deity. A like yogic effect comes from 

222 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

visualizing or else audibly pronouncing the mantra correspond- 
ing to that deity; for, by speaking forth as sound the mantra 
of any deity, that deity is made to appear. 

Unless the mantras are properly intoned they are without 
effect; and when printed and seen by the eye of the unini- 
tiated they appear utterly meaningless—and so they are 
without the guidance of the human guru. 

Furthermore, the correct pronunciation of the szantra of 
a deity depends upon bodily purity as well as upon knowledge 
of its proper intonation, Therefore it is necessary for the 
devotee first to purify, by purificatory mantras, the mouth, 
the tongue, and then the mantra itself, by a process called 
giving life to or awakening the sleeping power of the mantra. 

The occult ability to employ a mantra properly confers 
supernormal powers called Szddhz,) and these can be used, 
according to the character of the adept, either as white 
magic for good ends or as black magic for evil ends: the 
right- and left-hand paths being the same up to this point 
of practical application of the fruits obtained through psychic 
development. One path leads upward to Emancipation, the 
other downward to Enslavement. 

IV. THE GURU AND SHISHYA (OR CHELA) 
AND INITIATIONS 

Very frequently the Bardo Thodol directs the dying or the 
deceased to concentrate mentally upon, or to visualize, his 
tutelary deity or else his spiritual guru, and, at other times, 
to recollect the teachings conveyed to him by his human gurz, 
more especially at the time of the mystic initiation. YVogzs 
and Tantrics ordinarily comment upon such ritualistic directions 
by saying that there exist three lines of gurus to whom 
reverence and worship are to be paid. The first and highest 
is purely superhuman, called in Sanskrit dévyaugha, meaning 
‘heavenly (or “divine”) line’; the second is of the most 
highly developed human beings, possessed of supernormal 

1 Siddhi here means ‘ Powers’ arrived at through yogic practices. Literally, 
Siddhz is the attainment of any aim. 

INITIATIONS 223 

or stddhic powers, and hence called siddhaugha; the third 
is of ordinary religious teachers and hence called manavaugha, 
‘human line’? 

Women as well as men, if qualified, may be gurus. The 
shishya is, as a rule, put on probation for one year before 
receiving the first initiation. If at the end of that time he 
proves to be an unworthy receptacle for the higher teachings, 
he is rejected. Otherwise, he is taken in hand by the guru 
and carefully prepared for psychical development. A shishya 
when on probation is merely commanded to perform such 
and such exercises as are deemed suitable to his or her 
particular needs. Then, when the probation ends, the shishya 
is told by the guru the why of the exercises, and the final 
results which are certain to come from the exercises when 
successfully carried out. Ordinarily, once a guru is chosen, 
the skishya has no right to disobey the surz, or to take 
another guru until it is proven that the first gar can guide 
the skishya no further. If the skzshya develops rapidly, be- 
cause of good karma, and arrives at a stage of development 
equal to that of the guru, the guru, if unable to guide the 
shishya further, will probably himself direct the skzshya to 
a more advanced guru. 

For initiating a skzshya, the guru must first prepare himself, 
usually during a course of special ritual exercises occupying 
several days, whereby the guru, by invoking the gift-waves of 
the divine line of gurus, sets up direct communication with 
the spiritual plane on which the divine gurus exist. If the 
human guru be possessed of szddhic powers, this communion 
is believed to be as real as wireless or telepathic communica- 
tion between two human beings on the earth-plane. 

The actual initiation, which follows, consists of giving to 
the shishya the secret mantra, or Word of Power, whereby 
at-one-ment is brought about between the s/zskya, as the new 
member of the secret brotherhood, and the Supreme Guru 

1 The three lines of gurus are so called not because of any difference in their 
respective powers, but because of their different places of abode. In the Tantra- 
raja (ch. I) it is said that the Gurus of the Divya Order always abide in Shiva’s 

Heaven, those of the Siddha Order both in the Human-World and in the Heaven- 
Worlds, and those of the Manava Order on Earth only. 

224 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

who stands to all gurus and shishyas under him as the Divine 
Father. The vital-force, or vital-airs (praua-vayu), serve as a 
psycho-physical link uniting the human with the divine; and the 
vital-force, having been centred in the Seventh Psychic-Centre, 
or Thousand-petalled Lotus, by exercise of the awakened 
Serpent-Power, through that Centre, as through a wireless 
receiving station, are received the spiritual gift-waves of the 
Supreme Guru. Thus is the divine grace received into the 
human organism and made to glow, as electricity is made 
to glow when conducted to the vacuum of an electric bulb; 
and the true initiation is thereby conferred and the shzshya 
Illuminated. 

In the occult language of the Indian and Tibetan Mysteries, 
the Supreme Guru sits enthroned in the pericarp of the 
Thousand-petalled Lotus. Thither, by the power of the 
Serpent Power of the awakened Goddess Kundalini, the skzshya, 
guided by the human guru, is led, and bows down at the feet 
of the Divine Father, and receives the blessing and the bene- 
diction. The Veil of Aaya has been lifted, and the Clear 
Light shines into the heart of the skzskya unobstructedly. 
As one Lamp is lit by the Flame of another Lamp, so the 
Divine Power is communicated from the Divine Father, the 
Supreme Guru, to the newly-born one, the human shishya. 

The secret mantra conferred at the initiation, like the 
Egyptian Word of Power, is the Password necessary for 
a conscious passing from the embodied state into the disem- 
bodied state. If the initiate is sufficiently developed spiritually 
before the time comes for the giving up of the gross physical 
body at death, and can at the moment of quitting the earth- 
plane remember the mystic santra, or Word of Power, the 
change will take place without loss of consciousness; nor will 
the shishya of full development suffer any break in the con- 
tinuity of consciousness from incarnation to incarnation. 

V. gREALDI Y, 

In denying the soul hypothesis, Buddhism of all Schools 
maintains that personal immortality is impossible, because all 
personal existence is but a mere flux of instability and continual 

REALITY 2.25 

change karuzically dependent upon the false concept that 
phenomena, or phenomenal appearances, or phenomenal states 
and beings, are real. In other words, Buddhism holds that 
individualized mind or consciousness cannot realize Reality. 

The essence of the Bardo Thidol teachings is, likewise, that 
so long as the mind is human, so long as it is individualized, 
so long as it regards itself as separate and apart from all 
other minds, it is but the plaything of Ward, of Ignorance, 
which causes it to look upon the hallucinatory panorama of 
existences within the Sanugsara as real, and thence leads it 
to lose itself in the Quagmire of Phenomena. 

Followers of the Semitic Faiths are hereditarily so completely 
dominated by the theory of soul and of personal immortality 
after death, in a phenomenal paradise or hell, that in their 
view there can be no alternative; and to them the Buddhist 
denial of the theory erroneously appears to imply a doctrine 
of the absolute negation of being. 

The realization of Reality, according to the Bardo Thodol, 
is wholly dependent upon expurgating from the mind all 
error, all false belief, and arriving at a state in which Mara 
no longer controls. Once the mind becomes freed from all 
karmic obscurations, from the supreme heresy that phenomenal 
appearances—in heavens, hells, or worlds—are real, then there 
dawns Right Knowledge; all forms merge into that which is 
non-form, all phenomena into that which is beyond phenomena, 
all Ignorance is dissipated by the Light of Truth, personality 
ceases, individualized being and sorrow are at an end, mind 
and matter are known to be identical, the mundane conscious- 
ness becomes the supramundane, and, one with the Darma- 
Kaya, the pilgrim reaches the Goal. 

The great Patriarch Ashvaghosha, who set down in writing 
during the first century A.D.! the essential teachings of 
Mahayana Buddhism as at first handed down orally by 

1 The exact date of Ashvaghosha (or A¢vaghosha) is uncertain. According to 
Suzuki, who has investigated the question with great care, Ashvaghosha ‘lived 
at the time extending from the latter half of the first century before Christ to 
about 50 or 80 a.p.... At the very most, his time cannot be placed later than 
the first century of the Christian era’ (T. Suzuki, The Awakening of Faith, 
Chicago, 1900, p. 17). 

3069 G¢g 

226 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

initiates direct from the time of the Buddha, has other- 
wise stated the doctrines touching Reality as follows, in 
his remarkable treatise called The Awakening of Faith :* 

Of Ignorance: ‘The True Reality is originally only one, but 
the degrees of ignorance are infinite ; therefore the natures of 
men differ in character accordingly. There are unruly thoughts 
more numerous than the sands of the Ganges, some arising 
from ignorant conceptions and others arising from ignorance 
of senses and desires. Thus all kinds of wild thoughts arisc 
from ignorance and have first and last infinite differences 
which Ju Lai [i.e. the Tathagata] alone knows.’ ? 

‘As from the True Reality man knows that there is no 
objective world, then the various means of following and 
obeying this True Reality arise spontaneously [i.e. without 
thought and without action], and, when influenced by this 
power for a long time, ignorance disappears. As ignorance 
disappears, then false ideas cease to arise. As these false 
ideas do not arise, the former objective world also ends. 
As the forces cease to exist, then the false powers of the 
finite mind cease to exist, and this is called Mirvaua, when 
the natural forces of the True Reality alone work.’ ® 

1 There are two English translations of The Awakening of Iaith, from the 
Chinese, one by a Christian missionary to China, the late Rev. Timothy Richard, 
made in 1894 and published, in Shanghai, in 1907, the other by the learned 
Japanese Buddhist Mr. Teitaro Suzuki, published in rgoo, in Chicago. We give 
herein, in parallel, extracts from both. There are, likewise, two Chinese 
versions, each based upon the original Sanskrit version, which is now lost: one 
made in a,D. 554, by Paramartha (otherwise called Kulanatha), an Indian 
Buddhist missionary, who reached China in a. p. 546 and died in a. p. 569, at 
the age of 71 years; the other was begun in a. D. 7oo by Cikshananda, also an 

Indian Buddhist missionary, who died in China, in a.p. 710, at the age of 59. 
Richard’s translation is from Paramartha’s version, and Suzuki’s from Cik- 
shananda’s. 

* Richard’s trans. (p. 18), Cf. Suzuki’s trans, (p. 89): ‘Though all beings 
are uniformly in possession of suchness, the intensity [of the influence] of 
ignorance, the principle of individuation, that works from all eternity, varies in 
such manifold grades as to outnumber the sands of the Ganges. And it is even 
so with such entangling prejudices (Aleca or a¢rava) as the ego-conception, 
intellectual and affectional prejudices, &c. [whose perfuming efficiency varics 
according to the karma previously accumulated by each individual],—all these 
things being comprehended only by the Tathagata. Hence such immeasurable 
degrees of difference as regards belief, &c.’ 

8 Richard’s trans. (p. 17). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (pp. 86-7): ‘On account of 
this perfuming influence [i.e, through suchness perfuming ignorance] we are 

REALITY 207 

Of Phenomena: ‘ All phenomena are originally in the mind 
and have really no outward form; therefore, as there is no 
form, it is an error to think that anything is there. All 
phenomena merely arise from false notions in the mind. 
If the mind is independent of these false ideas, then all 
phenomena disappear... .’} 

‘Therefore the phenomena of the three worlds [of desire, of 
form, and of non-form] are mind-made. Without mind, then, 
there is practically no objective existence. Thus all existence 
arises from imperfect notions in our mind. All differences are 
differences of the mind. But the mind cannot see itself, for it 
has no form. We should know that all phenomena are created 
by the imperfect notions in the finite mind; therefore all 
existence is like a reflection in a mirror, without substance, 
only a phantom of the mind. When the finite mind acts, 
then all kinds of things arise; when the finite mind ceases 
to act, then all kinds of things cease.’ ? 

enabled to believe that we are in possession within ourselves of suchness whose 
essential nature is pure and immaculate; and we also recognize that all pheno- 
mena in the world are nothing but the illusory manifestation of the mind (alaya- 
vuyzidna) and have no reality of their own. Since we thus rightly understand 
the truth, we can practise the means of liberation, can perform those actions 
which are in accordance (with the Dharma]. Neither do we particularize, nor 
cling to. By virtue of this discipline and habituation during the lapse of 
innumerable asamkhyeyakalpas (lit. countless ages], we have ignorance anni- 
hilated. As ignorance is thus annihilated, the mind [i.e. dlaya-vytdana] is no 
more disturbed so as to be subject to individuation. As the mind is no more 
disturbed, the particularization of the surrounding world is annihilated. When 
in this wise the principle and the condition of defilement, their products, and 
the mental disturbances are all annihilated, it is said that we attain to Nirva@na 
and that various spontaneous displays of activity are accomplished.’ 

1 Richard’s trans. (p. 26), Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. 107): ‘In a word, all 
modes of relative existence, our phenomenal world as a whole, are created 
simply by the particularization of the confused mind. If we become dissociated 
from the latteé, then all modes of relative existence vanish away by themselves.’ 

2 Richard’s trans. (p. 12). Cf. Suzuki's trans. (pp. 77-8): ‘Therefore the, 
three domains {or viloka, i.e. domain of feeling (Aamaloka), domain of bodily 
existence (rapaloka), domain of incorporeality (avi#paloka)] are nothing but the 
self-manifestation of the mind [i. e. dlaya-vij#ana, which is practically identical 
with suchness, bhitatathata@|. Separated from the mind, there would be no 
such things as the six objects of sense. Why? Since all things, owing the 
principle of their existence to the mind (dlaya-vijiidna), are produced by 
subjectivity (siti), all the modes of particularization are the self-particulariza- 
tion of the mind, The mind in itself being, however, free from all attributes, is 

228 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

Of Space: ‘Men are to understand that space is nothing. 
It has no existence and is not a reality. It is a term in 
opposition to reality. We only say this or that is visible in 
order that we might distinguish between things.’ ? 

Of Mind and Matter: ‘Mind and matter are eternally the 
same. As the essence of matter is wisdom, the essence of matter 
is without form and is called the embodiment of wisdom. 
As the manifested essence of wisdom is matter, it is called 
the all-pervading embodiment of wisdom. The unmanifested 
matter is without magnitude; according to the will it can 
show itself throughout all the universe as the immeasurable 
Pusas [i.e. intelligent devout men, or Bodhisattvas], im- 
measurable inspired spirits, immeasurable glories, all different 
without magnitude and without interference with one another. 
This is what ordinary senses cannot comprehend, as it is the 
work of Absolute Reality... .’? 

‘According to the Absolute Reality there is no distinction 
between mind and matter; it is on account of the defilement 

not differentiated. Therefore, we come to the conclusion that all things and 
conditions in the phenomenal world, hypostatized and established only through 
ignorance (avidya) and subjectivity (swrt/) on the part of all beings, have no 
more reality than the images in a mirror. They evolve simply from the ideality 
of a particularizing mind. When the mind is disturbed, the multiplicity of things 
is produced; but when the mind is quieted, the multiplicity of things disappcars.’ 

1 Richard’s trans. (pp. 25-6). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. 107) : ‘ Beit clearly under- 
stood that space is nothing but a mode of particularization and that it has no real 
existence of its own. Where there is a perception of space, there is side by 
side a perception of a variety of things, in contradistinction to which space is 
spoken of as if existing independently. Space therefore exists only in relation 
to our particularizing consciousness.’ 

* Richard’s trans. (pp. 24-5). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (pp. 103-4): ‘ Matter (rapa) 
and mind (ci#/a) from the very beginning are nota duality. So we speak of [the 
universe as] a system of rationality (prajfakdya), seeing that the real nature of 
matter just constitutes the norm of mind. Again we speak of [the universe as] 
a system of materiality (dharmakaya), seeing that the true nature of mind just 
constitutes the norm of matter. Now depending on the Dharmakdya, all 
Tathagatas manifest themselves in bodily forms and are incessantly present at 
all points of space. And Bodhisattvas in the ten quarters, according to their 
capabilitics and wishes, are able to manifest infinite Bodics of Bliss and infinite 
lands of ornamentation, each one of which, though stamped with the marks of 
individuality, does not hinder the others from being fused into it, and this 
{mutual fusion] has no interruption. But the manifestation of the Dharmakaya 
in [infinite] bodily forms is not comprchensible to the thought and understanding 
of common people ; because it is the free and subtlest activity of suchness,’ 

Ned ve bel Me 229 

of the finite in the round of life and death that these dis- 
tinctions appear... .’1 

‘As to the defilements of the world, they are all false; they 
have no reality behind them... .’? 

‘Finally, to leave false concepts, one should know that 
purity and defilement are both relative terms, and have no 
independent existence. Although all things from eternity 
are neither mind nor matter, neither infinite wisdom nor 
finite knowledge, neither existing nor non-existing, but are 
after all inexpressible, we nevertheless use words, yet should 
know that the Buddha’s skilful use of words to lead men 
aright lay in this—to get men to cease conjecturing and to 
return to the Absolute Reality, for the best human thought 
of all things is only temporary and is not Truth Absolute.* 

Of the Nature of the Primordial Mind: ‘The mind from 
the beginning is of a pure nature, but since there is the finite 
aspect of it which is sullied by finite views, there is the sullied 
aspect of it. Although there is this defilement, yet the original 
pure nature is eternally unchanged. This mystery the En- 
lightened One alone understands.’ 4 

1 Richard’s trans, (p. 26). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (pp. 108-9): ‘Be it clearly 
understood that suchness (bhitatathala@) has nothing to do with any form of 
distinction produced by defilement, and that even in case we speak of its 
possessing innumerable meritorious characteristics they are free from the traces 
of defilement.’ 

? Richard’s trans. (p. 27). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. 109): ‘. . . defiled ob- 
jects ... are nothing but non-entity, have from the first no self-existence 
(svabhava), ...’ 

8 Richard’s trans. (pp. 27-8). Cf. Suzuki’s trans, (pp. 112-13): ‘If one be 
absolutely freed from particularization and attachment, one will understand that 
all things both pure and defiled have only relative existence. Be it therefore 
known that all things in the world from the beginning are neither matter (7#fa), 
nor mind (c7#éa), nor intelligence (prajfa), nor consciousness (vijizaua), nor non- 
being (abhdva), nor being (bhava) ; they are after all inexplicable, The reason 
why the Tathagata nevertheless endeavours to instruct by means of words and 
definitions is through his good and excellent skilfulness [or expediency, upaya- 
kaucalya}. He only provisionally makes use of words and definitions to lead all 
beings, while his real object is to make them abandon symbolism and directly enter 
into the real reality (¢atitva). Because if they indulge themselves in reasonings, 
attach themselves to sophistry, and thus foster their subjective particularization, 
how could they have the true wisdom (fattvajidna) and attain Nirvaza?? 

4 Richard’s trans. (p. 13). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (pp. 79-80) : ‘ While the essence 
of the mind is eternally clean and pure, the influence of ignorance makes 

230 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

‘If there were no True Real Nature of the mind, then all 
existence would not exist ; there would be nothing to show it. 
If the True Real Nature of the mind remains, then finite mind 
continues. Only when the madness of finite mind ceases will 
the finite mind cease. It is not the wisdom of the True Reality 
that ceases.’ } 

‘Just as a man having lost his way calls the east west, 
although the east and west have not really changed, so is 
mankind lost in ignorance, calling the mind of the universe 
his thoughts! But the Mind is what it ever was, all unchanged 
by men’s thought. When men consider and realize that the 
Absolute Mind has no need of thoughts like men’s, they will 
be following the right way to reach the Boundless.’ ? 

Of the Nature of the Absolute: ‘It is neither that which 
had an origin some time, nor that which will end at some 
time; it is really eternal. In its nature it is always full 
of all possibilities, and is described as of great light and 
wisdom, giving light to all things, real and knowing. Its 
true nature is that of a pure mind, eternally joyful, the true 
being of things, pure, quiet, unchanged; therefore free, with 
fullness of virtues and Bodhic attributes more numerous than 

possible the existence of a defiled mind. But in spite of the defiled mind the 
mind [itself] is eternal, clear, pure, and not subject to transformation. Further, 
as its original nature is free from particularization, it knows in itself no change 
whatever, though it produces everywhere the various modes of existence. 
When the oneness of the totality of things (dharmadhdiu) is not recognized, 
then ignorance as well as particularization arises, and all phases of the defiled 
mind are thus developed. But the significance of this doctrine is so extremely 
deep and unfathomable that it can be fully comprehended by Buddhas and by no 
others.’ 

1 Richard’s trans, (p. 15). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. 84): ‘Let ignorance be , 
annihilated, and the symptom of disturbance [in the mind] will also be annihi- 
lated, while the essence of the mind (i.e, suchness] remains the same. Only if 
the mind itself were annihilated, then all beings would cease to exist, because 
there would be nothing there by which they could manifest themselves. But 
so long as the mind be not annihilated its disturbance may continue.’ 

* Richard’s trans. (p. 25). Cf. Suzuki’s trans, (pp. 105-6): ‘As a lost man 
who takes the east for the west, while the quarter is not changed on account of 
his confusion, so all beings, because of their misleading ignorance, imagine that 
the mind is being disturbed, while in reality it is not. But when they under- 
stand that the disturbance of the mind [i. e. birth-and-death] is [at the same time] 
immortality [viz. suchness] they would then enter into the gate of suchness.’ 

REALITY 231 

the sands of the Ganges, divine, unending, unchanged and 
unspeakable.’ ! 

‘As the nature behind all experience has no beginning, so 
it has no end—this is the true MVirvana....?? 

‘Behind all existence there is naturally the Supreme Virvana 
[or Supreme Rest].’® 

1 Richard’s trans. (p. 21). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (pp. 95-6): ‘It was not 
created in the past, nor is it to be annihilated in the future; it is eternal, 
permanent, absolute ; and from all eternity it sufficingly embraces in its essence 
all possible merits (punya). That is to say, suchness has such characteristics as 
follows: the effulgence of great wisdom; the universal illumination of the 
dharmadhatu [universe]; the true and adequate knowledge ; the mind pure and 
clean in its self-nature; the eternal, the blessed, the self-regulating, and the 
pure; the tranquil, the immutable, and the free. And there is no heterogeneity 
in all those Buddha-dharmas which, outnumbering the sands of the Ganges, can 
be neither identical (ekartha) nor not-identical (nanartha) [with the essence of 
suchness}, and which therefore are out of the range of our comprehension.’ 

This description of the Absolute is also a description of the Dharma-Kaya, for 
the two terms are synonymous. A modern student. of Buddhism, Mr. P. 
Lakshmi Narasu, in Zhe Essence of Buddhism (Madras, 1912), pp. 352-3; 
describes the Summum Bonum thus: ‘Buddhism denies an Ishvara [i.e. 
a Supreme Deity, for even the Primordial Buddha is not such, but merely the 
lama’s hypothetical First Buddha] ; and the latter cannot, therefore, be its goal 
and resting-point. The Buddhist’s goal is Buddhahood, and the essence of 
Buddhahood is Dharmakaya, the totality of all those laws which pervade the 
facts of life, and whose living recognition constitutes enlightenment. Dharma- 
kaya is the most comprehensive name by which the Buddhist sums up his 
understanding and also his feeling about the universe, Dharmaké@ya signifies 
that the universe does not appear to the Buddhist as a mere mechanism, but as 
pulsating with life. Further, it means that the most striking fact about the universe 
is its intellectual aspect and its ethical order, especially in its higher reaches. 
Nay more, it implies that the universe is one in essence, and nowhere chaotic or 
dualistic. ... Dharmakaya is no pitiable abstraction, but that aspect of existence 
which makes the world intelligible, which shows itself in cause and effect. ... 
Dharmakaya is that ideal tendency in things which reveals itself most completely 
in man’s rational will and moral aspirations... . It is the impersonated inspiring 
type of every perfected rational mind. Without Diarmakaya there would be 
nothing that constitutes personality, no reason, no science, no moral aspiration, 
no ideal, no aim and purpose in man’s life... . Dkarmakaya is the norm of all 
existence, the standard of truth, the measure of righteousness, the good law; it 
is that in the constitution of things which makes certain modes of conduct 
beneficial and certain other modes detrimental.’ 

2 Richard’s trans. (p. 27). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. 11a): ‘Be it clearly under- 
stood that the essence of the five skandhas is uncreate, there is no annihilation 
of them; that, since there is no annihilation of them, they are in their [meta- 
physical] origin Nirvana itself.’ 

8 Richard’s trans. (p. 31). Cf. Suzuki’s trans. (p. rat): ‘.... all things 
(sarvadharma) from the beginning are in their nature Nirvana itself.’ 

233 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

Thus does Ashvaghosha bear witness to the soundness of 
the supreme philosophy of the Mahayana School underlying 
the Bardo Thodol; and, as an independent commentator, con- 
firms our own interpretations. 

VI. NORTHERN AND SOUTHERN BUDDHISM 
AND CHRISTIANITY 

Very much matter might also be incorporated herein to show 
the differences which exist between the two great Schools of 
Buddhism, the Northern and the Southern School, sometimes 
known as the A/ahayana (meaning the ‘ Greater Path’) and the 
Hinayana (meaning the ‘Lesser Path’—a rather belittling 
name never used by Southern Buddhists of themselves)." 

Northern Buddhism is chiefly distinguished by its hier- 
archical and more highly organized priesthood, its emphasis 
upon rituals, its elaborate doctrinc of divine emanations, its 
Christian-like worships and masses, its Tantricism, its Dhyani 
Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and extensive pantheon, its belief in 
a Primordial Buddha, its greater insistence on Yoga, its subtle 
philosophy, and its transcendental teachings concerning the 
Tri-K ya. 

In Southern Buddhism, on the contrary, there is a very 
loosely organized priesthood with no recognized heads like 
the Dalai Lama, who is the God-King, and the Tashi Lama, 
who is the Higher Spiritual Head of Lamaism. There are 
no recognized rituals comparable to the rituals of the Northern 
School, little or nothing clearly Tantric, and no worship of 
Dhyani Buddhas or of a Primordial Buddha, but a limited 
belief in devas and demons. The only Bodhisattva appealed 
to and imaged in temples is the coming Buddha, Maitreya. 
Although theoretically Yoga is insisted upon, it appears to 
have been but little practised among Southern Buddhists 
since the times of Buddhagosa and his immediate suc- 

1 Here Sj. Atal Behari Ghosh has contributed the following note: ‘ Mahayana 
may, and possibly does, mean the “‘ Greater ”’ or ‘‘ Higher Path”? (or ‘‘ Voyage’’), 
and Hinayana the ‘‘ Lesser”? or ‘‘ Lower Path” (or ‘‘ Voyage”). Ya (of Yana) 
means ‘‘to go”, and Yama “that by which one goes”. Western Orientalists 

have adopted “Vehicle” as an equivalent of Yaua, as that is the common 
meaning given in school-books, but ‘‘ Path” is preferable.’ 

BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 233 

cessors, when Buddhist Ceylon is said to have been famous— 
as Buddhist Tibet is now—for its great saints, or yogis. 
That there exists a transcendental Buddhism, based chiefly 
upon Tantric teachings and applied Yoga, such as the lamas 
claim to possess through oral transmission direct from the 
time of the Buddha, Southern Buddhism denies, for it holds 
that the Buddha taught no higher or other doctrines than 
those recorded in the 7ri-Pitaka or Pali Canon. Similarly, 
the doctrine of the Esoteric Trinity, or 77i-Kaya, Southern 
Buddhism does not propound, although there are clear 
references to the Dkarma-Kaya in the Aggaiia Sittanta 
of the Digha Nikaya, wherein the Buddha speaks of the 
Dharma-Kaya to a Brahmin priest named Vasctta (Skt. 
Vashishtha) ; and the Sinhalese work known as the Dharma- 
Pradipika contains elaborated expositions of Ripa-Kaya and 
Dharma-K aya. 

The hypothesis of Christian apologists that Northern 
Buddhism in its differentiation from Southern Buddhism was 
primarily affected by early Christian missionaries scems to 
be disproved—in so far as really fundamental doctrines are con- 
cerned—by the far-reaching fact (but recently made known to 
Western scholars through the recovery of some of the writings 
of the greatest of the Fathers of the Northern Buddhist Church, 
namely, the Patriarch Ashvagosha) that Northern Buddhism 
was fundamentally the same in the first century A. D. as it is now 
and was prior to the Christian era. If there were Christian in- 
fluences, as claimed, brought in by the Nestorians, or St. Thomas, 
or later missionaries, it appears that they could only have 
been superficial at most.?. In our own view—which is, of 

1 Cf. P. Lakshmi Narasu, The Essence of Buddhism (Madras, 1912), p. 352n. 

2 Huc, in his Zravels in Tartavy (Hazlett’s trans, ii. 84), notes that Tson 
Khapa, the founder of the Gelugpa, or Established Reformed Church of Tibet, 
was acquainted with Christianity through Roman priests who seem to have had 
a mission near the place of his birth, in the Province of Amdo, China. But 
Tsoh Khapa having been born during the latter half of the fourteenth century 
and having founded the Gelugpa during the early fifteenth, such probable 
Christian influence would be of no importance in relation to the primitive 
unreformed Ningmapa Church founded by Padma Sambhava in the eighth century, 
whence our Manuscript had its origin. Thescmi-reformed Kargyutpa Sect, too, 
antedates the Gelugpa, having been founded in the last half of the eleventh 

3069 Hh 

234 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

course, merely hypothetical, seeing how little is at present 
known of the interdependent influences of Hinduism, Buddhism, 
and other Oriental religions and Christianity—it is Christianity 
which probably has been shaped, not only in its pre-Christian 
symbolology and in its rituals, but in its beliefs, by the Faiths 
preceding it, and out of which it evolved. For example, 
Christian monasticism, as best studied in the first centuries 
of the Christian era in Egypt, with its yoga-like practices, has 
had, apparently, direct relationship with the more ancient 
monastic systems such as those of Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Jainism, and Taoism. The two great doctrines of Christianity, 
namely, those of the Trinity and of the Incarnation, are not, as 
formerly believed, unique; not only did both develop in pre- 
Christian times in India, but were principal doctrines in the 
Osirian Faith of Egypt at least six thousand years ago, The 
primitive Christian Gnostic Church, as the exponent of an 
esoteric Christianity, was also in general accord with the 
old Oriental teachings touching Rebirth and A arma, which 
the later or exotcric Christian Church eventually repudiated, 
the Second Council of Constantinople, in A.D. 553, decreeing 
that ‘Whosoever shall support the mythical doctrine of the pre- 
existence of the soul and the consequent wonderful opinion of 
its return, let him be anathema’. The Sermon on the Mount 

century by Marpa (sce p. 1357), whose chief gv was the Indian Pandit Atisha 
(cf. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, pp. 54-75). 

1 Origen, the pupil of St. Clement of Alexandria, and the best-informed and 
most learned of the Church Fathers, who held the doctrine of rebirth and karma 
to be Christian, and against whom, two hundred and ninety-nine years after he 
was dead, excommunication was decreed by the exoteric Church, on account of 
his beliefs, has said; ‘But that there should be certain doctrines not made 
known to the multitude, which are [revealed] after the exoteric ones have been 
taught, is not a peculiarity of Christianity alone, but also of philosophic systems, 
in which certain truths are exoteric and others esoteric’ (Ovigen Contra Celsum, 
Book I, c. vii). That Origen was a sound Christian in this view—despite his 
condemnation as a ‘heretic’ by the corrupt Second Council of Constantinople, 
held by the exoteric Church—is clear from sayings attributed to the Founder of 
Christianity Himself: ‘Unto you [the chosen disciples] it is given to know the 
mystery of the Kingdom of God; but unto them that are without [i.e. the 
multitude] all these things are done in parable: that seeing they may see, and 
not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand’ (Mark, iv. 
11-12); cf. St. Paul in x Corinthians, ii. 7; iii. 1-2; and Pistis Sophia, i. 9, 12, 
15, and passim, translation by G. R. S. Mead (London, 1896). 

BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 235 

itself, as a study of the pre-Christian Pali Canon indicates, 
might very well be regarded, as many Buddhist scholars do 
regard it, as a Christian restating of doctrines which the 
Buddha, too, formulated as an inheritance from prehistoric 
Buddhas! It is chiefly the doctrines of the modern Christian 
Churches that pride themselves in having no esoteric teachings, 
and not those of primitive, or Gnostic, Christianity,that did pro- 
pound an elaborate esotericism, which differ widely from the 
doctrines of Buddhism and other Oriental religions ; and among 
these doctrines the more outstanding are: (1) the doctrine of 
the one life on earth to be followed bya never-ending paradise 
or else an eternal hell; (2) of the forgiveness of sins through 
the blood sacrifice of a Saviour; and (3) of the uniqueness of 
the Divine Incarnation as exemplified in the Founder of 
Christianity. 

For the student of the West, whose outlook has been more 
or less affected by this theology of Church-council Christianity, 
rather than by primitive, or Gnostic, Christianity, there is 
need to realize exactly how Buddhism differs in fundamentals 
from modern Christianity. 

Thus, unlike modern, or Church-council, Christianity which 
teaches dependence upon an outside power or Saviour, 
Buddhism teaches dependence on self-exertion alone if one 
is to gain salvation. In practice, and to a limited degree 
in theory, this fundamental doctrine of self-dependence is 
modified in Lamaism—as illustrated in the Bardo Tkidol— 
and direct appeal is made by the devotee to the Dhyani 
Buddhas and tutelary deities, very much as to Jesus and 
saints and angels by Christians. Similarly, Northern Buddhism 
and Church-council Christianity, unlike, Southern Buddhism, 
have their masscs and their eucharistical ceremonies. 

Secondly, as pointed out above, Church-council Christianity 
condemns the doctrines of Rebirth and K arma(which primitive, 
or Gnostic, Christianity upheld), and Buddhism champions 
them. 

Thirdly, the two Faiths hold divergent views concerning 

1 Ct. A. J. Edmunds, Buddhist Texts in John (Philadelphia, ro11z); also 
Buddhist and Christian Gospels (Philadelphia, 1908). 

236 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

the existence or non-existence of a Supreme Deity. ‘The 
Fatherhood of God’ as a personal and anthropomorphic deity 
is the corner-stone of Christian Theology, but in Buddhism— 
although the Buddha neither denied nor affirmed the existence 
of a Supreme Deity—it has no place, because, as the Buddha 
maintained, neither believing nor not believing in a Supreme 
God, but self-exertion in right-doing, is essential to com- 
prehending the true nature of life. 

The Buddha ‘argued not that Ishvara was cause, nor did 
He advocate some cause heretical, nor yet again did He affirm 
there was no cause for the beginning of the world’. He 
argued: ‘If the world was made by Ishvara deva,... there 
should be no such thing as sorrow or calamity, nor doing 
wrong nor doing right; for all, both pure and impure deeds, 
these must come from Ishvara deva.... Again, if Ishvara be 
the maker, all living things should silently submit, patient 
beneath the maker’s powcr, and then what use to practisc 
virtue? *Twere equal, then, the doing right or wrong,... 
Thus, you see, the thought of Ishvara is overthrown in this 
discussion (shéstra).’ 1 

Although the Great Teacher has set aside, as being non- 
essential to mankind’s spiritual enlightenment, the belicf and 
the non-belief in a Supreme Deity—more especially in an 
anthropomorphic Supreme Deity—He has, however, made 
the corner-stone of Buddhism (as it is of Hinduism) the belicf 
in a Supreme Power or Universal Law, called the Law of 
Cause and Effect by the Science of the West and, by the 
Science of the East, Karma. ‘What ye sow, that shall ye 
reap’, saith the Buddha; even as St. Paul wrote long after- 
ward, ‘ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap’. 

Again, as elsewhere stated, Buddhism denies that there can 
be a permanent, unchanging, personal entity such as Christian 
Theology calls ‘soul’. It also denies the possibility of reaching 
a state of eternal felicity within the Sangsdéra (i.c. the uni- 
verse of phenomena); for Reality, or Mzrvaua, is for all 

? Ct, the Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king (vv. 1455-68), a professed Chinese version 
of Ashvaghosha’s Buddhakarita, made by an Indian Buddhist priest named 
Dharmaraksha about the year a.p. 420, trans. by S. Beal in The Sacred Books 
of the East, xix (Oxford, 1883), pp. 206-8. 

BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 237 

Schools of Buddhism non-sangsaric, being beyond all heavens, 
hells, and worlds, in a state only capable of being understood 
through personal realization of it. 

The Buddha has, therefore, not taught of any Father in 
Heaven, nor of any Only Begotten Son, nor of any method of 
salvation for mankind save that won by self-exertion léading 
to Right Knowledge. He, as all Buddhists believe, found the 
way as a result of innumerable lifetimes of spiritual evolution, 
and became the Fully Awakened, the Enlightened One, ex- 
hausting completely the Sanxgsaéra of Impermanency and of 
Sorrow. Through His own cxertions alone He reached the 
Goal of all existence—Supramundaneness. Buddhists venc- 
rate Him, not as Christians do a Saviour, but as a Guide, in 
whose footsteps each must tread if Truth is to be realized and 
Salvation attained. 

Although, as in the Bardo Thodol, there are prayers 
addressed to higher than human powers, and although all 
Buddhists pay what is really a sort of worship to the Buddha, 
the doctrine of Right Knowledge through self-development is 
never quite lost sight of; there is never that almost complete 
dependence upon outside forces which Christianity inculcates, 
nor is there anywhere a parallel to the Christian belicf in the 
forgiveness of sins through repentance, or faith in a Saviour, 
or through vicarious atonement. Some of the rituals of 
Northern Buddhism may seem to suggest a Christianlike 
theory of the forgiveness or absolution of sins, which, more 
than any other subsidiary doctrine peculiar to Northern 
Buddhism, may possibly yet be shown to have been shaped— 
if any of the Mahayana doctrines have been—by Christianity. 
But in their last analysis these rituals really imply,—setting 
aside any possible transformation due to Christianity,—as the 
whole of Southern Buddhism more clearly teaches, that it is 
only merit, or an equal amount of good karma, which can 
neutralize the same amount of evil karma, as, in physics, two 
equally balanced opposing forces neutralize one another. 

But as in all religions, so in Buddhism, there is apt to be 
very wide divergency between original teachings and actual 
doctrines and practices; and, accordingly, the Bardo Thédol 

238 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

as a ritual treatise is no exception. Nevertheless, underneath 
the symbolism of the Bardo Thodol there are to be discovered, 
by those that have eyes to see, the essential teachings of 
Northern Buddhism, sometimes called, in contrast with 
Southern Buddhism, the Higher Buddhism. 

VII. THE MEDIEVAL CHRISTIAN JUDGEMENT. 

In connexion with the difficult problem of origins, referred 
to in that part of our Introduction concerning the Judgement 
(pp. 35-9), and of the probable influences of Buddhism and 
other Oriental Faiths, including the Osirian Faith, on Chris- 
tianity, it is interesting to compare with the Bardo Thddol 
version of the Judgement (pp. 165-9) the similar version in 
the medieval treatise entitled Te Lamentation of the Dying 
Creature (date uncertain, but probably of 14th to 15th cent.) 
contained in the British Museum MS. Harl. 1706 (fol. 96), 
Comper’s ed. (pp. 137-68) : 

‘ The Dying Creature enset with Sickness incurable sorrow- 
fully Complaincth him thus :“ Alas that ever I sinned in my 
life. To me is come this day the dreadfullest tidings that 
ever I heard. Here hath been with me a sergeant of arms 
whose name is Cruelty, from the King of all’ Kings, Lord of 
all Lords, and Judge of all Judges; laying on me the mace 
of His office, saying unto me: ‘I arrest thee and warn thee 
to make ready.... The Judge that shall sit upon thee, He 
will not be partial, nor He will not be corrupt with goods, 
but He will minister to thee justice and equity... .” 

‘The Lamentation of the Dying Creature: “ Alas! alas! 
Excuse me I can not, and whom I might desire to speak for 
me I wot (i.e. know) not. The day and time is so dreadful ; 
the Judge is so rightful; mine enimies be so evil; my kin, my 
neighbours, my friends, my servants, be not favourable to mc; 
and I wot well they shall not be heard there.” 

‘The Complaint of the Dying Creature to the Good Angel: 
“O my Good Angel, to whom our Lord took me to keep, 
where be thee now? Me thinketh ye should be here, and 
answer for me; for the dread of death distroubleth me, so 

THE CHRISTIAN JUDGEMENT 239 

that I cannot answer for myself. Here is my bad angel 
ready, and is one of my chief accusers, with legions of fiends 
with him. I have no creature to answer for me. Alas it is 
an heavy case!” 

‘ The Answer of the Good Angel to the Dying Creature: “ As 
to your bad deeds, I was never consenting. I saw your 
natural inclination more disposed to be ruled by your bad 
angel than by me. Howbeit, ye cannot excuse you, but when 
ye were purposed to do anything that was contrary to the 
commandments of God I failed not to remember (i.e. remind) 
you that it was not well; and counselled thee to fice the 
place of peril, and the company that should stir or move you 
thereto. Can ye say nay thereto? Howcan you think that 
I should answer for you?”’ 

Though the Dying Creature appeals for assistance to 
Reason, to Dread, to Conscience, and to the Five Wits—very 
much after the manner of Lveryman, probably the best known 
of the medieval Christian mystery plays (which scem to be 
the outcome of the spread of Orientalism into Europe)—none 
can succour him. Thence, in his final appeal to the Virgin, 
through Faith, Hope, and Charity as mediators, and in the 
Virgin’s resulting appeal to the Son, there is introduced the 
Christian doctrine of the forgiveness of sins, in opposition to 
the doctrine of arma as expounded by the Lardo Thodol. 
Such introduction suggests that this curious Christian version 
of the Judgement may possibly have had a pre-Christian and 
non-Jewish Oriental source, wherein the dectrine of £arma (and 
the correlated doctrine of rebirth) remained unmodified by the 
European medievalism which shaped The Lamentation of the 
Dying Creature (see p. 3”). The ancient doctrine of karma 
(to which the primitive, or Gnostic, Christians adhered, ere 
Church-council Christianity took shape), being taught in the 
following answers to the Dying Creature, gives some plausi- 
bility, even from internal evidence, to this purely tentative 
view: 

Conscience: ‘Ye must sorrowfully and meckly suffer the 
judgements that ye have deserved.’ 

The Five Wits: ‘Therefore of your necessity your defaults 

240 TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD: ADDENDA 

must be laid upon you.... Wherefore of right the peril must 
be yours.’ 

Also compare the similar account of the Judgement in the 
Orologium Sapicntieg (14th cent.), chap. V, in Douce MS. 322 
(fol. 20), Comper’s ed., from which the following passage 
(p. 118) is taken: 

‘O thou most righteous Doomsman, how strait and hard be 
thy dooms; charging [i.e. accusing] and hard deeming me, 
wretched, in those things the which few folk charge or dread, 
forasmuch as they seem small and little. O the dreadful sight 
of the righteous Justice, that is now present to me by dread, 
and suddenly to come in deed.’ 

Reference might also be made to the wall-painting of the 
Judgement in Chaldon Church, Surrey, England, dating from 
about A.D. 1200 and discovered in 1870, which parallels in 
a very striking manner our Tibetan painting of the Judgement.' 
Thus, in both paintings there is the judging of the dead in an 
intermediate or dardo state, the heaven-world being above 
and the hell-world below. In the Chaldon Christianized 
version, St. Michael, in place of Shinje, holds the scales; 
instead of karmic actions, souls are being weighed; the Six 
Karmic Pathways leading to the Six Lokas have become 
a single ladder leading to a single heaven; at the top of the 
ladder, in place of the Six Buddhas of the Six Lokas, there is 
the Christ waiting to welcome the righteous, the sun being 
shown on His right hand and the moon on His left—as though 
He were a Buddha. In the Hell-world, in both versions, there 
is the cauldron in which evil-doers are being cooked under the 
supervision of demons; and, in the Christianized version, the 
‘Hill of Spikes’ of the Buddhist version is represented by 
a ‘Bridge of Spikes’, which the condemned souls are com- 
pelled to traverse. 

1 Cf. G. Clinch, Old English Churches (London, 1900), pp. 162-4, where 
a photograph of the Chaldon wall-painting is reproduced; also E. S. Bouchier, 
Notes on the Stained Glass of the Oxford District (Oxford, 1918), pp. 66-7, con- 
cerning a stained glass window in Brightwcll Baldwin Church, depicting the 
soul-weighing episode of the Judgement: ‘Below, the hand of St, Michael in 
white glass supports a yellow balance, in the left tray of which a half-length soul 
with yellow hair is praying, while beneath the right a small devil, with horns, 
tail, claws, and yellow wings, is trying to pull it down.’ 

THE CHRISTIAN JUDGEMENT 241 

All such parallels as these tend to strengthen our opinion 
that the greater part of the symbolism nowadays regarded as 
being peculiarly Christian or Jewish seems to be due to 
adaptations from Egyptian and Eastern religions. They 
suggest, too, that the thought-forms and thought-processes of 
Orient and of Occident are, fundamentally, much alike—that, 
despite differences of race and creed and of physical and social 
environment, the nations of mankind are, and have been since 
time immemorial, mentally and spiritually one. 

3069 11 

INDEX 

Black-type figures indicate the chief references, most of which may be 

Abhidhamma, 1671. 
Abhidharmakosha, x\. 
Adi (Primordial) -Buddha, 
OS, ON TPE), 1 TH, 
BiG Hats PBA. 
Adi- Kaya, 1674. 
Aeschylus, 167}. 
Acsop’s Fables, 3, 37, 57: 
Agamemnon, 50, 51. 
Agsanita Siltainta, 233. 
Aggregate: see Skandha, 
— Bodhic Wisdom, of, 16. 
— Body, of, 16, 72", 109}, 
192*, 
—Consciousness, of, 9", 
15, 1062, 1091, 1924. 
— Feelings, of, 9", 16, 114, 
1924. 

— Matter, of,9, 9°, 15,106. 
— Touch (or Sensation), 
OfMOu LO; LT, 102%. 
— Volition, of, 9°, 16, 116, 

1924. 
Aggregates of Life, xii. 
Ain Soph, 67. 
Ajanta Cave, 38, 56. 
Ajax, 59, 51. 
Akasha (Ether), 9, 16, 63, 
~ 174%, 179. 
Akasha-Garbha, 1112, 
Akshobhya, 9!, 16, 108}, 
mele OL a20: 
Aloke (Aloka), 113°. 
Amitabha, 9", 13, 16-18, 
20, 28, 32, 55, 70, 96, 
1131, 114-15, 120, 123, 
140, 189?, 200, 2021, 220. 
— State, g6*, 
Amogha-Siddhi, xxxii, 9", 
16-17, 325 55, 70, 115}, 
116-18, 120, I4I, 200, 
20229220: 
Amrita-Dhara, 120°. 
Anthropology, 14, 59. 
Apollo, 113%. 
Apparitions, xxxiii, 32, 
98, 101 ff., 103,104, 162, 
204: seée Hallucinations, 
—Psychology of, 132}, 
168, 181, 213, 
Arhant (Pali: Arahant), 
41, 54, 160'. 
Ars Moriendi (Craft of 
Dying), viii, xxvi, 3?, 

used as a Glossary. 

882-5, 93%, 951, 991,107, 
1348, 1512, 1722, 1987. 

Arthurian Legend, 54. 

Asanga, 2121, 

Ashvaghosha, 115, 154, 
225-33, 2361. 

Asoka, Edicts of, 170°. 

— Missionaries of, 14. 

Astrology, 19, 27, 75, 877, 
193", 214". 

Asura( Titan), 17, 24, 63, 
Magi He, tee a2 
Light-Path, and Zozas. 

— Birth, 156, 185. 

— Existence, 1217, 194}. 

Atalanta, 50, 51. 

Atharva-Veda, 46°. 

Atisha, 1353, 234°. 

Atma, xxviii, xxxiii, xliii, 
189!, 

Avalokiteshvara, 237, 99°, 
1138, 116%, 120%, 134°, 
149': see Chenrazee. 

Avatamsaka Stitra, xxxiii. 

Awakening of Faith, The, 
115, 154, 2251-31. 

Bardo, XXvi, 281, 38: see 
Bardo Thodol, JSudge- 
ment, and Rebirth. 

— Astral Light, 1615, 

— Birth, 156°. 

— Birth-Place, 102', 202. 

—Body, xxiii}, xxviii, 
XXXVi, Xxxix, 16, 30, 31, 
871, 924, 1001, 103°, 104, 
1265, 148, 155 ff., 161°, 
166°, 177, 187, 195, 219. 

— Chikhat, xxxiv, 29, 89}, 
89-100, 1024, 151, 203. 

— Chonyid, xxxiv, 20,29, 
71, 891, IOI-5I, 1025, 
135°, 1524,193, 203, 217. 

—Consciousness, xxxiv, 
182: seé Consciousness. 
— Cult, 373. 

— Dawning of, 90, 202-4. 

— Dhyana, 102°, 203. 

— Dream-State, 1027, 202. 

— Dream-World, xl, 17, 
34, 66, 187}. 

— Dwellers in, 187}. 

— Ending of, 30, 34, 188". 

— Food in, 164. 

Bardo, Friends in, 164. 

— Forty-Nine Daysof, xlii, 
6-7, 20, 30, 44, 48, 
104, 161, 183. 

— Intellect in, 172, 195. 

— Liberation from, xxxvii, 
Tisfsy, WANG, TSE gg 
Liberation. 

— Plato and, 36, 49-53: 
see Plato. 

— Prayers, 71', 88, 192, 
197-208, 237. 

— Psychology, 31-5, 66, 
T40!, 195. 

— Recognition of, 895, 90%, 
97, 99, 99%, LOI, 103-5, 
112, 118-19, 124-6, 
131-3, 135°, 137-41, 
146-9, 151, 155-8, 165, 
168, 173, 181, 193-4. 

— Sidpa, 20, 29, 49, 55; 
72", 891, 1026, 135-6", 
151, 153-93, 193, 204, 
206. 

—Six States 
202-4. 
—State, xxiii!, xxxv, 7, 

28-30, 38, 59> 66, 91 ff., 
1oo*, 1os!, 125%, 130%, 
158 ff., 164%, 187", 195, 

240. 

-—— Supernormal Powers in, 
158 ff. 

Bardo Thidol, 2, 33, 152, 
196: see Bardo. 

— Appendix, The, 196- 
208. 

—Block-Print, 609, 71, 
73, 1007, loose og, 
118}, 124, 142°, 144), 
1451-8, 1461, 152% 4,153). 

— Colophon, 209. 

— Corruptions of, xxxvii- 
xxxvilil, 58, 77, 1567, 
174", 179), 192°. 

— Deities, 361. 

— Divisions of, 85, 153). 

— Doctrine, 41, 136,194-6, 
elite 

— Illustrations, xvii-xxiv, 
70-1. 

— Manuscript, 68-73, 
HO, WE Ta, stl 
174}, 184°. 

of, 102, 

Bardo Thédol, Origin of, 
35-6 54-5, 73-8; 1964 

ee Sambhava and, 
13: see Padma Sam- 
bhava. 

— Plato and, 36, 49-53: 
seé Plato. 

—Faheleey: 31-5, 193- 

— Reading of, 19, 20, 87 ff., 
135) 151, 183, 195-6. 
— Rebirth Symbols, 469 ff.: 
see Rebirth. 

— Ritual, 75. 

—Science and, 8-9, 41, 
66,77. 

— Symbolism, 
Esotericism. 

— Tantricism, 213-20. 

— Teachings,10-17,32-5, 
66-8, 89°, 132, 151-2, 
1647, 176, 180, 182-3, 
186, 188, 190, 194-6, 
212-13, 222, 225, 235, 

2-6: 

Sée 

238. 
—Texts and Versions, 
Xxvi, 71-2. 

— Translating and Edit- 
ing, 1, 78-81. 

— Yog ga and, 211-14": see 
Yoga. 

Bhagavin, 105', 1197, 
149, 201. 

Bhikkhuni, xii, 210. 

Bhutan, 80, 188", 2187. 

Birth, Four Kinds of, 178, 
182, 

—-Supernormal, 156!, 178, 
188-90, 206. 

Blavatsky, H. P., 71. 

Bodhi (or Bodhic), 10, 11, 
aes OO. LO, 123), 
230. 

Bodhisattvas, 14, 547, 67, 
7OwLOS, LIT, 113, LLO, 
fee iz 2tsae.) TOC), 
183, IgI-2, 218, 228, 
RV 

— Invocation of, 711, 155, 
197-8. 

Bon, 23, 36", 74-5, 1401. 

Book of Dead, xxvi, I-2, 
22, 36, 77. 

— Egyptian, 5S.9hby Fr, EPH 
35) 77, 877, 136°, 1487. 

Brahma, 62. 

Brahman, 6%, 11. 

Brihmana, Tattiriya, 48°. 

— Vagga, 40, 158%. 

INDEX 

Brihmarandhra, Xxix- 
seeall, 70, EVER Obs Gfet: 
158}, 215-16. 

Brahmins, 48°, 170°, 191}, 

PBB 

Buddha, xxxii, 54, 105%, 
1064, 1197, 125!, 168}. 

— Birth of, 53, 1911, 2073. 

— Body of, axxvi, 10, 2077. 

— Bone-Reliques of, 163%, 

— Christ as, 240. 

— Consciousness, 189!, 

— Death of, 1911, 

— Eyes of, 1601, 216. 

— Invocation of, 711, 155, 
183, 192. 

— Lives of, 54. 

— Mind of, 96. 

— Pre-existence and, 49-1, 
S255 

— Realization of, 97". 

— Realm of, 1078, 201-2. 

— Seeing the, xxxiv, 97”. 

—St. Jehoshaphat as, 37. 

— Teachings of, xii, 17, 
38-42, 67-8, 233, 235-7. 

— Words of, 171. 

— Worship of, 237. 

— Yoga and, 158°, 

Buddhaghosa, 41, 417, 232. 

Buddhahood, XxXii, xxxvi, 
10, 15, 30, 58, 94, 95°; 
96, 96% ®, 971, 107, I10, 
112, 115, 118—19, 123-4, 
126", 132-3", 136, 138- 
41, 150, 188-9, 1957, 
199, 200-1: see Libera- 
tion, and Mervana. 

— Path to, 55, 89%, 124}, 
126. 

—State of, xxxvi, 1241, 
149. 
— Winning of, 89%, 114, 

126, 1357, 136, 146-8. 
Budidhakarita, 236}. 
Buddhism, Christianity 

and, 14, 232-41. 

— Esoteric, 4-5, 233-5. 

—- Flesh-Eating and, 1694, 
195%. 

— Northern, 232-8. 

— Reality and, 224-32. 

— Soul and, 86°, 224-5. 

— Southern, 232-8, 

— Tantric, 72, 74, 150°. 

— Tibetan, 74, 150°. 

— Woman and, 2091. 

— Yoga and, 212: 

Yoga. 

Budh-Gaya, 1584. 

RY 4-4 

243 

Chag-na-Dorje, 1164: sce 
Vajra-Pani. 

Chakra, 216, 219-20. 

Chakravartin, 10. 

Chenrazee, xx, xxiv, 99” 5, 
113%, 134%, 1491, 150%, 
1683-4; see Avalokitesh- 
vara. 

Christianity, | Buddhism 
and, 4", 14, 1273, 139, 
232-41. 

— Church-Council, 235. 

— Esoteric, 234-5. 

— Flesh-Eating and, 170°. 

— Heaven and, 184. 

— Hell-World and, 
185, 

— Karma and, 239. 

— Monasticism and, 234. 

— Origen and, 234). 

— Rebirth and, 234. 

— Trinity and, 14. 

— Yoga and, 234. 

Christos, 32. 

Chromatism, 
Xxxi, XXXVii. 

Consciousness, xxx, xxxi, 
11, 174, 1837, 189}, 225, 
229°: see Aggregate. 

— Bardo, in, 182. 

— Birth, at, xli. 

— Bodhic, 16. 

—Content of, 29, 32-3, 
ihe ele), Woy, LY PS. 

— Continuity of, 30. 

— Death, at, xxix—xxxi, 
xxxiv, xli, 878, 985, 100%, 
216. 

me 7, 18-19, 29, 
44 50, 58-9, 86", 875, 
92°, 971, 08, Log?, 1258, 
MBit Nees WORE, Toph. 
1871, 188, 214, 216, 219. 

— Restoration Om OB, 

— States, xxvi, xxxii, xlii, 
30, 90°, 964%, 988, 174, 

179), 

Mystical, 

HAS, HB, TsKey, ACH, 
214, 225. 
_ prs alana xxix, 

85-7, 91, 178°, 188-90, 
193, 203 
Count oare hy. 61-6, 1465, 
184. 

Daemons (Demons), 10, 
Wh ee BO bey Tete 
162, 1648, 166!, 186, 
1871, 232, 240. 

Déakini (Fairy), 32, 1225, 
1277, 1287, 130, 199, 201 

2.44 

Death, Art of, xxvii, 133, 
224: see Bardo, Dae- 
mons, Dharma- Raja, 
and Yama-Raja. 

— Astrology of, 19, 27, 
871, 193". 

— Cause of, xxv, 27, 84. 

— Ceremonies, 18~28, 169, 
183, 195°. 

— Cults, 26. 

— Demons, 27. 

— Effigy, 19, 20-3. 

— Feasts, 247, 

— Horoscope, 19, 27. 

— King of, 38, 169}. 

— Lords of, 32, 98, 147-8, 
166-7}, 169, 198. 

— Messengers of, 38-9, 84, 
198. 

— Phenomena, xxviii, 133- 
5, 164 ff. 

— Process, xxviii, 18, 924, 
1002, 158}, 1627, 216. 

— Science of, viii, xxv ff. 

— Symptoms, xxviii, 72°, 
86, 88-9, 93°, 196. 

Deva (God), 17, 24, 307, 

107, 150°, 160%, 199, 
218", 232: see Light- 
Path, and Lokas. 

—Birth, 30', 156, 160, 
184, 190°. 

— Existence, 194". 

— Eyes, 1601. 

Devadita Sittam, 38. 
Devadita Vagga, 38. 
Devatds, xxxvii, xxxviii, 
122°. 
Dharma, xxii, W', 14, 
171, 204. 
Dharma-Chakra, xxiii. 
Dharma-Dhatu, — xxxvi, 
15, 95°, 1058, 230", 2317. 
— Wisdom, 15, 106-7, 
W228 
Dharma- Kaya, xxxvi, 10, 
Ii, 12, 13, 15-16, 32, 
55) 82, 89, 92, 95%, 97, 

98!, 1214, 135, 146, 
167, 1674, 174, 225, 
PPL PIE, ee O77 
Void. 

— Clear Light, 94, 146°, 

211. 

— State of, 96, 96%, 1035, 
TA Gao: 

Dharma Matri Putra, 
100%, 

Dharmapala, 121", 128. 
Dharma-Pradipika, 233. 

INDEX 

Dharma-Raja, xx,35,36- 
7, 121°, 147°. 

Dharma Samgraha, 108%, 

Dhupema (Dhipa), 111*. 

Dhyana, 90°, 92, 100%, 
102°, 119', 160, 160%, 
186, 203. 

Dhyani Buddhas, xxxvil, 
8', 11, 13, 15-17, 1054, 
118, 120, 130, 217-18, 
Ay, als 

— Symbolism of, 55, 220. 

Diamond (or Immutable) 
AV eats, Me, Oy 

Dibpanamsel = (Dipani), 
1165. 

Dolma, 116°: see Tara. 

Door-Keepers, xviii, 120, 
143-4, 218: see Vogenis. 

Dorje (Skt. Vajra), xxiii, 
10, 63, 1087, 116", opp. 
137, 137-8, 142-57. 

Dorje-Chang, xxii. 

Dream, Bardo and, xxxvi, 
3374) 66, 102, 125°, 
181, 202, 

— State, xxxiv, 1871, 2031. 

Druids, 3, 60 

Ecstasy, 35, 90°, 971-8°, 
eyes Laie, Arie 
Elementals, 221. 
Elements, The Five, 8-10, 
1507, 1924, 201-2: see 
Aggregate. 
— The Four, 27, 119. 
Emerson on Karma, 2. 
Empcedocles, 53, 
Epeius, 50, 52. 
Eschatology, xxvi. 
Esoteric Doctrines, 133-4: 
see Esotericism. 
Ksotericism (or Occultism), 
oath Ty a AGL, 716 

45), 62-6, 854, 86?, 
10574, 1081, 1261, 1273, 
WARE AG, Wee, Tivee. 

Ta?) CA Oeme ns etOOe. 
179', 215, 218, 219ff., 
234", 235. 
—Kebirth and, 4off,, 
157}, 1798, 1853, 192}, 
— Yoga and, 212, 233. 
Essenes, 14. 
Etaddagga Vagga, 189}, 
Eumenides, 167}. 

Fairies, 731,873, 1272, 1282, 
1645, 1814, 
Freemasonry, 4, 1274, 169}. 

Furies, 166, 167', 185-6, 
188, 

Gandharva, 3iii, 873, 181'. 

Gandhema (Gandha), 116°, 

Garuda, 137°. 

Gelugpa, 29', 72, 1672, 
2 

33°. 

Genius, Evil, 1661, 239. 

— Good, 165?, 238-9. 

Ghirdhima (Gita), xxxi, 
113°. 

Gnosticism, 4,185", 234-5, 
239. 

Gokarmo, 70, 113°. 

Grace-Waves, 109%, Ig1, 
208, 224 

Guide, The, 85, 89, 196. 

Gurit, XxX, YD 13,14, ne 
79, 80, 85%, 87, 89%, 
goff., 99*, 124-5, 149, 
163, 169, 178, 199, 
218", 221-4. 

— Divine, 1611, 214", 222. 

— Norbu, 80. 

— Shishyaand,204,221-4. 

Wades Legend, 46". 

Hallucinations, 17, 29-31, 
33, 35, 58, 66, 98, 156: 
see Apparitions. 

—Karmic, 101ff., r4o!, 
156, 1647; 175, LShdte, 
1873, 

—Psychology of, 31-5, 
58, 66,1171, 140', 146-8, 
L675) 1S], 1572, enos 
225. 

Harpies, 1162, 

Hayagriva, 1204, 186, 188, 

Heaven- World, Origin of, 
1844. 

Hell-World, xxii, 24, 30, 
34, 109, 169°: see Light- 

Path, and Zokas. 

— Birth in, 156, 170, 185. 

— Christianity and, 1852, 
240. 

— Ixistence in, 194!, 2077. 

Hermes, 215. 

Iiermetic Writings, 7. 

Herodotus, 45, 50. 

Heroes, 128, 130, 134. 

Heruka Deities, xvii, xix, 
13, 70, 137-9, 144, 146, 
186, 218. 

Hinayana, 232. 

Hinduism, Ligher, 6, 46. 

Hitopadesha, 3?. 

Loma, 28. 

Hpho-bo, 18, 20. 

Htamenma, 71, 140 ff., 
140}, 218, 
Illumination, 89°, 213, 

217, 224: see Ecstasy. 
Indra, 62, 1087, 1211, 144. 
Initiation, 3,5, 72, 13, 17, 

37's 4% 45°, 50, 53, 62, 

Tia pmeto Osun aoe OGh, 
_ 177, 218", 219, 221-4, 
Ishvara, 2311, 236. 
Ishvari, 140}, 

Jainism, 234. 

Jampal, 113*: see Mai- 
jushri. 

Japa, xxvii. 

Jitaka, The, 37, 54. 

Jetsiin Kahbum, 82. 

Judgement, After-Death, 
XX-Xxil, xxx, 35-9,148}, 
165-9: see Dharma- 
Raja, and Yama-Raja. 

— Christian, 238-41. 

— Platonic, 49. 

Jupiter, xxiii, 1082. 

IKGh, PAS Baie 

Kalama Siutla, 41. 

Kandaraka Siitanta, 41". 

Kargyutpa, 61, 68, 72, 79; 
135%, 233%. 

Karma, 61, 89°. 

— Absolving of, 171, 237. 

— Christianity and, 234-5, 
239. 

-— Continuity of, 135, 1761- 
7 194, 2041. os 

— Illusions of, xxxviil, 
ior ff., 1628, 175, 185 ff. 

—James, William, on, 
Gry 

— Land, 73; 77: 

— Law of, 2, 43, 47', 63, 
236. 

— Lords of, 58. 

— Making of, xxxix, xli, 
AA, 

— Mirror of, xxi, 36, 166. 

— Pathways of, xxi. 

— Power of, 100, 106, 109, 
126, 131, 149, 155-6 ff., 
159, 161, 171, 173-5, 
188, 191, 198, 205-6. 

— Propensities of, 58, 86", 
97%, 1171, 133", 140}, 
148, 150, 157, 164}, 
173, 1767, 191, 206, 
213. 

INDEX 

Karma, Records of, 49, 
148}. 

— Wind of, 161, 198. 

— Workings of, xlii-xliii, 
29-34, 38-9, 43, 48°, 
57-8, 67, 94, 977, 98°, 
1265, 155, 1597, 163, 165, 
169%~4, 183, 219, 237. 

Karmic Deities, 140-1. 

Katha Upanishad, viii, 46°. 

Kerima, 71, 140 ff., 1401, 
142}, 218, 

Kesar Saga, 148}. 

Knowledge - Holding 
Deities, xx, 70, 126-31, 
134, opp. 136, 201, 218. 

Kosha, 214. 

Krotishaurima, 1372-40. 

Kshitigarbha, 108%. 

Kundalini, 216, 221, 224. 

Kwanyin, 113°, 

Lama, Astrologer, 19. 

— Confessor, 23. 

— Dalai, 26, 1133, 187}, 
DX. 

— Funereal, 20, 

— Kazi Dawa-Samdup, 
xliv, 11, 3, 71, 117-14, 
44, 78-81, 82, 85°, 86!-?, 
oS Tie, uo, ana, 
Palio 

— Oracular, 1877. 

— Tashi, 26, 113°, 232. 

Lamaism, Heads of, 232. 

— Music of, 129". 

— Origin of, 74-5. 

—- Protectors of, 1342. 

Lamentations, 18, 
195°. 

Lantsa characters, xxiv. 

Lasema (Lasya), 1085. 

Lepchas, 188°. 

Liberation, xxvii-xxviii, 
xxxili-xxxiv, 9, I, 17, 
67,71', 72", 867, 90, 97’, 
100, 101, 118, 131-2, 
137-41, 151, 155, 157, 
168, 189, 193': See 
Buddhahood, and Wzr- 
vanda. 

— Bardo, from, 30, 165, 
182~3, 193-5!, 196, 213. 

—Faith, by, 126, 134, 
BS. TI, 

— Paths to, xxxvii, 15, 
89°, 1057, 107, 109, 112, 
iv, Shp, Sie Tau: 
126, 135%, 136, 150%, 
193, 196, 222. 

87, 

~ 

245 

—Recognition by, i119, 
126, 131-2, 137-8, 141, 
148, 151, 158, 168, 173, 
193, 194. 

Light-Path, 125, 1507: 
see Lokas, and Wisdoms. 

— Asura(green), 117,124, 
50", 173. 

— Brute (blue), 124, 126, 
129, 130, 150", 174. 

— Deva (white), 106-7, 
124, 150", 173, 192. 

— Dharma-Dhitu (blue), 
106, ; 

— Hell (smoke-coloured), 
10g, 124, 150", 174. 

— Human (yellow), 111, 
Pigs ko4y UO Zan oz. 

— Preta (red), 113, 114, 
124, 150", 174, 

— Purified Propensities 
(vari-coloured), 127. 
Lokas (Worlds), xxxii- 
xxXxlii, xxxvil, xxxix, 17, 
24, 38, 107, 118, 125-0, 
136", 150°, 157, 179, 
240: see Asura, Deva, 
Hell-World,Light-Path, 

and Preta, 

— Brute, 24, 130. 

— Buddhas of, xix, 121, 

eye, Midst 
—‘Poisons’ of, xxxiii, 
xxxvii, 1257. 
Lonaphala Vagga, 40, 
189}. 

Lotus Deities, 85°, 139, 
218. 

Macicmii7 2am sno20—2e 

Maha-Kala, 147'. 

Mahé-Mudra, 1357. 

Maha-Parinibbana Siit- 
tanta, 5. 

Mahayana, xxxi, 10, 206, 
Dele, ENGR A bey 
237. 

Mahlaima (Mala), rer. 

Maitreya, 1085, 190%, 212!, 
DR 

Makara, 14.24, 144. 

Mamaki, 70, 108°, 110, 
199: see Tara. 

Manas, 9. 

Mandala, xvii-xix, 28, 70, 
7I, Opp. 118, 121°—2?, 
1241, 1261-7, opp. 136, 
136, 217 ff. 

Maiijushri (Mafjughosha), 
DR Tie, Tel Kye 

246 

Mantras, xxiv, xxxix, 129, 
134’, 136', 149%, 151, 

opp. 167, 171, 2061, 
220-4. 
Mantra-Yana, 13, 132, 

134, 136%, 151, 206%. 

Manu; Ito}, 47}. 

Maré, xix, xx, 1§, 62, 147, 
194, 206, 225. 

Marpa, 79, 135%, 234". 

Matris, 63, 1168-7, 201, 
218". 

Maya, Xxxii, 67,188, 212, 
219, 224. 

Miaya-Ripa, 100}. 

Medical Buddhas, 24. 

Memory, xxx, 183. 

—Past Lives, of, 40-1, 
189', 2074. 

— Records, 9, 60, 1891. 

Meru, Mt., 62, 63-5, 1465, 
147, 158-9, 215. 

Milarepa, xxxix’, 79, 82, 
aeee 

Mithras, 37}. 

Moksha, 11}. 

Monasticism, 234. 

Mudra, 71, 127%. 

Mukti, xxviii, 212. 

Mysteries, Antiquity, of, 
451: see Initiation. 

— Buddhist, 7. 

— Celtic, 3, 37}. 

= Eaypiaa, 301) 43: 45) 
122}, 

—Greek, 3, 9, 43) 454 
50, 51, 53, 122%, 

— Indian, 224. 

— Tibetan, 37, 361, 
224. 

221, 

Nadi, xxx, 90°, 215-16. 

Nalanda, 2, 74. 

Naropa, 135”. 

Nepal, 74. 

Nestorians, 233. 

Nidainas, xxxvii, 56. 

Nidhema (Naivedya), 1167. 

Nikaya, Anguttara, 38- 
41, 84, 158°, 189}, 

— Digha, 5, 207%, 233. 

— Majjhima, 38, 417. 

Ningmapa, 72, 2337. 

Nirmina- Kaya, xxxvi, 
1O-12, 13, 58, 135; 
136", 168. 

Nirvana, xxiii}, xxv, 

XXvii, xxxii, 63, II, 15, 
30, 38, 46, 62, 67-8, 
C7 100s toys: 114), 

INDEX 

125, 157’, 184%, 212, 
226, 227°, 2317 3, 236: 
see Buddhahood, and 
Liberation. 

Nirvana, Realization of, 
130% E321) LOZ 3, 
229%. 

Occultism : see Esoteri- 
cism. 

Odysseus, 50, 51. 

‘Og-min, 62, 107°. 

Origen, 234}. 

Orpheus, 49, 51. 

Osirian Faith, 234, 238. 

Osiris, 22, 35~6, 45}. 

Padma Sambhava, xviii, 
13, 23, 33, 655 72-7, 79; 
85, 135%, 150%, gol, 
233°. 

Panchatantra, 3%. 

Parsee Funeral, 25, 27. 

Peaceful Deities, xviii—xix, 
xXxxvii-xxxvill, 13, 23, 
31, 85, 103-4 ff, opp. 
PLS 124) Leo an Ua 
Ye 156, 193-4, 199, 
204-8, 217, ae 220, 

Phowa, xxix, 85'. 

Pindar, 53. 

Pistis Sophia, 234}. 

Plato, 36-75 49 ff., 
178%9g!, 188?. 

Pluto, 35. 

Possession (Avesha), xxix. 

Potaliya Siittanta, 41%, 

Prajita- Paramita » XXxil, 
Te, aes 

Prana, xxix, 214 ff. 

Pre-existence, Memory of, 
9: see Rebirth. 

freta (Unhappy Ghost), 
3988, AUIS TANI, TAA, 
150", 170: see Lokas. 

— Birth, 157, 185. 

— Existence, 1941, 207. 

— Origin of, 186-7. 

Proserpine Lore, 37. 

Psalms of the Early Bud- 
dhists, xii, 210, 

Psychical Research, 77, 

187! 

Ptah- hotep, Precepts of, 
110", 

Purana, Xxvi, XXX, Xxxiii, 
xiii. 

Purgatory (Limbo), xxvii, 

XXXV, 34) 379 39: 
— Origin of, 34". 

V7 

Pushpema (Pushpa), 1088. 
Pythagoras, 3, 53+ 

Ra, 109%. 
Rakshasa, 32, 65, 128%, 
144-5, 162, 186. 

Ratna Deities, 138-9. 
Ratna-Sambhava, 9°, 16- 
17,32, 5579 108,110! 

12, oe 123, 139, 146, 
200, 2021, 220, 

Reality, 68, 224-32. 

Rebirth, | Anthropology 
and, 59. 

— Bardo, 30, 102, 153- 
93) 204. 

— Bon, 74. 

— Cause of, 39. 

— Celtic, 37, 60. 

—Christianity and, 37, 
2341-5, 239. 

—Continents, 184, 190. 

— Doctrine, 39-61. 

— Ending of, 149". 

— Esotericism of, 40, 45'~ 
vathe 

— Greek, 49 ff., 53. 

— Herodotus and, 45. 

— Huxley and, 60-1. 

— Interpretation of, 39- 
Alito lo aes 

— Jewish, 37. 

— Karma and, 
Karma, 

— Lamas and, 40. 

— Memory, 40-17, 1825, 
189}. 

— Origen and, 234}. 

— Platonic, 49-53, 178°, 
M7Opploces 

—Process of, xxiii!, xli- 
xlii, 7, 34, 40, 45, 50, 67, 

67, 92*, 97", 95°, 114', 

1321, 165, 170, 172, 
175 ff., 179, 190 ff., 219, 
224. 

— Rig-Veda on, 45}. 

— Science and, 41, 60~1, 

— Sex at, xl, 179-80, 2065, 

— States of, xxxix, 40, 
150", 208": see Lokas. 

—pymibotien of, 49f., 
NO23, O52 eS melon 
185): : see Esotericism. 

— Transmigration and,xlii, 
42 fi., 59) 1263, 1788, 
AON OR, ROL: 

— Visions, 15% ff., 169 ff., 
7a regetisa ities 188, 

— Yoga of, 30, 41. 

198: see 

Re-incarnation, xxvii, xl, 
xli: see Rebirth, 

—- Resurrection and, xxvii. 

Reyan-k'yil, xxiii. 

Rig-Veda, on Rebirth, 45}. 

Rig-2in, 73,77; 127". 

Ruhy, xxviii. 

Riipa-Kiya, 233. 

Saddharma- Pandarika, 

Sddhand, xxxix, 1968, 

Sahasrara-Padma, XXX, 
216-17, 221, 224. 

Salamanders, 8 
Samadnt, 1025, 1237, 124, 
159, 163', 167, 173; 

174°, 186, 203, 206: see 
Dhyana, and Yoga. 

Same tta-Bhadra, xx, 12, 

Tf 32, 62, 95%, IIT, 
¥ar*, 2021: see 
.1d1- Buddha 

— Prayer, xxxi, 117, 

—State, 967, 964. 

Sambhogha-Kaya, xxxvi, 
10, II-13, 15, 107-8}, 
I10, I12, 115, 118-19, 
124, 135°, 138, 150, 
167, 188. 

Samgili Stitta, 2074. 

Sanchi Topes, xxiii. 

Sangha, 5,14, 171. 

Sangsara, xxiii, xxv, xxvii, 
xxxii, xl, 2, 63, 8, 11-12, 
15, 1031, 146, 180-1, 
189-90, 225, 236: see 
Lokas. 

— Emancipation from, 9, 
67, 125,135°: see Libera- 
tion, and Mirvana. 

— Renunciation of, 
Way owt 29, 213. 

—— Worlds of, 24. 

Sangskira, XXXIV, xliii. 

Sangyay-Chanma, 70, 111". 

Sa-tschha, 24. 

Semitic Faiths and Soul, 
225. 

Shatvagama, Xxxiv. 

Shakti, 6%, 32, 70, 120%, 
mans, TEM, gS ly 
217-18, 

Shangkaracharyya, xxxiii. 

Shape-Shifting, 159, 186. 

Shigatze, 26. 

Shinje, xxi, 35-7, 240. 

‘Shighoa (Chela), 67, 222- 

xii, 

A. 
Sinn, Waxes, Ane, 
Shinyata, i? : see Void. 

INDEX 

Stddhz, xxix, 128%, 
2042, 2221-3, 

Sikkim, 20, 22, 27-8, 37, 
55, 71-2, 79, 80, 1877. 

— Maharaja of, 80. 

Six Doctrines, The, 1623, 
1643. 

Skandha, xxviii, xxxvii, 
xl, 189!, 1924, 2312. 

IgI?, 

4.|— Vijfana, xxxi, xxxvii, 

Heli, Eb, Alii, 
Socrates, 53, 66. 
Soul-Complex,xxviii-xxix, 

XXxiv, XXXvll, xxxix—xli. 
Spiritism, xxxiv, 1665, 187}. 
Spirits, 32, 186, 187}. 
Spyang-pu, 20-4. 
Srong-Tsan-Gampo, 74. 
Stupa, 24, 1637. 
Sub-Consciousness, 9, 40, 

417, 60, 1171, 189', 1924, 

aI4. 

Sugata, 1251; see Buddha. 

Sukhavati, 28. 

Svastika, xxiii, 

Swedenborg, xxvi, xxxv. 

Symbolism: see Esoteri- 
cism. 

Tadhol, 72", 136', 1528, 
1924, 

Tantra, xxxi, xxxvii, 
XXXVili, 93, 1465-7, 15,22, 
156, 180, 213'~2, 216, 
219, 222. 

— Demchok, 1228, 

— Great Liberation, 
The, 1004. 

— Kularnava, xxv. 

— Raa, xxviii, xxix, 223). 

— Shrichakra - sambhara, 
xxix}, xliv, So. 

Tantricism, 291, 75-6, 78, 
854, 1277, 1465, 213-20, 
232-3. 

— Abuse of, 218". 

— Tibetan, xxxix’, 74. 

Taoism, 23, 234. 

Tapas, xxvii. 

Tara (Dolma), 7o, 1083, 
118, 200. 

Tathagata, xxxiv, xxxvi, 
ALO Ossmelino m2 2O: 
2298. 

Tattvas, xxxiv, 229%. 

Telepathy, 223, 

Lerton, 73, 75-7; 150". 

Thamyras, 50, 51. 

Theravada, §, 6, 10, 35, 
54). 

of 

247 

Thersites, 52. 

Thi-Srong-Detsan, 74. 

Thoth, 36. 

Thought-Forms, 17, 29- 
32, 34, 1034, 1237, 125°, 
148, 156, 1871, 205, 
Oly PRC, Pele 

— Body of, ror, 104}, 1265. 

—Recognition of, 104, 
1262, 141, 143-4, 146-7, 
204. 

Ti-Pitika (Skt. Trt-Pi- 
tika), 5, 301, 1607, 233. 

Totemism, 361, 140}. 

Transmigration : see Re- 
birth. 

Trt- Kaya,1O,12"-14,147, 
202, 232-3. 

Trinity, Buddhist, 13-14, 
871, 88, 1037, 148, 155, 
163, 165, I70, 192, 
197-8. 

— Christian, 14, 234. 

Tri-Ratna, Xix, 

Tst-pa, 19. 

Tson Khapa, 2337. 

Tushita Heavens, 
NGOum.. 

Tutelary Deity, 997. 

535 

Udana, 68}. 
Upanishads, 
40". 

viii, xxxii, 

Vairochana, xxxvii, 9, I5— 
17, 32, 46°, 55, 70, 
105*-7, 119, 137, 200, 
202°, 218, 220. 

Vajra Deities, 138. 

Vajra-Dhara, 13, 108}. 

Vajra- Pani (Chakdor), 
1164, 1347, 150, 189+. 

Vajra-Sattva, xxxvii, 9°, 
15, 16, 32; 55) 795 1063, 
108!-1o, 120, 123-4, 
126, 138, 199, 2021, 220. 

Vajra- Vana, 13. 

Vampire, 26. 

Vedanta, xxxi, xxxili, 46°. 

Vijaya, 1207. 

Vinaya-Pitika (or Dulva), 

53- 

Vissudht Magea, 41°. 

Vital-Airs (Prana-Vayu), 
Ald, AEN) COVE 

Vital Force (Prana), xxxi, 
go ff., 98°, 1627, 214- 
16, 224. 

Void (Shinyata), 

Xxvii, xxxii—xxxiil, 

The, 
10, 

248 

11, 15, 95°, 96°, 119, 
1261, 1467-*, 167, 174, 
182, 188. 

Void, Clear Light of, xxxi, 
Xxxili-xxxiv, 29, 32, 89, 
goff., 977-84 8, 135, 141, 
150-1, 174, 176, 182, 
1035209, 200) 211.213) 
219, 224. 

Wangchugma, 14off.,14.0'. 

Wheel of Life, 17, 37-8, 
55-6, 977, 131. 

Wheel of the Law, xxiii, 
106, opp. 119. 

Wisdom, All-Discrimina- 
ting, 16, 114-15, 119', 
123, 200. 

—All- Performing, 16, 
116-19}, 200, 

— Dharma-Dhilu, 15, 
106-7, 122. 

— Equality, of 16, 111-12, 
T191, 123, 200. 

— Mirror-Like, 15-16, 
109-10, 11g}, 123, 199. 

INDEX 

Wisdom, Perfected Ac- 
tions, of, 9, 123. 

— Reality, of, 200. 

— Simultaneously - Born, 
129-30, 201. 

Wisdoms, The, 10-11, 15- 
16, r19!, 125, 205. 

— Four, 119}, 122, 125-6. 

Wrathful Deities, xix—xx, 
xxxvii-xxxvili, 13, 23}, 
31, 85, 103, 1247, 126}, 
131-49, opp. 136, 156, 
193-4, 199, 201, 204-8, 
Aig Out) PETES 

Yamantaka, 120%7, 1672. 
Yama-Raja, 35, 37; 39) 
46", 471, 147°, 1673. 

Yantras, 1924, 

Yoga, xxx, xxxi, xxxviii, 
2, 10, 30, 33, 40-2, 58, 
67, 74-5, 79, 867, 89%, 
924, 97", 994, 1321, 135), 
157, 158 @ sgh, 
L7Oay llc lol me OOss 
2II-14", 232: see Dhya- 

na, Ecstasy, Ilumina- 
tion, and Samadhz. 

Yooa, Buddha and, 5, 158°. 

— Christian, 234. 

— Dream-State, 203". 

— Egyptian, 110°, 

— Hatha, xxv. 

— Indian, 9, 1357. 

—Laya or Kundalini, 
xxxiv, xxxixl, 221. 

— Mantra, 150", 221. 

— Mudra, 127'. 

— Patanjali on, 1575. 

— Rebirth, 41. 

— Samadhi, 1237, 163%. 

— Serpent-Power, xxxvili, 
216. 

—Tantric, 1205, 
213-20, 233. 

— Tibetan, xxxix', 9, 1357, 
150", 1027, FQasmealiees 

Yoga-Carya, 2123, 213”. 

Vogavishishtha,xxxiv',56%. 

Yoginis, 144-6. 

1465, 

Zanonti, 133". 
Zeus, 51. 

Printed in England at the Oxrorp UNIversity Press 
By John Johnson Printer to the University 

Beet 105 YOPAN 
“MWE52 UBM- SUPA 

mat 

SETSSTABBLPBSE 8bM ZE° p6Z 
‘peap ay} Jo yood uejeqT] aut