Wonhyo's Commentaries on the Awakening of Faith in Mah@yana 

By 
Sung-bae Park 

A.B. (Dongook University) 1958 
M.A. (Dongook University) 1960 

DISSERTATION 
Submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree of 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPEY 
in 
Buddhist Studies 
in the 
- GRADUATE DIVISION 

OF THE 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BitRKELEY 

Acknowledgements 

I would like to express my appreciation to Professor 
Cyril Birch and Wei-ming Tu for their painstaking read- 
ing of this dissertation, and to Professor Lewis 
Lancaster, without whose constant encouragement and 
advice this dissertation would not have been made 

possibie. 

ii 

Abbreviations 
ABORT... 2. - ee cece enc eee Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute (Poona) 
BPM... ce cece eee ew cee The Awakening of Faith in Mahayana 
DPM—H. wc cece wee eee eee ee Hakeda, Yoshito S., The Awakening 
of Faith 
BFM-S. ee cece cece ec ew eese Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro, Acvaghosha'! Ss 

Discourse on the Awakening "OF 

ernment tern 

Faith in the Mahayana 

BB. we eee ccc cee ee eee ences Bibliographie Bouddhique 

BDI... ee eee e eee eee ee eens Mochizuki Shinkso, BukkysS daijiten 

BRD. 2.222 see e eee eee wanes Ono Gemmys, Bussho Kaisetsu daijiten 

BMPS. 22. eee cece eee cece Bulletin de la Maison Franco- 
Japonaise 

(oh Combined Edition (Taesting kishinnon 

so ki hoebon) 

CHO. ewe cece ccc cc we ee nnes Cho Myong-gi, Silia pulgyo ui inydm 
kwa yoksa 

DKK—-M. -- +--+ -------------MOchizuki Shinko, Daijo kishin ron 
no kenkyu 

DKK=T. wee ccc cece eee ees Takemura Shdho, Daijo kishin ron 
k6doku 

DK-U. 2 ee cee eee eee eens Ui Hakuju, Daij6 kishin ron 

2 Wonhyo, Expository Notes (Taesung 
kishinnon pydlgi) 

HBS... ec eee ec cece nw ecnes Han'guk pulgyo sasangsa 

HODO. - eee cee cece wee ceee HobGgirin: Dictionnaire Encyclopedique 

de Bouddhisme d'apres les sources 
SD aaa Te ee 
chinoises et japonaises. 

HP—Ke wee cece ewe cece cece Kim Yong-t'ae, Han'guk pulgvosa 

iii 

IBK...... www wee ec cc cece Indogaku bukkyogaku kenkyu 

a5: (0s Indian Historical Quarterly (Calcutta) 

TA. ccc ccc cc wwe e cence Journal Asiatique (Paris) 

FX) Journal of the American Oriental 
Society (Baltimore) 

JBORS . 2. ec eee eee eee Journal of the Bihar and Orissa 
Research Society (Patna) 

Kec ec cee cece c ee cece Koryd taejanggydong 

KSL oe ccc eee cee ecw eee Chih-sheng, K'ai-yltan shih-chiao lu 

Ci Ishida, ed., Naracho genzai issaikydso 
mokuroku 

1 i re Nanjio Bunyiu., A Catalogue of the 
Chinese Translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka 

OLZ. . cc ww ccc cw ce ec ecw nee Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 

Ree eee eee eee eee eee eee Wonhyo., Running Commentary (Taesting 
kishinnonso) 

Doce eee eee cee cane Taisho shinshu daizdkyo 

WO. cece cece ec ee ec cees Mok Chdéngbae et al, Wonhyo Chonjip 

WKS... ee eee cece ee eee eee Lee Chong-ik, Wonhyo ui kinbon 
sasang 

) ee Dainihon zokuzokyod 

iv 

Table of Contents 

Page 
Acknowledgments . ......2..2e.. 

Abbreviations ......+..6e.e eee 

PART ONE 
Preface . . 2. 2. 6 6 6 © 1 ew we we tw lw tw tw wt kw wt el 2 
I. Introduction ...... ..6. 6 « © «© «© © « 6 

II. The Essence of the Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun .. 26 
III. Biography of Wonhyo .........+2.+2.2.2.. 45 
IV. Wonhyo's Bibliography ............. 58 
V. Wonhyo's Thought .........4..4.6.4.8.4284+28 73 
VI. Conclusion . .... 6... 2 2 2 ee ew ew ew ew ew 84 

Notes to PART ONE ...... 2. 2. «© «© © © © © «2 ee 2 92 

PART TWO 
I. Introduction to Translation ......... .4115 
II. Translation. .............4..+4. +. 120 
Notes to Translation ..........64..... 186 
Appendix . 2. 2. 2 2 6 6 ee ww ew we ee we ew ew we 250 

Bibliography ........ 2.2.4... 0.202.642. . 253 

PART ONE 

Preface 

in contrast to, for example, the Christian canon 
and the Confucian canon, the Buddhist canon is unusually 
difficult to define, because the Buddhist scriptures 
are several thousands in number .* One who wishes to 
gain knowledge of this canon cannot be asked or expected 
to read all or even most of them, so the Buddhist who 
wishes to present the essence of the teaching to others 
is immediately faced with the problem of having to pick 
a representative text to serve as introduction, survey, 
summary or outline to this vast body of material. This 
problem is compounded, especially in East Asia, by the 
existence of many Buddhist schools, most of them having 
a particular text which served as their bases. For 
example, the T'ien-t‘'ai school is based on the Saddharma- 
pundarika-sitra, the Hua-yen school on the Avatamsaka— 
“sutra, and so on. Accordingly, to choose a representa- 
tive text from the several thousand Buddhist scriptures 
iS unavoidably to come very close to accepting some sort 
of sectarian perspective. Thus, those who enquire after 
the essence of Buddhist teaching, yet who wish at the 
outset to avoid sectarian affiliation, will hesitate to 

approach the canon. 

The problem is compounded even further by the exis- 
tence of one influential school of Buddhism, the Zen 
(Ch'an) school, not a few of whose teachers have openly 
insisted on the harmfulness of reading the scriptures 
for those intent on achieving Enlightenment. For these 
teachers and their followers, the scriptures might just 
as well be burned as read.” 

This is not simply a modern problem; it existed in 
Sixth century China.* This was the period that saw the 
appearance of Treatise on the Awakening of Faith in Maha- 
ana (hereafter referred to as AFM). Once AFM appeared, 
it very quickly became popular. There seem to be two 
reasons for this: first, it satisfied the demand of people 
wno wanted one volume that could comprehensively embrace 
all Buddhist doctrines; second, it is a non-sectarian 
text.> As a matter of fact, AFM was welcomed not only by 
non-sectarian people but by sectarian people as well. 
This occasioned another problem: members of some Buddhist 
sects who welcomed the appearance of AFM tried to use 
AFM to glorify their own sects. Many of the traditional 
commentators betrayed such tendencies, the most famous 
of these being Fa-tsang (643-712 A.D.), the third patriarch 
of the Hua-yen school in China. ° One of his charac- 
teristic tactics was to anticipate the attack on his 

sectarian attitude by his opponents, the adherents of 

the Fa-hsiang school,’ by using the doctrine of AFM 
to justify what was specifically the Hua-yen doctrine. 
Fa-tsang's commentaries on AFM exerted a strong in- 
fluence on his own and succeeding generations, the result 
being that AFM has sometimes been considered a Hua-yen 
text. ° This is certainly unfortunate. But it under- 
scores the hermeneutical problem of how to read a text. 
Ui Hakuju, one of the most noted of modern Japanese 
Buddhologists, responded to this problem in his Daijo 
kishin ron by cautiously suggesting that the text be read 
apart from its commentaries in order that its real message 
be grasped.” This suggestion is valid only insofar as it 
screens out those commentaries, such as Fa-tsang's, which 
already bring a point of view to the text and read the 
text as confirming that point of view. If, however, 
the commentary is truly exegetical in nature, then Ui's 
suggestion is invalid since it cuts off a prospective 
medium by which one's understanding of the text may be 
deepened. The commentaries on AFM written by the Korean 
monk Wénhyo (617-686 A.D.) are such a medium.*° 
Wénhyo is regarded as one of the three great com- 
mentators on AFM; the other two are Hui-yUan (523-592 A.D.) 
and Fa-tsang (643-712 a.p.).++ wénhyo's commentaries 
are very different from Fa-tsang's: Wonhyo is emphatic 

in characterizing AFM as a text embodying a principle 

by which all sectarian disputes may be harmonized. Ac- 
cording to Wonhyo's understanding, if one interprets AFM 
as a sectarian teaching, one will betray the original 

intent of its author. =? 

Unfortunately, in East Asia, 
including his home country of Korea, Wénhyo's commentaries 
are simply famous; they are not well-studiea.?? Thev 
have generally been neglected in favor of Fa~tsang's. 
Wonhyo is, undoubtedly, one of the foremost thinkers 
that Korea has produced; he wrote much else besides his 
commentaries on AFM. Yet, although he influenced both 
Chinese and Japanese thinkers, ?4 he is almost unknown in 

the West. This thesis represents a preliminary attempt 

at remedying this situation. 

I. Introduction 

AFM is sometimes referred to by its Sanskrit title 
MahayanaSraddhotvada-Sastra, which was reconstructed from 
the Chinese title, Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun ( K Fe #2 4E 
Za): however, no Sanskrit version of the text has yet 
been discovered. In fact, no Indian text has mentioned 
even the name of the treatise. Moreover, no Tibetan 
translation exists, and no information about this treatise 
can be found from Tibetan sources, which are generally 
regarded as the best for information concerning the later 
Indian Mahayana Buddhist texts.1°> 

There are two Chinese translations of AFM: the first 
is by Paramartha in 550 A.D.; the second is by Siksananda 
between 695 and 705 A.D. Most East Asian commentators, 
including Wonhyo, used the first translation.+® 

There have been five English translations of AFM. 
The first was D.T. Suzuki's in 1900 and the most recent 
is Yoshito Hakeda's in 1967. Of the three intervening 
translations, the two by Rev. Timothy Richards in 1907 
and Ven. Wai-tao in 1937 are unreliable. The third, by 
Dr. Richard Robinson in 1960, is reliable but unpublished; 
it has been circulated only once among his friends and 

former students in mimeographed form.+/ 

It is odd that D.T. Suzuki chose the relatively 
unpopular translation by Siksananda for his translation 
rather than the much more popular one by Paramartha. 

Had Suzuki chosen to translate Paramartha's version of 
AFM, his translation would undoubtedly be read by many 
people even today. As things stand, Hakeda's translation, 
which like Richards', Wai-tao's and Robinson's was made 
from Paramartha's version, is the most widely read. How- 
ever, Hakeda's translation has failed to bring out the 
meaning of the text in many places. This point will be 
dealt with in the second section of Part One. ‘he rest 
of this introduction will be devoted to a review of the 
authenticity debate surrounding AFM, an issue first 
raised by Mochizuki Shinkd in 1902.28 

The colophon of the Taisho edition of AFM, which is 
found immediately after the title, purports to give us 
some historical information concerning the author and 

translator of the text. 19 t says, 
EC€iee Zeoe 
= > © 2%, 22 
= gk HK Ep seh 2% = 

This may be translated: 
Written by Bodhisattva A§$vaghosa, 
translated during the Liang Dynasty 

by the Western Indian Tripitaka 
Dharma-master Paramartha. 

In his lifelong study of AFM, the Japanese Buddholog- 

ist Mochizuki Shinko continually tried to prove the 

falsity of the information about the author and trans- 
lator as given by this colophon. Before entertaining 
Mochizuki's criticisms concerning the colophon, it would 
be best to review the previous traditional views about it. 

The earliest text of the colophon appears in the 
thirteenth century edition of the Korydé Tripitaka, which 
was used as the basis of the Taisho Tripitaka.*+ Sugi, 
the editor of the Koryo Tripitaka, was a very careful 
editor, but he did not mention anything about the colo- 
phon of AFM in the carefully written editorial record 
entitled Koryéguk shinjo Taejang kyojéng pydllok 
2s 8 HEAR REREE or Special Record of the 
Revisions of the Koryo Tripitaka. 7? 

The earliest record concerning the date of AFM is 
found in Fei Ch'ang-fang's catalogue entitled Li-tai 
san-pao chi EN =F he, , or Chronological Record of 
the Buddhist Scriptures. Fei's catalogue lists AFM as 
having been translated by Paramartha in 550 A.D. at 
the residence of Lu Yuan-che, Fu-ch'un, China. Fei 
Ch'ang-fang does not give the author's name. This does 
not mean, however, that Fei was skeptical about the 
identity of the author because Fei frequently failed 
to include author's names. “4 Another catalogue, Fa-ching 
lu or Fa-ching's Catalogue, which was presented to the 

Emperor Wen-ti of the Sui Dynasty in 594, also consis- 

20 

tentiy omits author's names .7> Therefore, that these two 
catalogues do not mention ASvaghosa as the author of AFM 
cannot count as evidence for disputing ASvaghosa's 
authorship of AFM. In fact, it is much more reasonable 
to interpret their silence as a sign of their accepting 
ASvaghosa's authorship, otherwise they would have indi- 
cated their doubts by placing AFM in the forged texts 
section of their catalogues. But they did not do so. 
Fa-ching did, however, have doubts about Paramartha's 
being the translator of AFM; thus he placed AFM in the 

doubtful texts section of his catalogue. *® 

Fa-ching's 
reason is contained in the fifth volume of his Chung- 
-ching mu-lu. It reads: 
Treatise on the Awakening of Faith 
in Mahayana. People say it is 
Paramartha's translation. I checked 
the catalogue of Paramartha's trans- 
lations but it does not have this 
treatise. Therefore, I have put this 
text in the doubtful treatise section. 
The full Chinese title of the doubtful treatise sec- 
. . , _ - sA¥ : 
tion is Chung-lun i-hu fen Re EER , which means 
"section of all treatises which are doubtful." But, 
by putting AFM in this section Fa-ching demonstrated that 
ne did not regard the treatise as a forgery, only that 
his investigations failed to uncover evidence to support 
the contention that Paramartha was the translator; i.e., 

the Chen-ti lu aR or Catalogue of Paramartha's 

B 
ie 

19 

Translations, which Fa-ching consulted simply did not 
contain AFM. Otherwise, he would have included it in 
the section reserved for forged treatises, the Chung-iun 
i-wang fen LAME ET or "section of all treatises 

27 Therefore, Fa-ching's action can- 

which are forged.” 
not be construed as a negative judgment upon the authen- 
ticity of AFM. 

How accurate was the copy of the Chen-ti lu which 
Fa-ching consulted? There is absolutely no way to answer 
this question as no copies of the Chen-ti iu have survived. 
But unless the quality of the Chen-ti lu which Fa-ching 
consulted is ascertained, one cannot count Fa-ching's 
record as evidence in the authenticity debate. In any 
case, Fa-ching's catalogue was compiled by Fa-ching and 
twenty other people within the space of one year.*? Be- 
cause it was completed in such a short space of time the 
cataloguers based much of their information on previous 
records without checking them against the actual texts 
involved. This last feature of the Chen-ti lu makes Fa- 
-ching'"s doubts concerning Paramartha's having translated 

AFM lose much of their force. 

In addition to Fei Ch'ang-fang and Fa-ching, a num- 

ber of distinguished Buddhist scholars in the sixth century, 

such as the earliest commentator on AFM, T'an-yen (516-588), 

the T'ien-t'ai master Chih-1i (539-597), the She-lun 

28 

ame 

master T'an-ch'ien (542-607) and the San-lun master Chi- 

-tsang (549-623), made reference to arm, 29 

Neither these 
scholars nor the three great commentators on AFM, Hui- 
-yian (523-592), Wonhyo (617-686) and Fa-tsang (643-712) 
doubted A§$vaghosa's authorship. 74 This being so, why did 
Mochizuki challenge their view? 

According to Mochizuki, he himseif had been an ad- 
herent of the traditional view and had blindly accepted 
the information contained in the colophon. 2” He renounced 
the traditional view on discovering that Fa-ching had 
placed AFM in the doubtful texts section of his catalogue. 
However, aS indicated above, doubtful does not mean forged. 
Therefore, Mochizuki's reason is weak and unconvincing, 
and represents a careless reading of Fa~ching's catalogue. 

Mochizuki's second reason revolves around the fact 
that different records give different dates for Paramartha's 
translation. In the most voluminous of his books de- 
voted to the authenticity question, Daij6 kishin ron no 
kenkyu (A Study of the Awakening of Faith in Mahayana), 
Mochizuki points out that (1) Fei Ch'ang-fang gives 550 A.D. 
as the translation date, (2) Fa-ching doubts that Para- 
martha was the translator aitogether, (3) Yen-tsung's 
catalogue (602 A.D.) says that AFM was translated during 
the Ch'en Dynasty, i.e., between 557 and 589 A.D., (4) 

Chih~k'ai's preface says 554 A.D., (5) Fa-tsang gives 

12 

the same reign year as Chih-k'ai but gives a different 
cyclical year, (6) Chih-sheng says 553 A.D. These facts 
constitute Mochizuki's second reason for doubting the 
authenticity of arM:? However, his argument is once 
again weak and unconvincing. 

First of all, it is necessary to point out that the 
discrepancies between the dates given by Chih-k'ai, Fa- 
-tsang and Chih-sheng center on the fact that the reign 
year Chih-k'ai gives as the translation date (554 A.D.) 
does not tally with the cyclical year he gives (AD ) - 
Fa-tsang kept Chih-k'ai's reign year but gave the cycli- 
cal year (CH EX ) properly corresponding to that reign 
year; Chih-sheng kept Chih-k'ai's cyclical year but gave 
the reign year (553 A.D.) properly corresponding to that 
cyclical year. Thus the difference between Fa-tsang and 
Chih-sheng with respect to Chih-k'ai reflect nothing more 
than an attempt to correct Chih-k'ai's mistake; in that 
sense the differences among them are trivial.°4 

The differences among Fei-Ch'ang-fang, Yen-tsung and 
Chih-k'ai are less trivial. (Fa-ching's doubts have been 
discussed above). However, it is obvious that Chih-k'ai's 

39 Thus, the date in the preface 

preface is a forgery. 
is unreliable. Second, Yen-tsung never explicitly stated 
that AFM was translated during the Ch'en Dynasty. Yen- 

-tsung simply regarded Paramartha as a Ch'en Dynasty monk. >° 

13 

In fact, however, Paramartha's career?’ spanned both 
the Liang and Ch'en Dynasties. Thus Yen-tsung's 
testimony cannot be used to date AFM. This leaves 
us with the date given by Fei Ch'ang-fang in his 
catalogue. 

There is no good reason to doubt this date. Fei 
Ch'ang-fang's catalogue is innaccurate in some re- 
spects. 78 However, the information he gives about 
texts published around his own time are more reliable 
than anyone else’s. Given this fact, and given the 
fact that the reason for the conflicting dates of 
translation can be explained, as has been shown, Mochi- 
zuki's doubts about the authorship of AFM may be re- 
garded as groundless if based on the date issue. 

Mochizuki's third reason is that the style and 
terminology of AFM are quite different from those of 
Paramartha's other translations. Mochizuki points out 
that many elements found in AFM are not found from 
Indian texts, but imply a Chinese origin. Mochizuki 
also points out that, for example, whereas AFM uses 
the term hsiu to lo 4% HE for sitra, which was a 
favorite term of Da$abhumika masters such as Bodhiruci, 
Paramartha usually uses ching 4%. ?? But this reason, 

too, is weak and unreflective. 

14 

First, it is well known that the early Chinese trans- 
lators of Buddhist texts were not so faithful to the 
Sanskrit text that while transleting they could not add 
to or deviate from the original, especially if they felt 
that by doing so the text would be better received. 

Thus, it is very conceivable that the elements in AFM 
which purportedly reflect Chinese views may have crept 
into AFM during the process of translation. Second, the 
Indian translators did not know Chinese well. Thus, they 
placed heavy reliance on their assistants who, however, 
did not know Sanskrit. As a result, a communication gap 
arose. When Paramartha translated the AFM, he had been 
in China for only four years. Matters of terminology, 
style, even how best to present the doctrine in translat- 
ing AFM were of necessity left in the hands of assistants. 
There is no evidence to suggest that Paramartha used the 
same group of assistants for all his translations. Also, 
it is reasonable to suppose that as Paramartha became 
more fluent in Chinese, he might have had a greater hand 
in choosing Chinese equivalents for Sanskrit terms. In 
this way, discrepancies between the style and terminology 
of AFM and those of Paramartha's other translations can 

4 . . . 
*9 Thus, here too, Mochizuki's argument is 

be explained. 
not compelling. 

Mochizuki introduces various other reasons to support 

15 

his argument. We will not discuss them as they can be 
undermined as readily as the previous ones. However, 

we must examine Mochizuki's most serious attack on the 
authenticity of AFM. Mochizuki claimed that the AFM was 
a forgery because of its close resemblance to another 
famous forgery, the so-called Chan-ch'a shan-o yeh-pao- 
-ching =e aed EFS (hereafter referred to as 
Chan-ch'a ching), attributed to the translator Pu-ti-teng 

of the Sui Dynasty.*2 

After a thorough comparison of 
AFM and Chan-ch'a ching, Mochizuki concludes that AFM is 
a later, revised version of it. It is true that the books 
are amazingly similar in many ways. For example, the 
topics, their order, and their explanation are almost 
exactly the same. However, Mochizuki's argument again 
lends itself to criticism. 

Mochizuki claims that because AFM is so precise, 
refined and comprehensive, while Chan-ch'a ching is 
imprecise, rough and not comprehensive, the latter is 
obviously earlier, because a precise work cannot become 
imprecise. This argument is open to the following objec- 
tion. Both AFM and Chan-ch'a ching were popular in China 
in the latter part of the sixth century. In 593 A.D. 
the government prohibited Chan-ch'a ching from being 
circulated because it propagated false teachings such 

as aivination. 7” Therefore the catalogues of both 

16 

Fei Ch'ang-fang and Fa-ching treat Chan'ch'a ching as 

a forgery. So did Tao-hstian and Chih-sheng. 7? These 
Buddhist cataloguers were all great scholars. Chih-sheng, 
especially, was brilliant and sensitive in distinguishing 
between forged and true scripture. But while he con-~ 
demned Chan-ch'a ching as a forgery, he had nething but 
praise for AFM. He even went so far as to criticize 
Fa-ching for having placed AFM in the doubtful texts sec- 
tion of his catalogue. “4 If, as Mochizuki pointed out, 
AFM and Chan-ch'a ching so closely resemble each other, 
then Chih-sheng showed a surprising ambivalence in his 
treatment of the two texts. 

But on examining the present text of Chan-ch'a ching, 
one easily notices a difference between the first and 
second rolls. As a matter of fact, they resemble two con- 
pletely different texts. There is no connection between 
them at all, for while the first roll is entirely devoted 
to divination, the second roll closely resembles APM, 

But a question immediately arises as to why Fei Ch'ang- 
-fang, Fa-ching, Tao-hstian and Chih-sheng failed to point 
out this striking difference between the first and second 
rolls. The most plausible explanation is that the contents 
of the second roll of Chan-ch'a ching did not resemble AFM 

until after Chih-sheng's time; i.e., the original second 

roll was replaced by the second roll in its present form. 

17 

Why this happened we do not know. However, it would ex- 
plain why Fei Ch'ang-fang, Fa-ching, Tao-hstan and Chih- 
-sheng, who were otherwise so keen, should all have 
failed, first, to comment on the difference between the 
first and second rolls of Chan-ch'a ching and second, 
to explain why they considered the Chan-ch'a ching forged 
and AFM not, if the second roll of the former so resembled 
the latter. Although ours is admittedly an argument of 
probability, still, it is more probable than Mochizuki's. 
Mochizuki's way of arguing reveals much about his 
way of thinking. Apparently, Mochizuki and his followers 
began by doubtino the information contained in the colo- 
phon of the text. Why did they doubt it, when traditional 
scholars did not? Perhaps, as Ui Hakuju somewhat cynic- 
ally pointed out, it was because of arrogance. “> They 
contemptuously looked down upon the traditional scholars 
as being ignorant of the history of Buddhist doctrine, 
for it is impossible that ASvaghosa, who lived before 
Nagarjuna (c. 150-250 A.D.), should have taught the 
Tathagatagarbha theory, which did not appear until after 
Nagarjuna and Vasubandhu (320-490 A.D.). But one cannot 
help asking why Mochizuki could not entertain the possi- 
bility that the author of AFM was another ASvaghosa, who 
lived after Vasubandhu. This is what Wonhyo apparently 

assumed. Mochizuki rejects this possibility by saying 

18 

that he had not seen any records telliing of the exis- 
tence of another ASvaghosa. If, Mochizuki continued, 
another A§vaghosa, who was the author of AFM, existed, 
then there should be some record of such a great master. “© 

This assumption, which Mochizuki held, is totally 
untenabie. Indeed, Ui Hakuju's criticism of Mochizuki's 
scholarship is really pertinent here. Ui held that it is 
really arrogant and non-Buddhistic’’ to think that the 
ASvaghosa mentioned in the colophon must be someone about 
whom there is already some information. As it is, accord- 
ing to Mochizuki's way of thinking, A&Svaghosa could not 
have been the author of AFM. 

Unfortunately, Mochizuki's long journey of AFM 
studies began with this assumption. That is, his conclu- 
sions were not the result of his research; rather, he 
made his research serve to justify his mistaken assump- 
tion. But the information contained in historical 
records such as the colophon of AFM cannot be vitiated 
Simply by hypothesis or assumption. 

As a result of the furor that Mochizuki caused, 
today no scholar believes that the ASvaghosa mentioned 
in the colophon as the author of AFM indicates the A&va- 
ghosa who wrote the Buddhacarita, or The Life of Buddha. “8 
Thus, all the traditionai accounts about Asvaghosa are not 

held to be about the ASvaghosa who is the author of AFM. 

19 

But so long as one cannot prove the falsity of the informa- 
tion given in the colophon, one cannot deny the Indian 
origin of AFM. Accordingly, Ui Hakuju gave the period 
between 420 and 500 A.D. as the period in which the 
ASvaghosa who wrote AFM probably flourished, as he must 

be dated after Vasubandhu (320-400 A.D.) but before 

Paramartha's arrival in China in 546 A.D. 7? 

20 

Ii. The Essence of the Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun 
1 
If one translates "Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun" (Se #z 

Ne Se as "Treatise" or "Discourse" on the "Awakening of 
Faith in the Mahayana," as previous translators have done, >? 
one question immediately presents itself: Can ta-ch'eng, 

or "Mahayana," really be the object of ch'i-hsin, or 

" 

"awakening faith," as the English translation implies? 
This question requires a lengthy discussion before an 
answer may be reached because the question involves the 
Buddhist concept of faith about which Buddhists themselves 
sometimes aisagree.>+ In fact, sometimes a single indivi- 
dual will experience the meaning of faith differently ac- 
cording to his degree of practice. But no matter how 
complex this subject is, one cannot escape confronting 
this question so long as one is dealing with the Buddhist 
conception of faith, as AFM is.?? Therefore, we must point 
out that in taking ta-ch'eng KEE as the object of ch'i- 
~hsin RUE , that is, in taking Mahayana as the object of 
Buddhist faith, one runs the grave risk of misleading the 
English reader as to what Buddhist faith really is. 

Our criterion for examining the correctness of the 

previous English translations will be the text itself, 

as well as the commentaries on it. Let us begin by noting 

21 

that in classical Chinese rarely does a verb follow its 
object except in poetry, in which case rules of grammar 
are often neglected. Therefore, the most likely relation- 
ship between ta-ch'eng and ch'i-hsin is not that of a 
verbal phrase (ch'i-hsin) and its object (ta-ch'eng) but 
rather that of a qualifier (ta-ch'eng) and that which it 
qualifies (ch'i~hsin). According to this understanding of 
the title, the English translation of it would be Treatise 
on Awakening Mahayana Faith. The invocation with which 
the treatise begins immediately supports this understand- 
ing as its last line reads "ch'i ta-ch'eng cheng-hsin 
FERREAE "or "awakening right Mahayéna faith." 

This line is again immediately followed by one like it, 

namely "“yu-fa neng-ch'i mo-ho-yen hsin-ken We $y tz. 
es Se] TAS AR "--—"there is a principle which can 

arouse the root of Mahayana faith.">* 

In these two lines 
the term "Mahayana" functions grammatically simply to 
qualify "faith;" there is not the slightest chance that 
"Mahayana" is to be taken as the object of "faith." Yet, 
all English translations, from D.T. Suzuki's to Yoshito 
Hakeda's, have "Mahayana" as the object of "faith." 

The following are the various renditions of the 
two passages in question (T. 1666, p. 575b, lines 15-16). 

(D.T. Suzuki translated these two parallel passages from 

the T. 1667 version of the text: "ch'i-hsin #¢ = " (p. 584a, 

22 

line 28) and "wei-yu fa-ch'i ta-ch'eng ching-hsin BER 
Fe BZ RAR IEAS " (p. 584a, line 29)). 
D.T. Suzuki: 
",--by the awakening of faith..." (line 28) 

"For the purpose of awakening... 
a pure faith in the Mahayana..." (line 29) 

Timothy Richards: 
"get Faith in the Great School..." (line 15) 
(no translation for line 16) 

Wei Tao: 

"by the Awakening of their Faith 
in the Mahayana..." (line 15) 

",..there is a way in which faith 
in the Mahayana can be developed..." (line 16) 

The Shrine of Wisdom: 

"And faith in Mahayana cause the 
Soul..." (line 15) 

(no translation for line 16) 
Y. Hakeda: 

"...to give rise to the correct faith 
in the Mahayana..." (line 15) 

"There is a teaching (dharma) which 
can awaken in us the root of faith 
in the Mahayana..." (line 16) 

R. Robinson: 

"to awaken true faith in the Mahayana..." 
(line 15) 

"There is a dharma that can_arouse the 
roots of faith in the Mahayana..." (line 16) 

23 

But neither here nor anywhere else in the text is "Maha- 
yana" in fact the object of "faith." Therefore, one 
must investigate why all of the previous translations 
render the passage so as to violate classical Chinese 
grammar and make "Mahayana" the object of "faith." 

The first to render "Mahayana" the object of "faith" 
in translating AFM into English was the famous pioneering 
Buddhist scholar, D.T. Suzuki. Apparently Suzuki had 
aifficulty in trying to introduce the Buddhist notion of 
faith to English readers. Even though there can be no 
doubt about the depth of Suzuki's understanding of Buddh- 
ist faith, as evinced throughout his many works on Buddh- 
ism, yet when he translated "ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin" into 
English, he compromised too much with the western notion 
of faith in which faith requires an object, as instanced, 
for example, in the formula "I believe in God." When 
Suzuki translated the title of the poem Hsin-hsin ming>> 
AS BS, as On Believing in Mina, °° he versisted in making 
"faith" (here, "believing") have an object. In the Hsin- 
~hsin ming the term hsin-hsin appears three times: once 

in the title?’ 58 

and twice at the end Suzuki shows sur- 
prising ambivalence in translating hsin-hsin. In the 
title, as we have seen, he renders it "believing in mind," 
whereas at the end of the text he renders it as "Mind 

anc each believing mind" and (what amounts to the same 

24 

thine) "each believing mind and Mind:" 

hsin-hsin pu-erh AE ts A> => 

"Where Mind and each believing 
mind are not divided." 

vy’ 

Dg 

pu-erh hsin-hsin WAR = A 

“And undivided are each believing 
mind and Mind." 

But in this poem the term hsin-hsin means simply 
“faith." It does not mean "believing in mind," and it 
certainly does not mean "Mind and each believing mind." 
in other words, hsin-s or "mind" does not serve as the 
object of hsinf= or "to believe." If one takes "mind" 
to be the object of "to believe" one completely misses 
the key point running throughout this poem, namely, that 
it is an error to admit any kind of duality in the prac- 

tice of Buddhist faith. 

2 

The question as to whether or not Mahayana functions 
as the object of faith in AFM cannot be successfully re- 
solved simply within the realm of grammatical investiga- 
tion; it is necessary to know what is meant by faith in 
the text itself. In AFM the term hsin{= is used fifty- 
four times: four times in the Invocation; three times in 
the first chapter; twenty-two times in the third chapter; 
eighteen times in the fourth chapter; seven times in the 
last chapter. It does not occur at all in the second 

chapter. In order to examine in what senses the term 

25 

hsin{s is used in each case, we have excerpted all the 

phrases and sentences in which hsin{f= occurs as follows: 

10. 

li. 
12. 
13. 

14. 

59 

In the Invocation 

KSEE BLAS EF (p. 575b, line 7) 

KR BAS F (ibid., line 15) 

Aq SK AE $e ESAT AS WK (ibid., line 16) 
NE AFASZ NS FP (ibid., line 18) 

In the first chapter 
SSE RES TH Beg ppTi RA AAR 
ABEX(p. 575b, lines 25-27) 

& S BKK RY Ee ib AZ AF A BZ Aes eR (p. 575b, 

line 27 - p. 575c, line 1 

EES AF Fil AY “Z Ve FE FRB ABW BR (p. 575c, line 4) 

In the third chapter 

AE AR SEAS Biv BB lp. 577, ine 29 - p. 577c, 
line 1) 

R= FER BAZ As AGRE He HE BEET 

(p. 577c, line 8) 

NRNEFU IR HLAG SE BL EL AEE 
(ibid., lines 9-10) 

SEAS ASHE es, BES SH[via., lines 15-16) 
fF 2 ke SHEER. 578b, line 10) 
ASCH Bete A (ibia., lines 23-24) 
ZAq] ASAEAS (ibid., line 26) 

15. 
16. 
17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 

28. 

33. 

34. 

26 

ZAG BAS ABLE = (bid., line 26) 

ABR ZARNGB EB (p. 578c, lines 12-13) 
Aig N BH EK i BEG AT (p. 599a, lines 2-3) 
WEE G4 EC ip B, (p. 579¢, lines 
4-5) 

ABI AL BEN (p. 580b, line 17) 
AST FE FE SE (abia., tine 18) 

AE RFE LSE als (ibid., line 19) 

4a RAK PERL +B ibid., lines 20-21) 
NEATAS US (dbid., line 21) 

$E— Bah AS is PRL Kiibia., lines 21-22) 
be E (Sus WHATS WZ (ibid., line 25) 
KE AER RE SH (p. 580c, line 6) 
MEER ER RR 
(ibid., line 27) 

Eke 39K (ERE SSE SL 

(p. 58la, line 16) 

vA ea ee) TEASER (ibid., lines 17-18) 

In the fourth chapter 
. NAF ASUS GF (p. 581c, line 6) 
~ ong ‘ . ° 
_ NFATASIS F via., line 7) 

Aq] SE AE ss BAGAGLT (ibid., line 8) 
Az ws gp weFE (ibid., line 8) 

AS AGA (ibid., line 9) 

35. 
36. 
37. 

38. 
39. 

40. 

4l. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

Sl. 

52. 

27 

AEA REAPS. (ibid., line 10) 

AS RI KAIB (ibia., lines 11-12) 
ABAS AE EAZAT FI AL Capia., lines 
12-13) 

AGA Te BPS BE ELAS (ibid., line 14) 
$A SEAF AT AEuS (p. 582a, line 6) 
RAK IA AS AES FBR RY 
(ibid.,lines 26-27) 

ee PRES IME (ibid., line 27) 

FEAL IRAE Y REBTE. (w. 582b, line 15) 
WE ACRIER THASHEE tp. 582c, lines 7-8) 
PRKIELE pe Az (p. 583a, line 12) 

Ap it BF KRG (ibid., line 14) 

Age BE TES (ibid., line 15) 

NEAT AES (ibid., line 21) 

BRA AT ORR ALE EE 

(ibid., line 24) 

DERE HSS See rls 

(p. 583b, lines 6-7) 

BAKE RE KR 

(ibid., line 8) 

ee SE CRW ER SE 

(ibid., lines 11-12) 

as ee a 

(ibid., line 12) 

28 

53. AR ERE SRW ARIE 
(ibid., line 13) 
54. KEE ECCS BA ivia., ine 17) 

In these fifty-four instances of its use, hsin {5 
is used as a transitive verb requiring an object only 
twelve times; in the remainder of its occurrences (forty- 
two), hsin= is used aS a noun not requiring, of course, 
an object. 

The twelve instances in which hsin{% is used as a 
transitive verb are as follows: 

l. ain the 12th case, where the object is chi-hsing 

or “the selfi-nature;" 

2. in thé 13th case, where the obitect is the fact 
that "there is the principle of Suchness in one's 
own body;" 

3. in the 16th case, where the object is the fact 
that "there is nirvana;" 

4, in the 18th case, where the object is chen-ju-fa 
or "the principle of Suchness;” 

5. in the 22nd case, where the object is the fact 
that "there is reward in terms of the principle 
of karma;" 

6. in the 28th case, where the object is the fact 
that "from the beginning all things are of then- 

selves in nirvana;" 

29 

7. ain the 34th case, where the object is ken-pen 

or “the Ultimate Source;" 

8. in the 35th case, where the object is the fact 

that "the Buddha has immeasurable merits;" 

9. in the 36th case, where the object is the fact 

that "the Dharma brings great benefits;" 

10. in the 37th case, where the object is the fact 
that "the Sangha is able to practice correctly 
the ideal of benefitting both the self and others;" 

ll. in the 49th case, where the object is"the teach- 
ing which is expounded in the treatise;" 

12. in the 50th case, where the object is"the teach- 
ing which is expounded in the treatise." 

In nine of these twelve cases (nos. 13, 16, 22, 28, 
35, 36, 37, 49, 50), hsin{= has a noun clause as its ob- 
ject; in the remaining three cases (nos. 12, 18, 34), 
hsinf{= has a simple noun as its object. What is the dif- 
ference between these two categories? 

The noun clauses which function as objects in the 
first category all have a common feature unique to them, 
namely, they all contain explanatory teachings about the 
Buddhist truth. Thus, the nature of the object in those 
cases is something to be realized rather than something 
simply to be believed in. In the second category, how- 

ever, the simple nouns functioning as objects do seem to 

30 

be something to be believed in. Let us now carefully 
examine what is meant by hsin/ in the three cases fall- 
ing into this category. 

First, in the twelfth case, it is obvious that the 
stage at which an individual comes to believe in his "self- 
nature" precedes the stage at which he comes to know the 
doctrine of Mind-only and the non-existence of an objec- 
tive external world; this in turn precedes the stage at 
which an individual begins to practice the teachings to 
free himself from illusion. Here what is believed in is 
a teaching that one's original nature is the Buddha~nature. 
Therefore, hsin{Z here means to accept a Buddhist proposi- 
tion which is to be fully understood at the next stage. 

Secondly, in the eighteenth case, the object of faith 
is exactly the same proposition as in the twelfth case: 
believing that one's original nature is Suchness itself. 
Therefore, it may be said that the meaning of hsin {= 
in the preceding two cases is not a faith requiring an 
object; rather, it is related to the knowledge of something. 

Finally, in the thirty-fourth case, the text says 
precisely that to believe in the Ultimate Source means to 
be joyously mindful of the principle of Suchness. Thus, 
no difference exists in the nature of the object of hsin 
AE “in any of these three cases. 

A conclusion may now be reached as to the nature of 

31 

hsin {= and its objects when used as a transitive verb, 
namely, that the nature of faith in all twelve cases is 
that of assent to a propositional truth. 

This conclusion is supported by wdnhyo. °° When 
Wénhyo comments on the three passages discussed above he 
clearly states that the faith discussed in them belongs 
to the earliest, beginner's stage, which is only a prelude 
to the next stage, that of understanding and practice. 

As the title of AFM suggests, one of the most important 
issues it will raise is the issue of faith. Chapter Four 
of the text, "On Practicing Faith," is the chapter devoted 
to faith and practice, but the meaning of faith in this 
chapter and in the title are different. 

Before examining this difference two things must be 
kept in mind about the nature of Chapter Four. First, this 
chapter was written for the sake of people who have not 
yet definitely resolved to pursue the truth. Second, the 
primary purpose of this chapter is to instruct the reader 
in how to practice in order to enter the path of correct 
truth; its primary purpose is not to discuss what faith is. 

The first sentence of Chapter Four supports our first 
point: 

In this chapter practicing faith will 
be discussed for the sake of people 

who have not yet definitely resolved 
to pursue the truth. 6l 

32 

Only seven other lines in Chapter Four mention faith 
from a total of one hundred thirty-two lines which are 
mainly devoted to the discussion of Dractice. Moreover, 
these seven lines only enumerate the various kinds of 
faith for making clear the goal of practice and for charac- 
terizing the nature of Buddhist practice; they do not dis- 
cuss the nature of faith. Therefore, (1) Ultimate Source, 
(2) Buddha, (3) Dharma, and (4) Sangha, which are usual- 
ly regarded as the objects of faith in this chapter, func- 
tion not as the objects of faith but as the subjects of 
the noun clauses of which they forma vart. It is these 
noun clauses which function as the object of faith, and 
not (1) Ultimate Source, (2) Buddha, (3) Dharma, and 
(4) Sangha, the subjects of each noun clause. But if 
these noun clauses are the object of faith (hsin f= ), 
then the meaning of hsin{= in these contexts must be to 
believe in such and such a proposition. 

Our second point becomes quite clear on considering 
the title of Chapter Four, hsiu-hsing hsin-hsin fen 4247 
40s FF, which is most smoothly translated as "On 
Practicing Faith." To translate it as "On Faith and 
Practice," as some earlier translators ©? have done, may 
mislead one to confuse the meaning of faith in Chapter 

Four with its meaning in the title of the text. 

33 

“3 
If one maintains the position that the term "Mahayana" 

never functions as the object of "faith" in AFM, and further- 

is in the position of having to resolve an apparent contra- 
diction between that position and the fact that the theory 
of four faiths found in Chapter Four of AFM seems to imply 
that Suchness, Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are objects of 
faith. However, there is here no contradiction at all 
because the meaning of faith in Chapter Four is not the 
same as its meaning in the title. 

Chapter Four is usually considered to be the chapter 
on faith and practice, but a careful reading of that chap- 
ter shows that it does not discuss faith; rather it dis- 
cusses practice for the sake of people who do not yet 
have faith and so have not yet decided to practice Buddh- 
ism. This is immediately apparent from the first line of 

the chapter which reads: "Here, for the sake of people who 

are still aniyata raSi ( FX ERB Be ), how to 

n63 In reading Chapter Four 

practice faith is discussed. 
one should bear this line in mind; otherwise, many mis- 
understandings may arise, one of which is that Chapter 
Four represents a discussion of the faith referred to in 
the title of the text, Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun. What, 
then, is the faith of people who are still aniyata rasi? 
According to D.T. Suzuki's understanding, °* aniyata 

raSi are people who have not yet entered into the "order 

34 

of constant truth" (EES ). That is, the aniyata 
raSi are the opposite of the niyata raSi, or those who 
have already perfected their faith and for whom there is 
no longer any fear of backsliding into non-faith. On the 
other hand, the faith of the aniyata rasi is an uncertain 
kind of faith in which there is always a possibility of 
backsliding. Thus the four faiths mentioned in Chapter 
Four are proposed simply for the sake of the practice of 
the aniyata raSi, through which they can strengthen their 
faith and eventually become niyata ragi. 

In reading Chapter Four, one should bear in mind two 
things about the four faiths mentioned in that chapter: 
first, the objects of all the four faiths are proposition- 
al statements to which the aniyata raSi must initially 
give their assent in order that they be able to begin 
practicing; second, each proposition is paraphrased so 
that the aniyata rasi may clearly perceive what each propo-~ 
Sition means in terms of practicing faith. These para- 
phrases taken together read like a manual for practicing 
faith. In light of tne foregoing observations about the 
nature of Chapter Four, Hakeda's translation is really 
misleading. 

Concerning the first faith Hakeda translates: 

The first is the faith in the 
Ultimate Source. Because [of this 

faith] a man comes to meditate with 
joy on the principle of Suchness.65 

35 

Hakeda regards the idea expressed in the second sentence 
as being the result of the first faith. D.T. Suzuki, how- 
ever, translates this passage as follows: 

As to faith in general: (1) To 

believe in the fundamental truth, 

that is, to think joyfully of 

Suchness (bhutatathata) 
If one compares the part of the sentence beginning "that 
is" in Suzuki's translation with the sentence beginning 
"because" in Hakeda's translation it should readily be 
apparent that Suzuki's translation supports our contention 
that the author of AFM was concerned to paraphrase each 
proposition of faith so that how to practice faith would 
be made clear. But both Suzuki and Hakeda fail to make 
clear that "to believe in the fundamental truth" (or to 
have "faith in the Ultimate Source") is a proposition to 
which assent must be given. In other words, "to believe 
in the fundamental truth" is, in this context, nothing but 
"to assent to the fact that Suchness is within me." There- 
fore, even the aniyata rasi are able to anjoy being mindful 
of the principle of Suchness if Suchness is always with 
them. 

Both Suzuki and Hakeda enjoy giving lengthy footnotes 

whenever they see fit. Unfortunately, they did not see fit 

to draw their readers' attention to the dynamics of the 

author's presentation of faith in Chapter Four of AFM. 

36 

In contrast to these modern interpreters, traditional 
commentators always made this very clear. 7 

Hakeda's translation concerning the second, third and 
fourth faiths suffers from exactly the same problem as 
his translation concerning the first faith. Suzuki's 
translation continues to support our contention. Concern- 
ing the second, third and fourth faiths Hakeda translates, 

The second is the faith in the numberless 
excellent qualities of the Buddhas. 
Because [of this faith] a man comes to 
meditate on them always, to draw near to 
them in fellowship, to honor them, and 

to respect them, developing his capacity 
for goodness and seeking after the all- 
embracing knowledge. The third is the 
faith in the great benefits of the 

Dharma (Teaching). Because [of this 
faith] a man comes constantly to remem- 
ber and practice various disciplines 
leading to enlightenment. The fourth is 
the faith in the Sangha (Buddhist Commun- 
ity) whose members are able to devote 
themselves to the practice of benefitting 
both themselves and others. Because [fof 
this faith] a man comes to approach the 
assembly of Bodhisattvas constantly and 
with joy and to seek instruction from 
them in the correct practice. 

In Hakeda's understanding, "the numberless excellent 
qualities of the Buddhas," "the great benefits of the 

Dharma," and "the Sangha" are the objects of "faith." As 
a result of these faiths, people are able to meditate on 
the Buddhas, practice the various dharmas, and approach 

the Sangha. If, however, these things result from faith, 

as Hakeda would have it, and if this is the meaning that 

37 

Chapter Four intended originally to convey, then it is 
very difficult to answer the question, How can I have this 
faith? But the inability to answer this question belies 
the opening remark of Chapter Four: "Here, for the sake 
of people who are still aniyata raSi, how to practice 
faith is discussed." That is, can it be a reasonable an- 
swer to people asking how they can have faith to show 
only the result of having faith? Then Chapter Four would 
be nothing more than bait. However, it is highly unlikely 
that faith, or practice based on that faith, can success- 
fully be awakened by bait. The question, How can I have 
this faith? must remain unanswered so long as one under- 
Stands Chapter Four as Hakeda does. The only way to ob- 
viate this question and make the chapter meaningful in 
the context of the whole text is to retranslate the first 
part of the chapter, which is the part having to do with 
faith, based on the understanding we have developed so 
far. This is our translation of the first part of Chap- 
ter Four, which discusses the four faiths: 

Briefly speaking, there are four faiths. 

What are the four? The first is to 

believe in the Ultimate Source, in other 

words [so wei fr Be ], to be mindful, 

with the utmost willingness, of the prin- 

ciple of Suchness. The second is to 

believe that the Buddha has innumerable 

excellent virtues, in other words, to 

think always of being close to the 

Buddha, to make offerings to him, and to 

respect him. Furthermore, it means to 
awaken the capacity for goodness, which 

38 

is wishing to have the omniscience that 
the Buddha has. The third is to be- 
lieve that the Dharma is the source of 
great benefits, in other words, to think 
always of practicing all the perfections 
[paramitas]. The fourth is to believe 
that the Sangha is able to correctly 
practice the Mahayana ideal of benefit- 
ting both oneself and others, in other 
words, to rejoice always in being close 
to the assembly of Bodhisattvas and to 
pursue genuine practice as it does. 

Our retranslation shows that in Chapter Four faith 
is always presented in terms of that which the aniyata 
raSi should keep in mind and in terms of that which they 
should do. However, Chapter Four has not yet guaranteed 
that the aniyata raSi will be able to maintain that faith, 
because that faith is still nothing more than intellectual 
assent to the truths contained in those propositions. 
Although intellectual assent is emphasized in Buddhism 
as the first step in pursuing the Buddhist way, at the 
Same time mere intellectual assent is condemned as a very 
cunning betrayal of the truths of Buddhism unless it is 
Supported by the practice of the paramitas (perfections). 
This is the reason why the rest of Chapter Four, more 

than nine-tenths of the chapter, is devoted to the dis- 

cussion of practice, mainly, to the paramitas.°? 

4 
If one carefully examines the structure of AFM as 

a whole, one easily discerns that that text describes three 

39 

types of faith: the first type is seen throughout its 
first, second and third chapters, and includes the "faith" 
of the title of the text; the second type is seen at the 
beginning of Chapter Four, a discussion of which has 
occupied us above; the third type is seen at the end of 
Chapter Four and is the faith in Amitabha Buddha. /° It is 
interesting to note the author's systematic arrangement 
whereby each type of faith receives a fair representation 
in the text in order to aid people of differing mental 
capacities. "Mental capacity" here does not mean intel- 
lectual capacity; it means tne degree of receptivity to 
a religious teaching or principle. We use the adjective 
"mental" merely for the sake of convenience, but avoid 
the equally convenient "Spiritual" because that term im- 
plies a closer connection between that to which we are 
here referring and that which is often designated "spiri- 
tuality" in the West than the facts of Buddhist faith 
and practice warrant. 

fn AFM the author first discusses “utmost right faith" 
(SE4= ) without any consideration of people's differing 
Mental capacities. This discussion occupies the greater 
part of the text. Next, for those unable to grasp the 
first type of faith, i.e., the aniyata rasi, the author 
presents the second type of faith, which is elaborated in 

the famous four faiths and five practices theory in Chapter 

40 

Four. Finally for those unable to practice even the sec- 
ond type of faith, the author suggests nien-fo (& i ) 

or the recitation of the name of Amitabha Buddha, which 
enables birth in the Pure Land to take place. Backslid- 
ing in faith will never happen in the Pure Land because 

of the complete protection that Amitabha Buddha proffers. /1 
It is very ironic that in the later development of Chinese 
Buddhism, after the appearance of AFM in China in the 
Sixth century A.D., the first type of faith never really 
became popular; instead, the third type became more and 
more popular as time went on. Surprisingly, this led even 
Ch'an Buddhists to recite the name of Amitabha Buddha as 
part of their daily service. /* Even more surprisingly, 
however, the first type of faith dealt with in AFM is now, 
in the twentieth century, being represented to the West 

as being of the same type as the third type of faith, 
without the confusion this involves having been pointed 
out. 

If the second type of faith dealt with in AFM, the 
type of faith dealt with at the beginning of Chapter Four, 
may be characterized as assensus/ > or assent, then the 
third type of faith, reciting the name of Amitabha Buddha, 
may be characterized as fiducia,/* or trust or loyalty. 
But the first type of faith, with which the first three 

chapters are mainly concerned, may be characterized neither 

41 

aS assensus nor as fiducia. This is because in the con- 
text of AFM both assensus and fiducia are possible only 

in the case of the aniyata raSi. With respect to the 
niyata raSi the question of faith is no longer raised; 
instead, the problem of producing Buddha mind, or citta- 
-utpada (fa-hsin Beas), is mostly discussed. According 
xo the last section of Chapter Three there are three kinds 
of citta-utvada: /> 

(1) mind produced after the perfection of faith; 

(2) mind produced while practicing the six paramitas 
after the right understanding of dharma nature 
has been gained; 

(3) mind produced in verfect Enlightenment. 

A careful examination of citta-utpada is beyond our 
present concern, but since the last section of Chapter 
Three may be viewed as concluding the discussion of the 
first type of faith, one thing at least must be pointed 
out: according to the text, citta-utpada is possible only 
when one has perfected one's faith after practicing for 
ten thousand kalpas (aeons). ’6 The text warns that citta- 
~utpada attained before completing a ten thousand kalpas 
long practice is not genuine, as faith has not then been 

V7 One with such faith is still to be con- 

perfected. 
sidered as being among the aniyata rasi. 
We must now raise the most critical questions concern- 

ing faith in AFM: Why is it necessary to wait a full ten 

42 

thousand kalpas to perfect faith? And why does the term 
hsin-hsin {2,5 , or faith, become fac-hsin Je u\s> (citta- 
~utpada), or producing Buddha mind? Is there no internal 
connection among hsin-hsin (42 6%), ten thousand kalpas 
long practice, and fa-hsin (Bey )}? These questions 
would already have been answered except that the signi- 
ficance of the ten thousand kalpas long practice required 
for the transformation of hsin-hsin into fa-hsin remains 
obscure. 

The problem is not simply with the astronomical length 
of time needed for producing Buddha mind, but with the 
requirement that no less than this length of time is needed. 
However, from this statement of the author one perceives 
that the nature of fa-hsin differs radically from that of 
nsin-hsin. That is, in saying "ten thousand kalpas long 
practice" the author is emphasizing the kind of difference 
existing between fa-hsin and hsin-hsin. Fa-hsin is 
realized after the perfection of hsin-hsin, but fa-hsin 
is not simply an extension of hsin-hsin. Instead, one may 
characterize the change from hsin-hsin to fa-hsin as a 
metamorphosis. 7° 

Usually the term hsin-hsin or "faith" is used of the 
aniyata raSi, in whose case faith is characterized as 
being the product of the intellect and needing no special 

effort to achieve. But because of this very fact such 

faith can easily be abandoned, whereas the faith of the 
niyata raSi is characterized as never in danger of being 
abandoned because of its being a metamorphosis from a 

. . . . . 7 
dualistic consciousness to a non-dualistic one. 9 

It 
may be said without exaggeration that the author of AFM 
devotes every line, from the title to the end, to clari- 
fying the nature of this metamorphosis and the nature of 
non-dualistic consciousness. Indeed, the ch'i-hsin 
(awakening faith) of the title denotes nothing but the 
achievement of that metamorphosis while ta-ch'eng (Mahayana) 
means non-dualistic consciousness. In other words, the 
realization of non-duality is the key issue of aru. °° 

We are now in a position to answer the question raised 
at the beginning of this discussion: Can ta-ch'eng, or 
"Mahayana," really be the object of ch'i-hsin, or "awaken- 
ing faith?" First, by making ta-ch'eng the object of 
ch'i-hsin, the key issue of the text, the realization of 
non-duality, is totally missed. Establishing a distinction 
between faith and its object is totally alien to the mean- 
ing of non-duality. Secondly, ch'i-hsin (“awakening faith") 
characterizes the metamorphosis from hsin-hsin to fa-hsin. 
Therefore, it describes a process, a moving from one kind 
of faith to another kind of faith; it does not describe 

the awakening of one kind of faith. Thus, to translate 

ch'i-hsin as "the awakening of faith" is misleading. Our 

44 

own proposal is to translate Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun as 
Treatise on Awakening Mahayana Faith, bearing in mind 

that (1) the "awakening" is a process or movement from 

the mind of the aniyata raSi to the mind of the niyata 
raSi, (2) that "Mahayana" means non-dualistic consciousness, 
and (3) that "faith" (hsin) is first the hsin (st) of 
hsin-hsin (42 su.) and then the hsin (-&*) of fa-hsin 

(FE ws ). The movement from hsin-hsin to fa-hsin is the 
meaning of "awakening" and, at the same time, it is the 

. 1 one . - - 81 
meaning of non-dualistic consciousness, or "Mahayana." 

45 

III. Biography of Wonhyo 

Wonhyo (617-686 A.D.) is one of the greatest, if not 
the greatest, religious figures that Korea has ever had. 
According to Wonhyo's biographers, Wonhyo was an extreme- 
ly complex figure whose career repeatedly underwent rad- 
ical changes. At first he was a member of Hwarang, a type 
of youth group active during the Silla Dynasty (57-935 A.D.). 
Later he became a Buddhist monk. While still a monk he 
fought in the war of unification. Finally, he returned 
to secular existence after the birth of a son, Sol Ch'ong, 
who is considered the founder of Confucianism in Korea. 

In terms of his denominational affiliations, Wénhvo began 
as a Hua-yen scholar, but because of his liberal attitude 
he did not remain within the Hua-yen sect. Consequently, 
he has left excellent works not only on Hua-yen thought, 
but on almost every other aspect of Buddhist philosophy 
as well. ° . 

The following is a critical examination of some key 
events in Wonhyo's career as reported by his two earliest 

a 
4 

biographers, Tsan-ning? = and Iryon°’, which attempts to 
Pierce the veil of legend which has attached to this 
famous figure and elicit the historical dimensions of 

these events. It is, therefore, an attempt to demythologize 

46 

the traditional Wonhyo and reconstruct a more accurate 
portrait of his life using not only the traditional informa- 
tion about him but also other known historical facts. 

It is rather surprising that there is so much bio- 
graphical material about Wonhyo, who lived in the early 
seventh century. The earliest record about him is the 
Kosonsa SSdang Hwasang t'appi Bb SE ve 40h HERE 
or "The Inscription of Sédang Hwasang in Koson Monastery." 

85 

Allegedly, this inscription was composed approximately one 
hundred years after Wonhyo's death in 686 a.p.°6 It 
remained unknown until it was discovered in a stream at 
Kyéngju, Korea, in 1914. Unfortunately, when discovered, 
it was in several fragments with many illegible characters. 
Many scholars have tried to read the fragments, °’ but so 
far no one has been able to reconstruct the inscription 
except imperfectly. Thus, the best biographical sources 
about Wonhyo are still these two records, °° which have 
always been esteemed by traditional scholars: 
(1) Tsan-ning ¥ = , ‘T'ang Hsin-lo-kuo Huang-lLung- 
-ssu YUan-hsiao chuan" ae eas Beg x 42 ' 
included in the fourth roll of his Sung Kao-seng 
chuan ig = AS AZ ,°? which was presented 
to the emperor T'ai-tsung in 988 a.p.?° 
(2) Iryon — KE (1206-1289 A.D.), "Wénhyo pulgi" 

AE, 7s aa , included in the fourth roll of his 

Samguk yusa = fi se.” 

47 

Tsan-ning's Sung Kao~seng chuan was written three 
hundred years after Woénhyo's death while Iryén's Samguk 
yusa was written almost another three hundred years after 
the completion of the Sung Kao-seng chuan. The two 
records are quite different from each other: Tsan-ning 
includes many miraculous, legendary stories about Wdénhyo 
whereas Tryon does not.?? However, they both fail in 
situating Wonhyo in relation to the history of Korean 
Buddhism. Such an a-historical approach to a historical 
figure, as shown in the work of both Tsan-ning and Irydn, 
exerted a detrimental influence on succeeding biographies 
in that the lives of almost all the major figures of 
Korean Buddhism lost their historicity; instead, their 
greatness was described through the use of fantastic, 
miraculous stories. Therefore, in order to form a correct 
impression of Woénhyo's life, one must evaluate the stories 
transmitted through these traditional biographies. The 
following three stories, which most excite the reader, 

especially deserve to be examined. 

The first story: Wénhyo wanted to study Yogacara 
doctrine under the guidance of Hstian-tsang. He set off 
on a journey to China but at the border he gave up the 
attempt and returned home. ?> 

The second story: Wonhyo broke the precept preventing 

a monk's having sexual relations and fathered a son, 

48 

Sol Ch'ong, who, it is said, became the founder of Korean 
Confucianism. After the birth of S61 Ch'ong Woénhyo took 
off the monk's robe and became a layman. ?4 
The third story: After becoming a layman, Wonhyo 
wandered all over the country dancing and Singing a song 
he had composed. The song was called Muaega REAL or 

"Song of Non-Hindrance."?> 

On the first story: Wonhyo's Enlightenment Experience. 

In Wonhyo's day it was a common dream of ambitious 
young men to visit T'ang China, the cultural center of 
the day, and study there. But when Wénhyo set out to visit 
China he was almost fifty and no longer a young man; 7° 
hence, he must have had a serious reason for going there. 
According to Yong-tae Kim's History of Korean Buddhism, 
this was not Wonhyo's first attempt. But Wénhyo gave it 
up and returned home while his friend, Uisang (625-702),°/ 
continued and later became the founder of the Korean Hua- 
“yen school. What made Wénhyo return? 

The records say that Wonhyo returned on attaining 
Enlightenment after svending the night in a tomb while 
waiting for a ship to take him to China. Having attained 
Enlightenment he no longer needed to study under someone's 
guidance. Tsan-ning describes Wonhyo's Enlightenment 

. 98 
experience as follows: 

49 

While seeking a big ship to go to 
China at a harbor of his country, 
Wonhyo was greeted by a heavy yain 
so that he and his companion, Uisang, 
Stayed overnight at a house along 
the roadside to escape the storm. 
Next morning, they discovered that 
they had been sleeping in a tomb 
with skulls. However, the weather 
stayec so bad that they could not 
leave the tomb. That night ghosts 
came suddenly and bothered them. 
At that moment W6nhyo sang, "It 
was peaceful last night when I 
thought this was a house, but 
tonight there are so many ghosts, 
after I know this is a tomb." 

If one stops to think about this historical event in 
Wonhyo's life within the limits of the information given 
by Wonhyo's biographers, wonhyo will remain an obscure 
and legendary figure, but the next passage from Tsan-ning's 
Kao-seng chuan describing Wonhyo's Enlightenment experience 
at the tomb provides the link between legend and history. 
The passage says, 

When a thought arises, 
various things arise; 
When a thought ceases, 
there is no difference between 
a house and a tomb. 

The theme of this passage is not new; it was one of 
the most popular and widespread Mahayana Buddhist slogans 
in seventh century China. But this passage is almost identi- 

100 If allowed to restate 

cal with a passage found in AFM. 
Tsan-ning'’s obscure report about Wonhyo's Enlightenment 

in light of this fact, we might do so as follows: "Wonhyo 

50 

expressed the reason for giving up his dream of studying 
Yogacara doctrine with Hstlan-tsang with a passage from 
AFM." If this restatement is permitted, then one is led 
to examine the relationship between Yogacara doctrine and 
AFM in Wonhyo's philosophical world. Then one realizes 
that the event of Wonhyo's Enlightenment is neither acci- 
dental nor mythical but very historical, for according to 
Wonhyo's understanding the doctrine of AFM is one that 
overcomes the one-sidedness of the Madhyamika and Yogacara 
extremes. Therefore, it is not simply conjecture to 
interpret Wonhyo's return home as a great philosophical 
turn on his part from the level of the Madhyamika-Yogacara 
struggie to the synthetic level of AFM. 

Such an intervoretation of a Buddhist Enlightenment 
experience should not be misunderstood as an attempt to 
reduce it to a simple historical event. But although the 
truth realized through a Buddhist Enlightenment experience 
may be beyond the limitations of historical time and 
Place, yet the factors that drove the Buddhist to have 
that experience must be historical, and the expression of 
that experience, whether oral or written, must also be 
historical, because apart from history the cause and 
effect of an event, even a religious one, cannot be ex- 
plained. 

In Wonhyo's day, overcoming the polemical struggle 

S1 

between the two rival Mahayana Buddhist schools, Madhya- 
mika and Yogacara, was a serious problem. According to 

the research of Park Chong-hong, the Madhyamika camp was 
represented in seventh century Korea by the teaching of (SBR 
Sungnang (5th - 6th century A.D.) while the Yogacara camp 
was led by Wonchtk [ia (612-696 a.p.).1°+ arthough 

Wonhyo never mentioned Stingnang and Wonchik by name in 

his works, he criticized the two schools they represented 

as follows: 

(However, treatises) such as the 
Madhyamaka-Sastra, the DvadaSanikaya- 
-S§astra, etc., only refute all attach- 
ments and go on to refute the refuta- 
tion. But (they) do not further 
admit that there is the refuter and 
that which is refuted. (Therefore,) 
these are called treatises which 
refute but are not complete. (On 

the other hand,) treatises such as 

the Yogacarabhumi-Sastra, the Mahayana- 
samgraha-Sastra, etc., by penetrating- 
iy establishing (what is) profound 
and (what is) shallow, distinguish 
between teachings. But (they) do 

not reject the theories (they) them- 
selves establish. (Therefore,) these 
are called treatises which establish 
but fail to refute.102 

It is debatable whether or not Wonhyo's criticism of 
the two schools is accurate. But nevertheless it is 
undeniable that a dispute between the two schools did 
exist. And as long as their struggle was polemical, 
Wonhyo's characterization of each school was valid. For 

Wonhyo, moreover, the dispute between the two schools could 

52 

successfully be harmonized if the doctrine of AFM were 
properly grasped. Immediately after the passage quoted 
above, Wonhvo concludes his criticism by extolling the 
AFM as follows: 

Now this treatise (on awakening 
Mahayana faith) not only (contains) 
Wisdom but also benevolence. (Its 
doctrine is) both mysterious and 
encyclopedic. (Therefore, it) does 
not establish anything it does not 
itself reject; (it) does not refute 
anything it does not also admit. 
"Also admit" indicates that if the 
refuter (carries) refutation to (its) 
extreme he will have completely 
established. "Itself reject" clari- 
fies that if an affirmer (carries) 
affirmation to (its) extreme he 

will have negated. This is why the 
doctrine of (On Awakening Mahayana 
Faith) is called the patriarchal 
teaching of all treatises; (this is 
why its author is called) the chief 
arbitrator of all controversies. 

Here Wonhyo clearly affirms the supremacy of AFM 
over the two rival Mahayana doctrines. If Wonhyo's major 
contribution to the history of Korean Buddhism may be 
said to be his having synthesized the position of the two 
rival Mahayana camps, then the historical role of Wonhyo 
with respect to Korean Buddhism is comparable to that of 
AFM with respect to the evolution of the Mahayana Buddhist 
Sastras.1°4 

Thus, although Tsan-ning's report about Wonhyo's 
Enlightenment experience is not very detailed, it is still 

possible to recognize the event as marking the beginning 

53 

of Wénhyo's leaving the level of the two rival Mahayana 

schools and advancing to the level of AFM. 

On the second story: Breaking the Precept. 
This story is not found in Tsan-ning's Sung Kao~-seng 

chuan; it is found only in Iryon's Samguk yusa. The story 

goes as follows:29° 

One day Wonhyo felt a strong desire 
for a woman. He walked through the 
streets (of Kydéngju) singing "Who 
will lend me an axe that has lost its 
handle? I wish to cut a heaven- 
supporting pole." People did not 
understand the real meaning of his 
song, but when King Muydl heard it, 
he said, "This monk wants to marry 
& noble lady and get a wise son by 
her. If a sage is born, so much the 
better for the country." 

At this time there was a widowed 
princess living in Yosdk Palace. 
The King told his officials to con- 
duct Wonhyo to that palace, and they 
found that he had already descended 
South Mountain and reached the 
Mosquito Stream Bridge. Here he 
deliberately fell into the stream 
and got his clothes wet. Therefore, 
the palace officials led him to 
Yosok Palace and had him change his 
clothes. Thus he stayed there over- 
night. 

As a result, the princess became 
pregnant and bore a son whose name 
was Sol Ch'ong.10 

Here the incident of Wonhyo's breaking the precept 
is described as if everything were verformed deliberately 
according to a previous design. It is apparent that Iry6n 

tried not to make Wonhyo's conduct appear disgraceful. 

34 

Iryon might have shared the belief common to many Buddhists 
that everything that happens around so-called enlightened 
people must differ from what happens around ordinary 
people. Such a conception of what Enlightenment is prob- 
ably made Iryén dramatize this event, as well as Wénhyo's 
biography in general. Even today such an attitude May be 
observed in many who write about Wonhyo's life. This 
attitude is harmful because it obscures and distorts the 
real aspect of Wonhyo's unique experience. 197 As a 
matter of fact, a careful examination of all of Wonhyo's 
works reveals the extent of the carelessness and misinter- 
pretations of Iryon and his followers. 

First, Wonhyo had written much vinaya material in 
which he emphasized the importance of keeping the pre- 
cepts. 198 For example, in the Palshim suhaeng chang #5 
4% 45S , or Chapter on the Aspiration for Enlightenment 
and Practice, 199 apparently written by Wonhyo after he 
broke the precept, Wonhyo regretfully states the harmful- 
ness of practitioners’ having sexual desire and breaking 
that precept. Also, after breaking the precept, Woénhyo 
contemptuously called himself a layman. Thus, Wonhyo did 
not view having a son as heroic Bodhisattva behavior but 
as a shameful and regrettable scandal for a monk. +19 

Again, our interpretation must not be misunderstood 

as an attempt to belittle Wonhyo's greatness. Indeed, 

55 

Wonhyo's greatness begins to show only when Wonhyo's real 
aspect is revealed. ‘That is, only when Woénhyo's love 
affair is treated as a scandal does the first story, about 
Wénhyo's Enlightenment experience, and the third story, 
about his dancing and singing all over the country, make 
real sense. 

When one regards the second story as scandalous then 
the nature of Wénhyo's Enlightenment in the first story 
is revealed to be not the Perfect Enlightenment which was 
later so much to be emphasized by the Lin-ch'i branch of 

iil In other words, Wonhyo's experience 

Ch'an Buddhism. 
was not the perfection of Buddhist practice but an awaken- 
ing to Buddhist truth in the stage where external tempta- 

tion is still to be feared. 

On the third story: Dancing and singing all over the 
country. 

This story has usually been interpreted as indicating 
the stage in Wonhyo's life where he reached perfection, the 
stage in which a man is perfectly free, being imbued with 
the spirit of interpenetration as expounded in Hua-yen 
doctrine. This is because, sometimes as a beggar, some- 
times as a drunken customer in the prostitute's section 
of town, he appeared almost everywhere. Indeed, Wonhyo 

was really free in the sense of having access everywhere. 

56 

But, while appearing everywhere, Wonhyo was spreading 
the practice of Yombul (B48 y,it2 

If the second story may be regarded as a temptation 
story, then the third story may be regarded as describing 
Wonhyo's practice and propagation of the remedy for people 
who, although attaining a kind of awakening, nevertheless 
allow their practice to be hindered by various obstacles. 
In short, the third story tells of Wonhyo's devotion to 
and spreading of faith in Amitabha Buddha. 

The fact that Wonhyo wrote quite a few texts on 
Pure Land Buddhism, as well as his emphasis on Yombul 
(2 4), a recitation of the name of Amitabha Buddha, 
as shown in works such as his Palshim suhaeng chang 
FEE A; SF , and the fact that later Japanese Pure Land 
Buddhists respected Wonhyo as a patriarch of the Pure Land 

113 

lineage, may be said to support our interpretation of 

the third story. In AFM, three steps in saving people 

are describea. 114 

The first step is simply to state the 
fundamental principle of Mahayana Buddhism, that the mind 
of all sentient beings is the matrix of Tathagata, which 
it discusses in Chapters One, Two, and Three. The second 
step is to practice faith, i.e., to believe in Suchness, 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, which it discusses in the first 

part of the fourth chapter. The third step is to recite 

the name of Amitabha Buddha, which it discusses in the 

57 

last part of the fourth chapter. 

Of these three steps, the first is designed for the 
sharpest people, who are eventually going to become niyata 
rasi; the second is designed for the aniyata rai, who 
are always in danger of backsliding into unbelief: the 
third is designed for those who are unable to practice 
by themselves because of their impotence in the face of 
the obstacles they meet. It may be said, therefore, that 
in the last part of his life Wonhyo followed the last step, 
as if he were the lowest level of practitioner. But 
because of his attitude Wonhyo was able to spread Buddhism 
all over the country. Therefore, Iryén said, because of 
Wonhyo's effort all the peopie in the country recited 

the Buddha's name. 11° 

58 

Iv. Wonhyo's Bibliography 

There is a significant difference between the bio- 
graphical works written by Wonhyo's biographers and the 
works written by Wonhyo himself. In terms of approach, 
Wonhyo's biographers are more or less fanciful while 
Wonhyo himself is very philosophical, +1t® at least in his 
extant works. As a matter of fact, no line that Wénhyo 
has written makes mention of anything miraculous whatso- 
ever. Wdénhyo always pursued religious issues, and his 
method of treating the issues is always based on a clear- 
cut understanding of the human condition. Thus it is 
truly ironic that today many writers treat WSnhyo in much 
the same way as the early biographers did while, surpris- 
ingly, few scholars give the kind of serious attention 
to the issues Wonhyo discusses that Wonhyo himself did. 
At this point the need for a critical study of Wonhyo's 
works themselves becomes apparent. 

Wonhyo's early biographers mentioned a few works 
by Wonhyo, such as the Kimgang sammaegyOng non fh 
SRRSEEE or Treatise on the Vajrasamadhi-sitra, ‘+’ 

and the Shimmun hwajaeng non + FY fee or Treatise 
18 

— se eee ee 

. . J 
But the first comprehensive cataloguer of Wonhyo's 

59 

Vv 
works was Uich'$nt1? 

(& F : 1055-1101 A.D.), one of the 
most eminent Buddhist monks of the Koryo Dynasty 
(918-1392 A.D.). Uich'8n often criticized the contem- 
porary tendency to esteem only works of Indian origin, 
at the expense of native East Asian productions. After 
Many years of effort and sacrifice, at the risk of his 
life, Uich'on published a Buddhist catalogue in 1090 
entitled the Shinp'ydn chejong kyojang ch'ongnok 387m 
SE BKK Re aE , or Newiy Compiled General Catalogue 
of the Commentaries of all (Buddhist) Schools?*° (here- 
after referred to as "Uich'én's catalogue."). 

Uich'Sn's catalogue is historically significant in 
that it is the first attempt in the history of East Asian 
Buddhism to catalogue only those commentaries done by 

East Asians. 771 

Of the 1,010 texts in 4,740 rolls listed 
in Uich'én's catalogue, 44 texts in 82 rolls are by 
Wonhyo. The texts collected by Uich'gn, on the basis 

of which he compiled his catalogue, were engraved on 
wooden blocks with the support of the Kory& Court .1?4 
This activity lasted from 1092 until 1101, the year of 
Uich'Sn's death. This carved edition is called Sokchang 
aE , or The Continued Tripitaka. Uich'én prayed in 

123 

the preface to his catalogue that these commentaries 

Might be preserved forever, together with The First Carved 

Tripitaka ( ANE Agee E ), the original tripitaka 

60 

of Indian origin. Unfortunately, The Continued Tripitaka 
was burned by the Mongolian invaders in 1232 together with 
all the wooden blocks of The First Carved Tripitaka, 
which was kept at Puin Monastery near Taegu, Korea.+74 
During the years 1236 to 1251, the Koryo Court had 
the tripitaka re-engraved. The result was the famous 
Chaejo Taejanggyong ( Fi BE. K ge = ), or The Second 
Carved Tripitaka, the oldest complete tripitaka in the 
world, which is now preserved at Haein Monastery. Sadly 
enough, however, Sugi ( of ), the editor of The Second 
Carved Tripitaka, did not include ich'én's collection of 
East Asian commentaries in this new edition. If Sugi had 
included Uich'én's The Continued Tripitaka, we would have 
had a clearer picture of Wonhyo's Writings today. As it 
is, many of Wonhyo's works are now permanently lost. 
Uich'én's remained the only extensive bibliography 
of Woénhyo's writings until the early twentieth century, 
when modern scholars began their research into Wonhyo's 
works using the method of critical and comparative cata- 
loguing. The most recent and comprehensive bibliography 
of Wénhyo's writings is found in the Silla Pulgyd wi inydm 
yoksa HH HY BE RR oe 
The Ideologies and History of Silla Buddhism, written 
125 

fu 

kw. 

by Professor Cho Myong-gi in 1962. In this book 

Professor Cho states that Wonhyo wrote 98 books in about 

61 

240 rolls, of which only twenty books in twenty-two rolls 
are extant. Most scholars have accepted these findings. !7 
In his bibliography Professor Cho brought together the 
titles of all works by Wonhyo, which previously had 
appeared only in separate catalogues including the fifty- 
fifth volume of Taisho and the three-volume Showa hdbd 
somokuroku. 7? Here we do not have to reproduce what 
Professor Cho did. However, we must make several voints 
about Professor Cho's work in order that the nature of 
Wonhyo's writings be better understood. 

First, Professor Cho's method is quite unsophisticated. 
His list of 98 titles gives the impression that it was 
not compiled according to any classification system at 
all, because the titles are simply listed without any 
classification symbols; Professor Cho does not do any- 
thing to correct this impression as nowhere does he 
explain the order of his list. However, if one under- 

takes to carefully examine Professor Cho's list, one 

observes that the 98 titles group themselves as follows: 

1. On the Avatamsaka-sttra 6 books 
2. On the Nirvana-sttra 2 books 

3. On the Saddharmapundarika-sutra 4 books 

4. On the Lankavatara-sttra 4 books 
5. On the Vimalakirti-sutra 2 books 

6. On the Chin-Kuang-ming ching 4 books 

62 

7. On the Prajhaparamita-sutras 2 books 
8. On the Chin-kang san-mei ching 3 books 
9. On Tathagatagarbha 5 books 
10. On the Samdhinirmocana-sutra 1 book 
11. On the Pure Land sutras 8 books 
12. On Fang Kuang ching 1 book 
13. On Vinaya 19 books 
14. On the Ch'i-hsin lun 5 books 
15. On the Ch'eng wei-shih lun 5 books 
16. On Hetuvidya 4 books 
17. On the Ta-chih-tu lun 3 books 
18. On the Fa-Hsiang School 4 books 
19. On the San-Lun School 4 books 
20.__Others. 0 25_books 
Total 98 books 

With the help of this classification it is obvious that 
Professor Cho has listed the 98 works by Wonhvo in 

exactly the same order that Uich'dn followed in his cata- 
logue, where all the commentaries were classified in the 
order of commentaries on the sutras, commentaries on the 
vinaya, and commentaries on the Sastras, with the 
commentaries on the Avatamsaka-sutra put first, followed 
by the commentaries on the Nirvana-sutra, Saddharmapundar— 

ika-sutra, etc. 

€é3 

This brings us to the next point about Professor 
Cho's work, namely, that is it, quite frankly, invalid 
to apply Uich'én's Standard of classification to Wonhyo's 
works. In a word, Uich'dn's Standard is primitive and 
sectarian. 

Uich'én placed the commentaries on the Avatamsaka-— 
-sutra first; this indicates that he was a Hua-yen monk. 
Uich'&n's contemporary and successor, Sugi, did not follow 

Uich'gn's scheme, but adopted the method of Chih-sheng's 
K'ai-yuan shih-chiao lu £¥ %, 4E BR , in which the 
Prajnaparamita texts are placed first.178 The difference 
between Uich'oén's method and Sugi's method is not a simple 
Matter of their having emphasized different texts; it 
reflects their different views on cataloguing. That is, 
While Sugi held the view that Buddhist texts were to be 
arranged according to historical priority, Uich'Sn did 
not. Therefore, although we fully recognize the value 

of Uich'dn's catalogue and deeply regret Sugi‘s exclusion 
of Wonhyo's collection from The Second Carved Tripitaka, 
we have to point out that as far as a standard of classi- 
fication is concerned, Sugi's principle is more acceptable 
in that it was the first attempt to make historical, not 
sectarian, considerations the basis for cataloguing 

Buddhist texts. 

During the early part of this century Takakusu 

64 

Junjiro, editor of the Taishd Tripitaka, reclassified 
all Buddhist texts according to the most recent historical 

129 

research. Accordingly, the Agama texts, considered 

to be the earliest Buddhist texts, are placed at the 
beginning of the Taisho Tripitaka.1?° Thus the Taisho 
Tripitaka represents a continuation of the historical 
approach initiated by Sugi. In keeping with this approach, 
we propose here to rearrange Wonhyo's works according to 
the historical priority of the texts on which they are 

based. In the following attempt we make full use of the 

fruits of Professor Cho's painstaking research. 

First group -- On the Prajhaparamita sutras 

1. 4B fe SE Ga (3 or 4), missing. T. 9184 
2. Bow SH (1), missing, T. 2184 

3. KEES 7 e (1), extant, T. 1697, p. 68 
4. KES BRE (1), missing, Nara 
3. RYLBRE KF (2), missing, T. 2177 

Second group -- on the Saddharmapundarika-sutra 

6. 7% BE EE ee i extant, WC, pp. 23-24 

7. 3s ee (1), extant, T. 1725, vol. 34, 
pp. 870c-875c 

8. REE {l), missing, Nara 

9. 33H Bh (1), missing, Nara 

10. 2B EWR BRE (1), missing, T. 2184 

65 

Third group -- On the Avatamsaka-sutra 

ll. SRSA 
i2. Ee SEER, 

13. BEAs RE 
14. BESE SRA 
~~ = 

20. & BZ FER 
21. OB GRER, 

extant, WC, pp. 73-76 

(8 or 10), extant: only roll 3, 
T. 2184, p. 234 

{1), missing, T. 2184 

(1), missing, Kenjun ( 38 ) 

(1), missing, T. 2184 

(1 or 3), missing, T. 2184, Nara 

missing, Sillasa 

missing 

missing 

(1), missing, Kenjun, T. 276 

(2), missing, T. 2184 

Fourth group -- On the Nirvana-sutra 

22. jE REG 
23. Te HE RE Re 

24. FEE £2 FR 

extant, WC, pp. 31-33 
(1), extant, T. 1769 

(5), missing, Nara 

Fifth group -- On the Vimalakirti-sutra 

25. <BR SE RE 
26. EEE PR 

(1), missing, T. 2184 

(3), missing, Nara 

Sixth group -- On the Suvarnaprabhasa-sutra 

27. BASE, 
23. SEER, 

(8), missing, T. 2184 

(8), missing, T. 2183 

66 

29. ERLE, (8), missing, Kenjun 

~ . ok = ot 
30. SAK Be EC. missing, Gangyo (2B ee, ) 
Seventh group -- On the Bhadrapala-sutra 

31. ALE =, (1), missing, T. 2184 
32. Anes = axe BASE, (1), missing, T. 2183 
33. Gs He = RSS CLE (1), missing, Nara 

Eighth group -- On the Satyasiddhi 
> & 
34. KS a Fi (10 or 16), missing, T. 2183 

Ninth group -- On the San-Lun School 

35. Je 5 ee Fz (1), missing. T. 2184 
36. aa te E (1), missing, Kenjun 
37. fe Gee & te (1), missing, T. 2183 
38. = oe FE (1), missing, T. 2184 
39. a = (1), missing, T. 2184 
Tenth group -- On the Fa-hsiang School 

40. GRE € S250 F extant, WC, pp. 175-176 
41. RISE RREL (3), missing, T. 2184 

a2. PROB BEA RE (1), missing. T. 2184 
43. KR (4), missing, T. 2183 
44. 2G FESS We, (4), missing, T. 2184 
45. Pah ae Fic, (4), missing, T. 2184 

67 

46. Fy He yy (5), missing, Nara 

47. wen TF SSR (4), extant: only roll 3, WC 
48. aye opin 265 Fit (4) missing, Nara 

49. Sy oe RE (1), missing, T. 2184 

50. 123 #4 4 (1), missing, T. 2183 

51. ke & SEK, (5), missing, ?. 2183 

Eleventh group -- On Nyaya 

52. op a (1), missing, T. 2184 

53. 4 tS Sa (1), extant: fragment, WC, 
pp. 285-300 

54, Sl cve See RK extant, 2. 954 

55. iEsP Ee. (1), missing, Kenjun 

56. WeeASESTH, (1), missing, T. 2183 

Twelfth group -- On Tathagatagarbha 

57. Wee RR FE (1), missing, T. 2184 

58. ARSE Ee, (2 or 4), missing, T. 2184, 
* T. 2183 

59. ‘Sik Sa Ae (1), missing, T. 2183 

60. & je oe ee (1), missing, Nara 

61. HF $E Bi (7 or 8), missing, T. 2184, 

Nara 

62. AFF HeE FA, (7 or 8), missing, T. 145, 

Nara 

68 

63. FF the $E ZB (1), missing, T. 2184 
64. Aone FER (1), missing, T. 2183 
65. See Faw eu (1), extant, T. 1845 
66. A248 Be Bu (2), extant, T. 1844 
67. 2242 BRK (1), missing, T. 2184 
68. #e4ASBSKEU (1), missing, T. 2184 
69. #242 263497 (1), missing, T. 2184 
70. te -H = (1), missing, T. 2184 
71. FEE oe Tes missing, Nara 
72. ale % (1), extant, WC, pp. 317-360 
73. ee ee (1), extant, WC, pp. 317-360 
74. A = HEE extant, WC, pp. 81-82 
75. ANS RSS (6 or 3), extant, T. 1730, 
vol. 34, p. 961 
76. SR SHARE PAL (3 or 6), missing, T. 2183 
77. BA =BRFE BSA (3), missing, Nara 
Thirteenth group -- On the Pure Land sttras 
78. RSS GE FA {1 or 2), missing, T. 2184 
79. ES ZAE Bt (1), missing, Chdsai (@ ® ) 
80. ERE SIRE (1}, extant, T. 1747, p. 125 
81. {EE Psy eeSPR, (1), extant, T. 1759, 
vol. 37, pp. 347f 
82. PH] FR CRE EPR, (1), missing, Koryu ( BE FE) 
83. Pel FH PE REISS Tit, (1), missing, Bunyt ( XFE ) 

69 

84. 7m Sy + PFE RE (1), extant, T. 1773, p. 299 
85. Ra Lee, (3), missing, T. 2183 
86. ei GE SS (1), extant, T. 1965, 

vol. 47, p. 119 

Fourteenth group -- On Vinaya 
87. RE GE gE (2), missing, T. 2184 

g8. ARS Se eS (1), missing, T. 2184 
89. = RAHM Bee, (1), extant, T. 1907, 

vol. 45, p. 918 

90. ER MARE (1), extant, T. 1906 

91. Rem ge ee RR #432, (2), extant: only roll 1, 
Zz. 95.2 

92. On FE HE, an (4), missing, T. 2183 

93. a KE AL (3), missing, Koryu 

94. we 4247 REC (8), missing, Koryu 

95. uw 4 4B WE Fh ae (8), missing, Koryu 

96. AE 42 FR extant, WC, pp. 131-132 

97. Ss ee om f@, (2 or 3), extant: only 
roll 2, 2. 61.3 
98. KER Ke ABA (1), extant, T. 1908, 

vol. 45, p. 921 

- 

; x 
99. Bie ls AGAT EB (1), extant, WC, pp. 373-377 
100. ZEl¢K AR Se (1), missing, T. 2184 

101. LY By BB (1), missing, T. 2184 

70 

102. se BE ST ER (1), missing, T. 2184 

103. ane (1), missing. T. 2184 

104. RB EE BO RISES (1), missing, 
Nara 

Fifteenth group -- Others 

105. + Pl 423436 extant, WC, p. 303 

106. + FF Kets oe (1), extant: fragment, WC, 

po. 303-315 

In our list we have added eight titles to Professor 
Cho's 98, swelling the number of works by Wonhyo to 106. 
These newly discovered titles are listed in Dr. Ch'ae 
In-hwan's valuable book, Shiragi Bukky6 kairitsu shiso 
kenkyu. 17+ Three factors determined our standard of 
classification: first, the history of the development of 
Buddhist texts; second, the history of the development 
of Chinese Buddhist schools; third, the history of the 
development of Wonhyo's thought. ‘The order of the first 
thirty-four texts, from the first group, "On the Prajna- 
paramita-sutras," to the seventh group, "On the Bhadrapala- 
-sutra," is fairly similar to that of the Taisho Tripitaka. 
In our list commentaries on the Saddharmapundarika-sutra 

precede those on the Avatamsaka-sutra. This is because 

although the latter came to be more influential in China, 

at first the former was more popular. This was also the 
case with Wonhyo. The order of the next seventy-three 
texts, from the eighth group, "On the Satyasiddhi," to 

the fifteenth and last group, "Others," is designed to 
reflect the theoretical development of Wonhyo's thought 

as it engaged the various Chinese Buddhist schools. In 
actual fact, with respect to the history of the develop- 
ment of the texts, the texts forming the basis of the thir- 
teenth groupv, "On the Pure Land sutras," and those forming 
the basis of the fourteenth group, "On Vinaya," were in- 
troduced into China before the texts forming the basis of 
the ninth group, “On the San-Lun School," and those form- 
ing the basis of the tenth group, "On the Fa-hsiang School." 
However, it seems that Wonhyo studied the San-Lun and 
Fa~hsiang texts at an earlier stage in his career and later 

132 especially 

proceeded to study the Tathagatagarbha texts, 
AFM and the Chin-kang san-mei-ching lun, which synthesize 
the San-Lun and Fa-hsiang teachings. In the final stages 
of his career Wonhyo emphasized the importance of keeping 
the precepts and tried to persuade people to practice as 

aniyata rasi, whose faith is in constant danger of back- 

Sliding. As a result, he naturally emphasized the Vinaya 
and Pure Land texts at this stage of his career. The end 

of Wonhyo's long writing career was marked by the appearance 

of the Shimmun Hwajaeng non, or Harmonization of all 

Disputes in Ten Chapters. The significance of this 

work will be discussed in the following section. 

72 

73 

Vv. Wonhyo's Thought 

Although there is almost nothing upon which Wénhyo 
did not touch, nevertheless, later Korean Buddhists, in- 
cluding almost all modern Wonhyo experts, agree that 
Wonhyo's lifelong concern was to establish a foundation 
for T'ong pulgyo, or "Buddhism of Complete Interpenetration. 
by means of Hwajaeng, or "Harmonization of All Disputes." 
This is the essence of Wonhyo's thought, his central 
philosophy.*?7 
Many papers and a number cf books on Wonhvyo have al- 

ready been published, but most of them are either biographi- 
cal or bibliographical or else are only partial approaches 
dealing with special topics; very few devote themselves 
to Wonhyo's central philosophy. The most recent scholar- 
ly work on Wonhyo is Professor Lee Chong-ik's long essay 
entitled "The Fundamental Thought of Wonhyo: A Study of 
Shimmun hwajaeng non (or Treatise on the Harmonization of 
All Disputes in Ten Chapters) ,"~ published in 1977. 
In his preface Professor Lee criticizes previous scholars:17> 

"So far no one has succeeded in com- 

pletely understanding Wonhyo's 

thought: even Uich'dn (1055-1101), 

known as the person who first dis- 

covered the real value of Wonhyo's 

thought, did not understand it com- 
pletely." 

74 

The earliest extant record of Wonhyo's central vohilo- 

sophy is found in the Kosén Monastery inscription. 

. a . 3 
2nscription reads in part: 6 

[When Wonhyo stayed] at a small shrine 

in the suburbs to the northwest of the 
King's castle, fhe read] secular books 

such as "The Book of Predictions"...and 
non-Buddhist books which have been re- 
jected by the [Buddhist] world [for a long 
time]. Finally, he wrote the Treatise on 
the Harmonization of All Disputes in Ten 
Chapters, [a part of which states:] 

“When the Tathagata was in the world, 
everybody relied on his perfect teaching. 
After Buddha's death, however, people's 
opinions were like showers and pointless 
theories like rising clouds. Some said, 
‘I am right; others are wrong.' Others 
argued, 'mine is like this [but] others' 
are not like this.' Finally, [theories 
and opinions] became a flood. 

-.-.-the attitude of staying in a deep 
valley while [avoiding] great mountains 
or loving emptiness while hating exis- 
tence is just like the attitude of going 
into a forest while avoiding trees. But 
one Should be aware of the fact that 
green and blue are identical in essence, 
and ice and water are identical in origin; 
a mirror reflects myriad forms, and 
parted waters will perfectly comingle 
[once they are brought back together]." 

Therefore, [WOnhyo] wrote the Treatise 
on the Harmonization of All Disputes in 
Ten Chapters, which everybody accepts. 
Everyone says it is excellent. 

The 

The author of this inscription reported only the 

motives behind Wonhyo's writing the Treatise on the Har- 

monization of All Disputes in Ten Chapters and its impact; 

—— re 

he did not discuss the theory contained within it. 

two facts about the inscription are worth noting. 

However, 

First, 

75 

of the many works by wonhyo, only the Treatise on the Har- 
monization of All Disputes in Ten Chapters was selected 
for mentioning. This would indicate that the idea of 
harmonization was recognized as a central element in Wonhyo's 
thought. Second and more important, five similes are men- 
tioned for harmonizing people's disputes. The first is 
the simile of a forest and trees. This indicates the 
ignorance of people who know only the name while failing 
to see what the name really means. The second and third 
Similes, about the relationship of green to blue and ice 
to water, illustrate that although the appearance of a 
thing may vary, its essence is one and the same. The 
fourth simile, about the mirror in which myriad forms are 
reflected, reveals the relationship between the one essence 
(here represented by the mirror) and its variant forms. 
The fifth simile , about water for which no real division 
is possible, can be read as a very forceful allusion to 
the possibility of harmonizing all disputes. 

We know nothing about the author of this inscription. 
Some scholars say that the passage which we placed between 
quotation marks is part of Wonhyo's preface??? to the 
Treatise on the Harmonization of All Disputes in Ten Chap- 
ters. However, as only fragments of the treatise survive, 

that cannot be proven. 

The next record of Wénhyo's ideas concerning the 

76 

harmonization of all disputes is found in Uich'én's (1055- 
1101 A.D.) "Funeral Odes for wonhyo of Punhwang Monastery ."+7 
Uich'én's remarks are more general than those of the Kosdn 
monastery inscription: 
Wonhyo harmonized the disputes of 
all people by penetratingly clarify-— 

ing [the relationship between] essence 
[t'i ‘4K ]and marks [hsiang 48 Jand by 

comprehensively embracing the past and 
the present. He harmonized all disputes 
so that he established an extremely im- 
partial theory for that time...I have 
examined all philosophers of the past, 
But there is no one like Wonhyo... 
Some scholars regard "essence" mentioned above as referring 
to the meditative tradition of the T'ien-t'ai school, and 
"marks" as referring to Hstan-tsang's Fa-hsiang school.1?? 
¥ v . . ° 
However, because Uich'on did not elaborate further, it is 
impossible to determine whether this is really the case. 
uv. uv . . . " 
Uich'dn is known as the first person to "discover 
Lt, Vv ‘ : Wes 
Wonhyo. Uich'én refers to Wonhyo variously as Wonhyo, 
the Lord of Korean Buddhism," "Wonhyo the Bodhisattva," 
"Wonhyo the Holy Sage," etc. In 1101, King Sukchong of 
the Koryo Dynasty granted Wonhyo the posthumous title of 
Hwajaeng Kuksa, or "National Master of the Harmonization 
of All Disputes," and erected a commemorative stone pagoda 

141 This was accomplished through Uich'on's 

with inscription. 
effort. Uich'dn lived in a time of religious turmoil; 
especially severe was the struggie between the meditative 

Vv. v 
and the scripture studying factions. One of Uich'on's 

77 

lifelong goals as the most prominent Buddhist of his time 
was to terminate all of those violent disputes. This is 
probably the reason why he and his followers found Wonhyo's 
theory of harmonization so attractive. But it is strange 
that it is not possible to find a discussion of Wénhyo's 
theory of harmonization from Uich'én. Unless hitherto 
unknown works by Uich'n are unearthed, one can only 
conclude that either he was not a scholar, and so was 
not equipped to discuss Wonhyo's theory, or else he simply 
tried to realize Wénhyo's ideal through T'ien-t'ai doctrine, 
which harmonizes meditation and scriptural study .14? 
Bich'dn was succeeded in championing the idea of 
harmonization by Chinul. (1158-1210 A.D.), who greatly 
influenced the later development of Korean Buddhism. Chinul 
especially emphasized the unity of meditation and scrip- 
tural study. In this regard Chinul frequently quotes 
Wonhyo, but his purpose in quoting him is almost always 
restricted to showing Wonhyo as a scriptural scholar who 
practiced meditation, rather than as one who had already 
explicitly emphasized the unity of scriptural studies and 
meditation. Actually, Chinul is the Sén (Ch'an) master 
who skillfully changed the direction cf Korean Buddhism 
from emphasis on scrivtural studies to emphasis on the 

143 

practice of Son meditation. So far no Chinul expert 

has discussed in detail Chinul's relationship to wénhyo.1*4 

78 

Chinul did not have just one teacher; if a teaching had 
value, no matter whose it was, he accepted it. In the 
Ch'an aspects of his thought, Chinul was influenced by 
Hui-neng (638-713 A.D.) and Ta-hui (1088-1163 A.D.), in 
the Hua-yen aspects by the layman, Li T'ung-hstian (635- 
730 A.D.). In the aspects influenced by the school of 
Sudden Enlightenment and Gradual Practice, he inclined to 
the teaching cf Tsung-mi (780-841 A.D.); and in the aspects 
influenced by the theory of the unity between Ch'an and 
Pure Land, he inclined to the teaching of Yen-shou (904- 
975 A.D.). However, no records mention any influence 
from Wonhyo.1?° 

But Chinul must have read Wénhyo's works. Chinul 
lived in the period between the first carving of the Korean 
Tripitaka (1010-1082) and the famous second carving (1236- 
1251). It was not until twenty-two years after the death 
of Chinul that the Mongolian invaders burnt the first 
carving of the Korean Tripitaka. As the first carving of 
the tripitaka included Uich'én's collection of commen- 
taries and non-canonical texts, including Wonhyo's, and 
as both Chinul and his biographer state that he had read 

146 

all the Buddhist texts, Chinul must have read Wonhyo's 

works, including the Treatise on the Harmonization of All 

Disputes in Ten Chapters. At the very least, Chinul must 

have been aware of the posthumous title, "National Master 

79 

of the Harmonization of All Disputes" accorded to Wonhyo 
by King Sukchong. Therefore, it is odd that he did not 
discuss Wonhyo's ideas on harmonization in reference to 
his own ideas of unification unless he disagreed with 
Wonhyo . In that case he would have refrained from men- 
tioning Wonhyo because in mentioning him he would have had 
to criticize him, which his ethic as a monk would have 
prevented him from doing.?47 

After Chinul, many monks quoted Wonhyo, but without 
discussing his theory of harmonization. This was probably 
the result of the Sdn school's having overpowered all 
other schools: S6én people did not like the idea of their 
school's harmonizing with other schools for they kept in- 
sisting on the supremacy of their teaching. 

It was not until the early years of the twentieth 
century that the serious study of Wonhyo began, with the 
publication by Professor Cho Myong-gi of the collected 

148 But both this and © 

works of Wonhyo in ten volumes. 
his later work, The Ideologies and History of Silla 
Buddhism, published in 1962, remain mostly within the 
biographical realm. A History of Korean Thought, by Dr. 
Park Chong-hong, which appeared in 1966, was the first 
book to discuss Wonhyo's theory of harmonization from a 
philosophical perspective. "7? 

Dr. Park is famous for attempting to show in this 

80 

book that Wonhyo was the synthesizer of two opposing 
schools: the Madhyamika school of Stngnang (5th - 6th 
century A.D.) and the Yogacara school of Wonchtk (612- 

696 A.D.}. Although this is a very attractive and ambi- 
tious thesis, unfortunately it is not convincing. Sung- 
nang was of the Silla Dynasty and was a great Madhyamika 
master, but there is no evidence that he performed any 
scholarly or missionary activity before leaving Korea for 
China; once he went to China, he did not return. The 

same is true of Wonchtik. WSnhyo, however, had never been 
to China, nor did he mention the names or cite the works 
of either Simgnang or Wonchikk in any of his writings. 
Thus, one cannot claim that he had been influenced by them 
in any way. So although Wonhyo did try to resolve the 
Madhyamika-Yogacara conflict by synthesizing the two 
approaches in his own thought, it is incorrect to say that 
he is the synthesizer of the two opposing schools. 

But Park has made a lasting contribution to the study 
of Wénhyo: he doggedly pursued, from a vhilosophical per- 
spective, the logic underlying all of Wonhyo's thought. 
According to Park, in his theory of the harmonization of 
all disputes Wonhyo clarified the relationship between 
doctrine ( chong) and essence (# yo) by means of the 
concepts of unfolding (ff kae) and sealing (4- hap) the 

truth. 1° "Doctrine" refers to the development of the 

81 

one into the many while "essence" refers to the unification 

of the many into the one. When the truth is unfolded it 

is called doctrine: when sealed, it is called essence. 

The unfolding aspect of the truth is also called the aris- 

ing aspect of dharmas while the sealing aspect of the 

truth is called the ceasing aspect of dharmas. Further- 

more, the aspect of arising is sometimes referred to as 

the aspect of accomplishing myriad virtues while the aspect 

of ceasing is referred to as the aspect of returning to 

One Mind. Although these two aspects seem to be contra- 

dictory, in fact, they freely interpenetrate without any 

obstruction. 1° The Madhyamika doctrine of Nagarjuna 

concentrated on the aspect of ceasing and ignored its 

interpenetration with the aspect of arising, while the 

Yogacara doctrine of Maitreya and Asanga clarified the 

aspect of arising but ignored its interpenetration with 

the aspect of ceasing.1°? 
However, Asvaghosa's AFM is fully aware of the fact 

that these two aspects are totally interpenetrated. Wonhyo 

found the basis for his theory of the harmonization of all 

disputes from the principle of interpenetration as ex- 

pressed in AFM. This is the reason why Wonhyo stressed 

the importance of AFM. In having so indicated the impor- 

tance of Wonhyo's commentaries on AFM for understanding 

the relationship between Wonhyo's theory of harmonization 

82 

and the principle of interpenetration as expressed in AFM, 

Park has made a major contribution to the study of Wonhyo. 

* *& *® 

It is our future task to elaborate the structure of 
interpenetration in wWonhyo's harmonization theory, especial- 
ly as it relates to the question of practice. In other 
words, in order to realize interpenetration between unfold- 
ing and sealing, a double negation of the self which per- 
ceives a dispute must be performed, otherwise interpenetra-~- 
tion will remain a notion within the realm of conceptual 
play. That is, if the self does not realize interpenetra- 
tion between the positions upheld by two parties to a 
dispute, it is only because of the self's attachment to 
its self-nature (svabhava). Therefore, if self-nature is 
not negated, interpenetration will not be realizea.t?? 

For example, if my jati position is negated, but my 
maranam position is not negated, then I can maintain my 
maranam position. If so, then interpenetration will not be 
realized. Therefore, both the jati and the maranam posi- 
tions are to be simultaneously negated. This means the 
complete realization of breaking the self-nature. Once 
the breaking of the self-nature, which occurs after the 
double negation, is realized, then both jati and maranam 
exist together within the self's world. Then, jati and 

Maranam are interpenetrated. That is, jati is not simply 

83 

jati, and maranam is not simply maranam. Therefore, 

jati can be maranam, and maranam can be jati while at the 
same time jati is maintained as jati and maranam is main- 
tained as maranam. Therefore, Wonhyo's harmonization 
must begin with the self's self-negation. This is a 
double negation in which that which is negated is not 
simply an objective jati or objective maranam in which 
one's former self safely resides; rather, that which is 
negated is the self itself. Therefore, for a correct 
understanding of Wonhyo's theory of harmonization, which 
is the essence of WSnhyo's thought, the problem of how to 
realize interpenetration within the individual's world 

must be solved.t>4 

84 

VI. Conclusion 

Wonhyo valued AFM because in it he could find the 

principle upon which he could build the foundation of T'ong 

pulgyo SB HBL or "Buddhism or Complete interpenetration" !>> 

Wonhyo found this principle stated at the beginning of 

Chapter Three of AFM. There we read:°® 

IN GENERAL, THERE ARE TWO WAYS OF 
EXPLAINING (THE TERM) "MAHAYANA." 

WHAT ARE THE TWO? FIRST IS (ACCORD- 
ING TO ITS) PRINCIPLE; THE SECOND IS 
(ACCORDING TO ITS) SIGNIFICATIONS. 

THE WORD "PRINCIPLE" MEANS THE MIND 

OF SENTIENT BEINGS. THIS MIND EMBRACES 
ALL ENTITIES IN THE MUNDANE AND SUPRA- 
MUNDANE WORLDS. (I) WILL REVEAL THE 
MEANING OF MAHAYANA ON THE BASIS OF 
THIS MIND. WHY? BECAUSE THE SUCHNESS 
ASPECT _OF THIS MIND SHOWS THE ESSENCE 
OF MAHAYANA, (WHILE) THE CONDITIONAL 
ASPECT OF THE ARISING AND CEASING OF 
THIS MIND CAN SHOW_THE ATTRIBUTES AND 
OPERATION OF MAHAYANA ITSELF. 

By means of this principle, Wonhyo felt he could synthe- 
Size all Mahayana Buddhist disputes. According to wWonhyo, 
philosophical disputes originate in ignorance; one sees 
only one side of an issue and clings to it. In order to 
eliminate ignorance, one must re-examine the position to 
which one is so strongly attached to see whether the posi- 
tion hitherto neglected or rejected may be admitted. 
Through this process my position and the opposing position 

begin to seem inseparable. At this level of understanding, 

85 

previous conflicts are no longer conflicts: the two sides 

of the argument are seen to be mutually dependent. There- 

fore, AFM says,7>/ 

BASED ON THE PRINCIPLE OF ONE MIND 
THERE ARE TWO ASPECTS. WHAT ARE 
THE TWO? THE FIRST IS MIND’S SUCH- 
NESS ASPECT; THE SECOND IS. MIND'S 
ARISING AND CEASING ASPECT. THESE 
TWO ASPECTS EACH WITHOUT EXCEPTION 
COMPLETELY EMBRACE ALL DHARMAS. 
WHAT DOES THIS SIGNIFY? (IT SIGNI- 
FIES THAT) THESE TWO ASPECTS ARE 
INSEPARABLE FROM ONE ANOTHER. 

It may be said that Wenhyo's whole focus in his com- 
mentaries on AFM is on the inseparability of these two 

aspects in One Mind. Wonhyo believed that once this rela- 

Lf 

tionship between the two is understood not only would all 
disputes among the Mahayana schools be resolved but all 
the doctrinal differences among the various Mahayana Buddh- 

ist texts would be understood. Therefore, in characteriz- 

ing AFM Wonhyo says , 1° 

Although what is discussed (in the 
treatise) is vast, it may be summar- 
ized in (the following) words. By 
revealing two aspects in One Mind, it 
comprehensively includes the 108 
jewels of the Mahayana teaching, and 
by showing the essential purity in 
phenomenal impurity, it completely 
synthesizes (all Mahayana doctrines). 

In RC Wonhyo characterized the relationship between 
the two aspects as being like that between the completely 
empty and the very mysterious, Suchness and phenomena, the 

invisible and the visible, the ineffable and the effable, 

86 

the great and the infinitesimal, the exteriorless and the 
interiorless, something and nothing. By characterizing the 
relationship of the two aspects like this, Wénhyo wanted 

159 In EN Wonhyo 

simply to indicate their inseparability. 
likened the relationship between the two aspects as being 
Similar to that between the private and the public, the 
partial and the impartial, the impure and the pure, aris- 
ing and ceasing, the absolute and the conventional, the 
path of thinking and the path of prayer. Throughout his 
explanation of Mahayana in his commentaries on AFM, Wonhyo 
assumes the inseparability of the two aspects. 

Wonhyo explained the inseparability of the two aspects 
by means of various metaphysical formulas of Chinese philo- 

sophy, such as the T'i-yung ARB formula. +°° 

The T'i-yung 
formula was the most widely used metaphysical formula in 
the history of Chinese philosophy since the emergence of 
the three main schools of thought in China during the 

161 Wonhyo was the first Korean Buddhist 

Three Kingdoms. 
to use the T'i-yung formula in explaining religious ex- 
perience. 

Wonhyo used the T'i-yung formula to illustrate the 
interdependence of t'i4K, or essence, and vung, or 
function (operation). For example, the light of a candle 

is the candle's yung, or function, while the candle itself 

is the t'i or essence. Waves and ocean may be similarly 

87 

analyzed. These similes show the interdependence of two 
seemingly different aspects, such as light and candle, 
waves and ocean. Wonhyo sougnt co explain the inseparabi- 
lity of the two aspects in One Mind like this. 

Some western scholars today overlook Wonhyo's point 
about the inseparability of the two aspects. For example, 
Yoshito Hakeda, the most recent translator of AFM, in- 
Sists that "the title of the text, the Awakening of Faith 
in the Mahayana, should...be understood as the ‘Awakening 
of Faith in the Absolute... '">% In other words, Hakeda 
has set up an "Absolute" besides the absolute as opposed 
to phenomena. This is in direct contradiction of the prin- 
ciple which Wénhyo understood to be the essence of AFM, 
the principle of pu-hsiang li-hsing FAB Bee, or inter- 
dependence of the absolute and phenomena. As a result, 
Hakeda does not read AFM as discussing the relationship 
between the absolute and vhenomena, but about the relation- 
ship between Mahayana or Absolute and the absolute-pheno- 
mena axis. The former is the issue of AFM; the latter 

163 Therefore, 

is very reminiscent of Samkara concerns. 
Hakeda deserves to be criticized as changing the issue of 

AFM. That is, so to speak, AFM's concern with the horizon- 
tal relationship between the two aspects, which gives them 

equal weight and aims at amalgamating the two, is trans- 

formed into a concern with a vertical relationship in which 

88 

there is a hierarchical distinction made between the Abso- 
lute on one hand and the absolute and phenomena on the 
other. Although Hakeda never presents the issue of AFM 
in these terms, this understanding underlies his thinking. 
Two recent doctoral dissertations from Harvard Univer- 
sity discuss this issue; one was completed by Whalen Lai 
in 1975 and is entitled The Awakening of Faith in Maha- 
yana;*°4 the other was completed by Hee Sung Keel and is 
entitled Chinul, The Founder of Korean S6n (Zen) Tradi- 
tion.?°° Both dissertations contain sizeable discussions 
about Wwonhyo's understanding of AFM. Unfortunately, Whalen 
Lai holds more or less the same position as Hakeda. Lai 
fails to grasp the inseparability of the two aspects, as 
he claims that the absolute aspect creates the phenomenal 
aspect. Hee Sung Keel understands the relationship between 
the two aspects as dialectical. This contradicts the 
understanding derived from applying the T'i-yung formula, 
as the T’i-yung relationship is manifestly not a dialecti- 
cal one. Furthermore, if one understands the two aspects 
in this way, one cannot understand exvressions like "the 
impotence of language," which is not implied by dialectical 
thinking, or "the knowledge of the enlightened ones," 
which is not entertained by dialectical thinking. Yet 
expressions like these are used in AFM and Wonhyo's com- 
mentaries whenever the interdependence of the two aspects 

is discussea. 1% 

89 

Wénhyo's purpose in emphasizing the interdependence 
of the two aspects is always to make his readers aware of 
their ignorance, which makes them cling to the distinction 
between the two. In other words, Wonhyo's prime purpose 
in writing his commentaries was awakening people. That 
is why Wonhyo paid so much attention to the problem of 
faith and practice. 

While studying Wonhyo, one must always keep awakening, 
faith, and practice in mind. Awakening is not accomplished 
through knowledge; it is accomplished only when the basis 
upon which one's present knowledge rests is completely 
destroyed. Therefore, Wonhyo concludes his discussion 
about the relationship between the two aspects with the 
following words, 1°? 

I do not know how to describe 

it; therefore, I am compelled to 

call it "Mahayana." 
Thus, in pursuing the meaning of Mahavana as having two 
aspects, Wonhyo clearly is brought to the point where words 
fail and thought, based on such words, is rendered impo- 
tent. 

Whenever Wonhyo reached this point in the relationship 
between the two aspects, he would use the words ién ch$llyd 
ze = £E, Je. : li-yen chueh-lu, or wordlessness and 
no-thought. This is now a favorite expression of Korean 

Son (Ch'an) Buddhists when describing the world of Son. 

90 

This idea is traceable back beyond Wonhyo to the Lao-tzu 
Tao-te ching and the early Ch'an masters of sixth century 

China. 1&8 

But in Korea it was Wonhyo who first used this 
expression to describe Buddhist experience. This is not 
generally recognized. 

Buddhism was introduced to Korea from China in the 
fourth century A.D. Korean Buddhism began with scriptural 
Studies; by Wonhyo's time, during the Silla Dynasty, these 
studies had fully matured. At the end of the Silla Dynasty, 
the tradition of — scriptural study was challenged by 
the newly imported S6n tradition. Therefore, the task 
that Buddhist leaders such as bich'&n and Chinul faced 
during the Koryo Dynasty was reconciling the struggle be- 
tween the two opposing traditions: scriptural studies and 
Son meditation. In this situation, Wonhyo's theory of the 
harmonization of all disputes was again welcomed, by both 
Uich'dn and Chinul, after several hundred years of neglect. 
It is truly unfortunate that even today the doctrinal 
relationship between Wonhyo's Silla Buddhism and Uich'én's 
and Chinul's Koryo Buddhism has not been completely examined 
by Korean scholars. One must carefully investigate the 
possibility whether or not Dich'on and Chinul were prac- 
titioners of Wonhyo's theory of harmonization. This is 
one of the important tasks to be undertaken in the Field 

of Korean Buddhist studies in the future. 

91 

Vv 

Despite the efforts of Uich'6n and Chinul, both of 
whom devoted themselves to the harmonization of the dis- 
pute between the scriptural tradition and Sén, Buddhism 
during the Yi Dynasty was overwhelmed by the Son tradi- 
tion. However, Wonhyo's influence on the greatest Yi 

nd iv . 

Dynasty Son master, Sdsan ( @ 4 1520-1604 A.pD.), is 

clearly to be seen, especially Wonhyo's concern with Pure 

169 170 

Land Buddhism and the study of Confucianism and Taoism. 
This influence is evident in Sdésan's IRajor works, such 

171 

as Soénga kugam AR K S 4% , ox Manual of Son Buddhism 

172 =KE4E , or Manual of the Three 

and Samga kugam 
Religions. Had Yi Buddhism not been suppressed so badly 

by the Confucian government, Yi Buddhism might have assumed 
the balanced shape that Wonhyo had envisioned. 

The twentieth century has seen a revival of scriptural 
studies and dialogue among the different religious groups 
in Korea. The task remains, however, critically to re- 
interpret and apply the traditional Korean Buddhist ideal 
of T'ong pulgyo, or "Buddhism of Complete Interpenetration,” 
first envisioned by Woénhyo in the sixth century and dominat- 
ing his writing, continued by Uich'én and Chinul of the 

Koryo Dynasty, and reasserted by Sosan of the Yi Dynasty. 

92 

Notes to Part One 

1. A number of books have been written about the 
Buddhist canon. For the Pali canon see Maurice Winternitz, 
A History of Indian Literature, Calcutta: University of 
Calcutta, 1933, especially Vol. II, Section III, pp. 1-423. 
For the Sanskrit texts see Yamada Ryujo, Bongo Butten 
no shobunken, Kyoto: Heirakuji shoten, 1977. For the 
history of the formation of the original Buddhist texts 
in general, see Maeda Egaku's Genshi Bukkyo seiten no 
seiritsushi kenkyu, Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1964. This 
is the most comprehensive book of its kind. 

The following books on the Chinese Buddhist canon 
are reliable: Prabodh Chandra Bagchi, Le Canon Bouddhique 
4, Paris: Sino-Indica Publications de l'université de 
Calcutta, 1927-1938; Paul Demiéville, "Sur les Editions 
Imprimées du Canon Chinois," Bulletin de L'Ecole Francaise 
d'Extreme-Orient, Tome XXIV, Hanoi, 1924; Ono Gemmyo, 
"BukkyoO kyoten soron," vol. 12 of Bussho kaisetsu 
daijiten, Tokyo: Daito shuppansha, 1931-1936; Kenneth 
Ch'en, Buddhism in China (Princeton: Princeton University 

Press, 1973), po. 365-386. 

93 

2. For the schools of Buddhism in China, see Kenneth 
Ch'en, ibid., op. 297-364. 

3. As Yanagida Seizan, one of the most energetic of 
contemporary Japanese Zen scholars, says in his discus- 
sion of the origin of Ch'an Buddhism in China, the early 
Ch'an masters such as Bodhidharma (arrived in China in 
521 A.D.) and Hui-neng (638-713) did not neglect the 
importance of canonical instruction. The negligence 
shown towards the canon was a fairly late development in 
Ch'an Buddhism, after it had become popular and powerful. 
Extreme condemnation of scriptural studies began with 
Kung-an (Koan) Ch'an masters such as Ta-hui (1088-1163). 
See Yanagida Seizan, Zen shiso (Tokyo: Chuo koronsha, 1975), 
pp. 9-106 and Yanagida Seizan, Shoki Zenshu shisho no 
kenkyu (Kyoto: HOzdkan, 1967), pp. 419-484. 

4. In the second chapter of AFM, "Reasons for Writ- 
ing the Treatise," there are two pairs of questions and 
answers; the second one of them is a discussion of this 
problem. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 7-17. 
wonhyo discusses this in his commentary also: see T. 1844, 
vol. 44, p. 205c, line 5 - p. 206a, line 16. 

5. It is undeniable that AFM became popular very 
quickly because of the many early records which mention 
AFM and commentaries on it. However, I disagree with 

previous scholars such as Mochizuki Shinko and Ui Hakuju 

94 

about the reasons for its popularity. They claimed that 
its popularity was due to the fame of ASvaghosa and Para- 
martha. This may be true, but it can be only partially 
true. Many texts bear the names of ASvaghosa and Para- 
martha, but none have been as influential as AFM. There- 
fore, one may say that it was the doctrinal content of 
AFM which guaranteed its success; only this can explain 
its prominent historical role in sixth century Chinese 
Buddhism. Although Woénhyo did not doubt the authenticity 
of the text, he did not discuss the author and translator, 
whereas Hui-yllan and Fa-tsang did discuss them. See the 
preface to Mochizuki Shink6's Daijo kishin ron no kenkyt 
(hereafter referred to as DKK-M) (Tokyo: Kanao bunendo, 
1922), pp. 1-5. See also the postface to Ui Hakuju's 
Daijo kishin ron (hereafter referred to as DK-U) (Tokyo: 
Iwanami bunko, 1936), pp. 131-132. See also T. 1843, 
vol. 44, op. 175c, line ll ~ ». 176a, line 8 and T. 1846, 
vol. 44, p. 245c, line 25 - p. 246a, line 8. 

6. For the nature of Fa-tsang's commentaries, see 
DK-U, p. 132. An excellent overall survey of commentaries 
on AFM is given in Mochizuki Shinko's DKK-M, pp. 203-346. 
Mochizuki's survey includes detailed and annotated explana- 
tions of 176 commentaries on AFM. For the most recent 
comprehensive survey see Hirakawa Akira's Daijo kishin 
ron (Tokyo: Daizo shuppan kabushiki kaisha, 1976), op. 

390-413. 

95 

7. Murakami Sensh6 gives a good review of the 
criticism of AFM. See his Daij6 kishin ron kégi (Tokyo: 
Toyo daigaku shuppanbu, 1912), pp. 19-31. 

8. See DK-U, pp. 138-139. 

9. See ibid., p. 1406. 

10. Wénhyo wrote nine commentaries on AFM; only two 
are extant: T. 1844 and T. 1845 (see Part Two, "Intro- 
duction to Translation"). For the titles of the seven 
missing commentaries see the third section of Part One, 
"Wonhyo's Bibliography." 

ll. Almost all the books and records about AFM 
mention the three great commentaries. The earliest at- 
tested one to do so is the preface by the Japanese monk 
Kakugen. It is included in T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202a, 
lines 3-4. See my translation of Kakugen's preface in 
the Appendix. 

i2. T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226b, line 12. 

13. Many books and papers have been published about 
Wonhyo, but few of them are critical. There have been 
three translations of Wénhyo's commentaries into modern 
Korean, but none of the three is reliable. See Note 3 
to the translation in Part Two. 

14. See Motoi Nobuo's paper, "“Shiragi Gangyo no denki 

ni tsuite," Otani gakuho XLI, No. 1 (1961), vo. 37. 

96 

i5. See the introduction te AFM-H, pp. 3-19. 

16. For the second translation, see ibid., pp. 8-9; 
see also T. 2060, vol. 50, p. 458b, lines 27-28. 

17. The following are the English translations 
Of AFM in chronological order: 

(1) D.T. Suzuki. Acvaghosha's Discourse on the Awaken- 

ee 

Publishing Company, 1900. This translation was based on 
Sikxsananda's translation (T. 1667). It is quite faith- 
ful to the original text. 

(2) Timothy Richard. The Awakening of Faith in the 
Mahayana Doctrine. Shanghai: Christian Literature Society, 
19907. This is a good, readable translation, but it has 
a very strong Christian bias. 

(3) Wei Tao. "Awakening of Faith," included as a 
section in A Buddhist Bide, ed. by Dwight Goddard. 

Boston: Beacon Press, 1938. This translation is very 
free and omits parts of the original text; it is unreliable. 

(4) Richard Robinson. Treatise on the Awakening of 
Faith in the Mahayana. 1960. This is an unpublished 
translation. It is very faithful to the Chinese original. 

(5) Yoshito Hakeda. The Awakening of Faith. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1967. This is the most 

recent critical translation, and the most widely read, 

but it has many problems. 

97 

A sixth translation, The Awakening of Faith in the 
Mahayana, Surrey: The Shrine of Wisdom, 1964, by the 
editors of the Shrine of Wisdom omits many passages and 
is generally unreliable and unscholarly. 

18. Mochizuki's first paper is included in DKK-M, 
pp. 65-69. 

19. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575b, lines 8-9. 

20. Tokiwa Daijo, Mochizuki's opponent, usually 
championed the traditional view. See his Shina Bukkyo 
no kenkyu, Vol. 2 (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1944), pp. 25-128. 

21. For information about Taishd's editorial prin- 
ciple, including its basis, see Mizuno Kdgen, Butten 
kaidai jiten (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1977), pp. 55-56. 

22. For Sugi's record, see K. 1402, vol. 38, pp. 
512a - 725a. 

23. Fei Ch'ang-fang's report about AFM is found 
in T. 2034, vol. 49, p. 99a, line 5. 

Fa-ching's attitude is in marked contrast to Fei 
Ch'ang-fang's, whose catalogue was published three years 
after Fa-ching's in 597. Fei's catalogue was compiled 
by Fei himself working alone and took seventeen years to 
complete. He took so long because so far as possible 
he would inspect the texts himself. The present informa- 
tion about AFM, supported by the people disagreeing with 

Mochizuki, is mostly derived from Fei's catalogue. 

98 

24. Fei Ch'ang-fang, Li-tai san-pao chi, Vol. ll. 
T. 2034, vol. 49, p. 99a. Twelve other texts are listed 
without author's names on the same page as the record of 
AFM. 

25. See T. 2146, vol. 55, p. 142, in which Fa-ching 
gives translators' names only. 

26. The doubtful texts section is found in ibid., 
lines 15-16. 

27. The forged texts section is found in ibid., 
lines 18-20. 

28. DK-U, pp. 133-134. 
29. About the quality of Fa-ching's catalogue, see 
Tokiwa Daijo, Shina Bukkyo no kenkyt, Vol. 2, vp. 31-33. 
30. About Chi-tsang's attitude toward AFM, see 
Murakami Sensho, Daijo kishin ron kogi, p. 23. 

31. For the places where the three great commenta- 
tors mention ASvaghosa's name, see T. 1843, vol. 44, p. 
175c, lines 11-12 (Hui-yWan); T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202b, 
lines 16 and 22 (Wonhyo); T. 1846, vol. 44, p. 245c, line 
25f (Fa-tsang). 

32. See the preface to DKK-M, pp. 1-5. 

33. Ibid., pp. 5-7. 

34. See DK-U, p. 133 and DKK-M, pp. 70-73. 

35. See DK-U, p. 133 and DKK-M, pp. 70-73. 

36. For Yen-tsung's record about AFM, see T. 2147, 

99 

vol. 55, p. 153c, lines 10-13. 

37. The most exhaustive research about Paramartha's 
career is contained in Ui Hakuju's "Shintai sanzo den 
no kenkyu" in Indo tetsugaku kenkyu (Tokyo: Koshisha shobo, 
1930), Vol. 6, pp. 1-130. 

38. See DK-U, pp. 133-134. 

39. See DKK-M, pp. 8-12. 

40. See DK-U, p. 135. 

41. For the Chan-ch'a ching, see T. 839, vol. 17, 
pp. 90lc - 910c. For Mochizuki's argument on the Chan- 
zch'a ching, see DKK-M, pp. 14-18. 

42. See ibid., p. 17. 

43. All the major Chinese Buddhist cataloguers in the 
Sui and T'ang Dynasties, such as Fa-ching, Fei Ch'ang- 
-fang, Tao-hstjan and Chih-sheng . consider the Chan- 
~chta ching a forgery. See Ono Gemmyo, "Gigikys" 

(4% 224%), | BKD, Vol. 12, pp. 446-481. 

44, See T. 2154, vol. 55, p- 575c, line 17. 

45. See DK-U, p. 135. 

46. See DKK-M, p. 3. 

47. Here "non-Buddhistic" means an attitude fraught 
with presuppositions or bias. 

48. For ASvaghosa, see Tokiwa Daijo, Memyo bosatsu 
ron, Tokyo: Kinkodo, 1905. 

49. See DK-U, p. 137. 

100 

290. See Part One, note 17. 

Sl. Almost all Buddhist scriptures of all Buddhist 
schools mention hsin{Z or faith. The following two 
passages are the most often quoted. The first is from 
Buddhabhadra's version of the Hua-yen ching; the second 

is from Kumarajiva's translation of the Ta-chih-tu lun. 

a Ve —+7e¢ ¥ 
4 S38 4B HER I REAR 
Faith is the Origin of the Way and 
the mother of merit; 
It causes all the roots of goodness to grow. 

(T. 278, vol. 9, p. 433a, lines 26-27) 

(2) TAK SRN BEI 
In the great sea of Buddha's teaching 
faith is that by which one can enter; 
wisdom is that by which one can be saved. 
(T. 1509, vol. 25, o. 63a, lines 1-2) 
The following are notable papers on Buddhist faith by 
modern scholars: B.M. Barua, "Faith in Buddhism," in 
B.C. Law, ed., Buddhist Studies, pp. 329-249: N. Dutt, 
"Place of Faith in Buddhism," in B.C. Law, ed., Louis 
M. Saigusa, "RytUju ni okeru shin no mondai," IBK 3-2, 
1955, pp. 297-299; K. Zawada, "Bukkyo ni okeru shin no 
honshitsu to sono kozo," Bukkyo bunka kenkyi No. 9, March 
1960, pp. 61-72. 
22. As the title of the treatise implies, awaken- 

ing faith is the central issue of the text. The Chinese 

101 

T'lien-t'ai master Chih-i's brilliant exegetical works 
amply demonstrate the importance of the title in Buddhist 
scriptures. See T. 1716, vol. 33, po. 681-814. 

53. TT. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575b, line 15. 

24. Ibid., line 16. 

55. TT. 2010, vol. 48, pp. 376b - 377a. 

56. See D.T. Suzuki's translation, "On Believing 
in Mind" (Shinjin-no-Mei) in Manual of Zen Buddhism, 
(New York: Grove Press, 1960), po. 76-82. 

57. T. 2010, vol. 48, pv. 377a, line 9. 

58. Ibid. 

599. T. 1666, vol. 32, po. 575b - 583b. 

60. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p- 221b, line 22 - p. 22I1c, 
line 8. 

61. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 58lc, line 7. 

62. See AFM-H, pp. 92-102. 

63. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 58lc, line 7. 

64. For the meaning of aniyata raSi, see AFM-S 
pp. 114 and 127. 

65. See AFM-H, p. 92. Brackets are Hakeda's. 

66. See AFM-S, p. 128 and also T. 1667, vol. 32, 

p.- 590a, lines 20-21. 

67. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 22lc, lines 3-4 and 
T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 578b, lines 23-24. See also Okamoto 
Soko, "Shinri gainen no koz6--Daijo kishin ron ni okeru", 

IBK 3-2, 1955, pp. 138-139. 

102 

68. See AFM-H, pp. 92-93. 

69. For the complete list of the six paramitas, 
see the end of Chapter Three of AFM. T. 1666, vol. 32, 
p. 58la, lines 20-26. 

70. The passage in AFM about Pure Land practice is 
found in T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 583a, lines 12-20. See 
also AFM-H, p. 102. The theory that holds that this pas- 
sage is a later insertion can be rejected by adducing 
Wonhyo's understanding of AFM: (1) AFM is a systematic 
work in which all the existing theories are synthesized; 
(2) AFM is soteriological in purpose. See Takemura Shdhd's 
beautiful essay, which forms the appendix to his book 
Daijo kishin ron kOdoku, Kyoto: Hyakukaen, 1959, pp. 226- 
304. 

71. For Wonhyo's Pure Land thought, see Sasaki 
Getsusho, Indo Shina Nihon jodokyo shi (Tokyo: Bobunsha, 
1928), pp. 451-484. 

72. Some Korean Buddhists like Han Yong-un (1879- 
1944), one of the most influential Korean Buddhist lead- 
ers of the early twentieth century, severely criticized 
the practice of Pure Land in Korea because of -its Son 
(Zen) orientation. This criticism indicates that it 
was vopular to practice Pure Land Buddhism in Korea 
even in Son monasteries. See my paper, "Son (Zen) and 

Pure Land in Korea," in the Pure Land volume of the 

103 

Berkeley Buddhist Studies Series, edited by Dr. Michael 
Solomon (in press). 

73. In Christian theology, "assensus" means a belief 
or mental assent to some truth. See Van A. Harvey, A 
Handbook of Theological Terms (New York: Macmillan Pub- 
lishing Co., 1974), pp. 95-98. 

74. Fiducia is understood to be the basic orienta- 
tion of the total person. It may include belief, but 
it is best described as trust, confidence, or loyalty. 
See ibid., p. 95. 

75. For the three kinds of fa-hsin Fy , see AFM-H, 
pp. 80-91. See also T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 580b, line 15 - 
p. 58lc, line 5. 

76. The necessity of a ten thousand kalpas long 
practice for the perfection of faith is repeatedly em- 
Phasized in AFM. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 580b, line 22 
and p. 580c, line l. 

77. This emphasis in APM on long practice might be 
considered evidence of Hinayana notions of practice in 
AFM. But it is better to consider it as a reflection 
of the synthetic nature of AFM. 

78. The possibility of metamorphosis from hsin-hsin 

to fa-hsin Zt) is debatable. However, in Buddhism 
such a transformation is always assumed by those who 

accept the possibility of Enlightenment. See Nagao Gadjin, 

104 

"Denkan no ronri" ( He +H 2 ea 2e ), Tetsugaku kenkyt 
35-7 (1952), pp. 449-476. 

79. For the discussion of faith in relation to 
AFM, see DKK-T, pp. 226-304. 

80. For Wonhyo's conclusion of the section on ex- 
plaining the title, see T. 1844, vol. 44, ». 203b, lines 5-7. 

81. The problem of fa-hsin 3 is one of the most 
important issues in Wonhyo's thought. See his Palshim 
suhaeng chang, in WC, pp. 373-377. 

82. The most comprehensive introduction to Wénhyo's 
career is Professor Lee Chong-ik's "Wonhyo ui saeng'ae 
wa sasang" included in his Tongbang sasang nonch'ong 
(Seoul: Poryéngak, 1972), pp. 198-240. 

83. T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 730a~b. 

84. T. 2039, vol. 49, pp. 953c-1019a. 

85. This inscription is included in WOnhyo chonjip, 
ed. by Mok Ch'éru et al (Seoul: Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, 
1973), pp. 383-386. 

86. Motoi Nobuo, "Shiragi Gangyo no denki ni tsuite", 
Otani gakuhO XLI, No. 1 (1961), pp. 33-52. 

87. Ibid., pp. 34-41. 

88. Ch'ae Inhwan, Shiragi Bukkvo kairitsu shiso 
kenkyu (Tokyo: Kokusho kankOkai, 1977), vp. 274. 

89. T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 730a-b. 

105 

90. T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 709a, line 3. 

91. T. 2039, vol. 49, p. 1006a-c. This text was 
translated into English by Ha T' ae-hung and Grafton K. 
Mintz in their Samguk yusa, Seoul: Yonsei University 
Press, 1972. 

92. Actually there are several lines in Iryon's 
record where he tried to avoid Tsan-ning's record. See 
T. 2039, vol. 49, p. 1006a, lines 23-29. 

93. The story about Wonhyo's return to his home 
country is illustrated in more detail in a passage from 
the biography of isang 3 ke , also written by Tsan- 
“ning. See T. 2061, vol. 59, p. 729a, lines 6-16. 

94. T. 2039, vol. 49, p. 1006a, line 29 - p. 1006b, 
line 8. 

95. T. 2039, vol. 49, p. 1006b, lines 11-16. 

96. See Motoi Nobuo's chronological chart of Wonhyo's 
life in his article entitled "Shiragi Ganayo no denki ni 
tsuite," Otani gakuho XLI, No. 1 (1961), p. 50. See also 
Kim Yongt'ae, Han'guk pulgyosa, (Seoul: Chinsudang, 1970), 
pp. 51-52. 

97. See Kim Yongt'ae, ibid., po. 53-54. 

98. T. 2061, vol. 50, pv. 729a, lines 7-13. 

99. Ibid., lines 13-14. 

100. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 577b, line 22. 
1lO1. Park Chong-hong, Han'guk sasangsa (Seoul: 

Ilshinsa, 1966), pp. 28-59. 

106 

102. T. 1845, vol. 44, pv. 226b, lines 5-9. 

103. Ibid., lines 9-12. 

104. The relationship between Wonhyo with respect 
to Sungnang and WOonchuk is comparable to that of the 
doctrine of AFM with respect to those of the Madhyamaka-~ 
-S&stra and the Yogacdrabhimi-S$astra, as the following 

diagram illustrates: 

Stngnang Wonchuk Madhyamaka- Yogacarabhimi- 

NU ~§astra ~§astra 

Wonhyo AFM 

105. T. 2039, vol. 49, p. 1006a, line 29 - pb. 1006b, 
line 7. 

106. Ha T'ae-hung's translation, which is found in 
his book, Samguk yusa (Seoul: Yonsei University Press, 
1972), pp. 306-307, is not faithful to the original text; 
therefore, we quoted him here with quite a few alterations. 

107. It is not rare to see such cases in modern 
interpretations of Wonhyo's life. For example, see Ch'ae 
Inhwan, Shiragi Bukkyo kairitsu shiso kenkyu (Tokyo, 
Kakusho Kankokai, 1977), p. 275, Yi Chong'ik, "Silla 
pulgyo wa Wonhyo sasang," Tongbang sasang nonch'ong (Seoul: 
Poryodn'gak, 1975), Db. 192 and "wonhyo Wi saeng'ae wa 
sasang," Tongbang sasang nonch'ong (Seoul: Poryén'gak, 1975), 

pp. 209-211. 

107 

108. See my discussion of Wonhyo's Bibliography in 
the next section of this thesis. 

109. See WC, pp. 373-377. 

110. See T. 2039, vol. 49, bp. 1906b, line 11. 

dll. See Lin-ch'i lu in T. 1985, vol. 47, pv. 496a, 
line 29. 

112. See T. 2039, vol. 49, pv. 1006b, lines 15-16: 

Sak ere 2 FE, 
Bre BRL 
2K KRA 

113. See Motoi, p. 33. 

114. See my discussion of faith in section two of 
Part One, "The Essence of the Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun." 

115. See Part One, note 79. 

116. Professor Park Chong-hong has described Wonhyo 
as a scholar who thinks clearly and logically. See his 
"Wonhyo ui ch'olhak sasang," in Han'guk sasangsa (Seoul: 
Iishinsa, 1966), pp. 60-88. 

117. The story about’ Wonhyo's motivation for writing 
his book is found in the biographies of both Tsan-ning and 
Iryon. See T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 730a, line 18 - p. 730b, 
line 19 and T. 2039, vol 49, vw. 1006b, lines 21-24. 

118. Wonhyo's preface to Shimmun hwajaeng non, which 
is included in the Kosonsa inscription, is found in WC, 

p. 383, line 12 - p. 384, line 1 and in WC, p. 303. 

108 

119. The most comprehensive work on Uich'on was 
done by Professor Cho Myong-gi. See his Koryd Taegak 
Kuksa wa Ch'ont'ae sasang, Seoul, 1964. 

120. Uich'on's catalogue is found in T. 2184, vol. 
55, pp. 1165b - 1178c. 

121. See Kim Yéng-t'ae, Han'guk pulgyosa, p. 108. 

122. See ibid., pp. 124-125; see also Ikeuchi 
Hiroshi, "“Koraichd no daizdkyS," in Mansenshi kenkyu 
(chuseihen), 1937, po. 483-614. 

123. Uich'on says: ER EX fe 2 fe 6 

BlBGREe. See T. 1165, vol. 55, p. 1165c, line 27 - 
p. 1166a, line l. 

124. See HP-K, p. 125. 

125. See Cho, pp. 90-134. 

126. For example, the list of Wonhyo's works in 
Mok Chongbae's introduction to WC and Ch'ae Inhwan's 
bibliography of Wonhyo in his Shiragi Bukkyo kairitsu 
shiso kenkyu (pp. 278-287) are identical to Cho Myong-gi's. 
See WC, pp. 10-13. 

127. The three volumes of Showa hobs sdmokuroku have 
been added to the Taisho Tripitaka. See Taisho volumes 
98-100. 

128. For the classification system, see KSL, pp. 
580-581. 

129. See Mizuno Kogen, Butten kaidai jiten (Tokyo: 

Shunjusha, 1977), pp. 55-56. 

109 

130. All the Acama texts (T. 1-151) are included 
in the first and second volumes of Taishd. 

131. See Ch'ae Inhwan, Shiragi Bukkyo kairitsu 
shiso kenkyu, (Tokyo: Kokusho Kankékai, 1977), pp. 278-287. 

132. Wonhyo wrote 21 books connected with Tathagata- 
garbha thought. This is an indication of the importance 
he attached to it. For Wonhyo the notions of both 
Tathagatagarbha and Alayavijhana do nothing but explain 
the relationship between the two aspects of One Mind. 

133. Almost all modern scholarly works on Wdénhyo 
agree that the Shimmun hwajaengnon P9 eS is 
Wonhyo's most important philosophical work. See Lee 
Chong-ik, Wonhyo Ui ktinbon sasang (Seoul: Tongbang sasang 
yonguwoén, 1977), pp. 10-14. 

134. See ibid., pp. 21-56. 

135. See ibid., pp. 1-2. 

136. See WC, pp. 303-315. 

137. The first book to treat this as a nart of 
Wonhyo's preface to Shimmun hwajaengnon is WC. 

138. For the funeral ode to Wonhyo, see Taegak kuksa 
munjip Ke Eee: a , included in Han'guk Ui sasang tae- 
-chénjip (Seoul: Tonghwa ch'ulpansa, 1972), pp. 420-421. 

139. See WKS, p. 12. 

140. See WKS, p. l. 

141. See WKS, p. 12, footnote 2. 

110 

142. See Park Chong-hong, Han'guk sasangsa, (Seoul: 
Sémundang, 1974), pp. 148-177. 

143. See ibid., pp. 178-232. 

144. Even Professor Lee Chong-ik who wrote about 
Chinul for his doctoral dissertation in 1974 at Taisho 
University in Japan has not discussed the relationship 
between Wonhyo and Chinul. 

145. "“P6j6 Kuksa pimyong" or "The Inscription of 
National Master Pojo (Chinul)," written by Kim Kunsu in 
the thirteenth century, is the most detailed early 
record about Chinul but it does not yield any information 
about the relationship between Wonhyo and Chinul. In- 
stead, it contains a lengthy description of the influence 
of Chinese monks on Chinul. See Kim Kunsu, "Pojo Kuksa 
pimyéng" in Pdj6 pobo, translated by Kim T'anhd (Seoul: 
Péppowon, 1963), vp. 139-147. 

146. See ibid., p. 139b, line 11. See also Kim 
Chi-gy6n, ed., Hwaomnon choryo (Tokyo: Seif cakuen,1968), 
p. l, line 8. 

147. It might be of interest here to point out 
that when Chinul did mention Wonhyo he always treated him 
aS a representative of the scriptural study tradition 
and as a laymen. This is in marked contrast to UWich'on's 
attitude towards Wonhyo. Both Uich'on and Chinul lived 

in the twelfth century, there being only fifty years 

lll 

separating them. What then made the attitudes of these 
two prominent Buddhists differ to such an extent with re- 
spect to Wonhyo? 

Although both were leaders of the Buddhist community 
of the day, Uich'dn was a popular leader with a scriptural 
orientation, whereas Chinul was a monastic leader with a 
meditative emphasis. Thus, although both were concerned 
with the harmonization of disputes, the context in which 
each had to function determined how each would approach 
and deal with his predecessor. Gich'Sn, dealing with the 
Buddhist community at large, would emphasize the authority 
of his predecessor, whereas Chinul, addressing himself 
primarily to the Sangha, could not afford to do so, as 
Wonhyo had broken his vows and his authority for members 
of the Sangha could be challenged on that account. Thus, 
in referring to Wonhyo, Chinul had to make the kind of 
qualification about him his audience was sure to make if 
he did not--that Wénhyo was a layman. It is regrettable 
that neither Uich'Sn nor Chinul explicitly discussed 
Wonhyo's theory; instead, Chinul replaced it with Hua-ven 
doctrine and the meditative experience of Enlightenment, 
while Uich'dn replaced it with the T'ien-t'ai theory of 
unity in meditation and study of the scriptures. 

148. All extant works by Wonhyo are included in WC, 

edited by Mok Chong-bae et al. 

iT2 

149. See Park Chong-hong, "WSnhyo ti ch'olhak Sasang," 
in Han'guk Sasangsa (Seoul: Sémundang, 1974), pp. 85-127. 

150. See Keel, Hee Sing, Chinul, the founder oF 
Korean Sdn (Zen) tradition (Ph.D. thesis) (Cambridge: 
Harvard University, 1977), pp. 38-40. See also T. 1844, 
vol. 44, p. 202b, lines 18-23. 

151. For Wonhyo's idea of interpenetration in his 
commentaries on AFM, see T. 1844, vol. 44, pp. 202a-b and 
T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226a. See also Francis Cook, Hua-yen 
Buddhism (University Park: The Pennsylvania State Univer- 
Sity Press, 1977), pp. 56-89. 

152. See T. 1845, vol. 44, p.- 226b, lines 4-12. 

153. Wonhyo's focus in his double negation is on 
having people elevate from aniyata rai to niyata raSi. 
Therefore, Wonhyo's theory of double negation is used in 
his system as a theory of religious practice in which 
fa-hsin is achieved. 

154. According to Wonhyo, AFM contains a good an- 
Swer to the problem of how to realize interpenetration. 

155. Keel, Hee Sung translated Ttong pulgyo as 
"unified Buddhism" in his thesis. If that were correct, 
however, it would be incompatible with Wonhyo's disinterest 
in institutional organizations. See his thesis, p. 42. 

156. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 20-24. 

157. See ibid., p. 576a, lines 5-7. 

113 

158. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202b, lines 11-17. 

159. See ibid., p. 202a, line 23 - p. 202b, line 4. 

160. For a discussion of T'i-yung, see Shimada Kenji, 
"Taiyo no rekishi ni yosete," in Tsukamoto Hakase kinen 
Bukkyo shigaku ronshu (Kyoto: Kyoto University, 1961), 
po. 416-430. 

161. See T'ang Yung-t'und, Han wei Liang-Chin Nan- 
~pei Ch'iao Fo-chiao shih (Shanghai: Commercial Press, 
1938), p. 333. 

162. See APM-H, p. 28. 

163. For Samkara see M. Hiriyanna's discussion of 

"Vedanta: Absolutistic," in The Essentials of Indian 
Philosophy (London: Allen and Unwin, 1967), pp. 151-174. 

164. See Whalen W. Lai, The Awakening of Faith in 
Mahayana: A Study of the Unfolding of Sinitic Mahaydna 
Motifs. (Ph.D. thesis) (Cambridge: Harvard University, 
1975), pp. 163-164. 

165. See Keel's thesis, pp. 39-40. 

166. Wonhyo's favorite term, ion chéllvé is first 
found in T. 1844, vol. 44, 2. 202b, line 6. 

167. See ibid., lines 3-4; see also Part Two, 
note 18. 

168. Ideas similar to Wonhyo's "“wordlessness and no- 
thought" may be found in the Lao tze Tao-te Ching, (especial- 

ly Chapters One and Twenty One), Bodhidharma'’s Erh-ju 

114 

ssu-hsing lun => WT ee and Seng-tsan's Hsin-hsin ming 
AS BE - See Arthur Waley, The Way and its power (New 
York: Grove Press, 1958), pp. 141 and 170; D.T. Suzuki, 
Manual of Zen Buddhism (New York: Grove Press, 1960), pp. 
73-82. 

169. For Wonhyo's works on Pure Land Buddhisn, 
see pp. 68-69 of Part One. 

170. The Kosonsa inscription tells us that Wonhyo 
read secular books such as "The Book of predictions" and 
non-Buddhist books which have been rejected by the Buddhist 
world. See WC, p. 383, lines 11-12. Tsan-ning's Sung 
Kao-seng chuan also says that Wonhyo was imbued with three 
Studies, i.e. Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism. See 
T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 730a, line 9. 

171. The Sénga kugam is one of the most popular 
Zen texts. See Han'guk ti sasang taejSnjip 15 (Seoul: 
Tonghwa ch'ulp'ansa, 1977), po. 39-68. 

172. In the Samga kugam, Sénga kugam, Yuga kugam (BR 

$35 or Manual of Confucianism and Toga kugam sa S oe ' 

or Manual of Taoism are included. See ibid., pp. 68-76. 

PART TWO 

115 

I. Introduction to Translation 

The text used for this translation is the Zokuzokyo 
edition of the Tae-stng ki-shin-non so-ki hoe-bon 
(Z. vol. 71), roll 1, which will be referred to here- 
after as CE (Combined Edition). CE includes the follow- 
ing texts: Ta-ch'eng ch'’i-hsin lun in one roll (Taisho 
No. 1666, vol. 32, pp. 575a-583b) attributed to ASvaghosa, 
which will be referred to hereafter as AFM (Awakening of 
Faith in Mahayana); Ki-shin-non so in two volumes (Taisho 
No. 1844, vol. 44, pp. 202a-226a) by the Korean monk 
Wonhyo (617-686), which will be referred to hereafter 
as RC (Running Commentary); and Tae-sting ki-shin-non 
pyOl-gi (Taisho No. 1845, vol. 44, pp. 226a-240c) also 
by Wonhyo, which will be referred to hereafter as EN 
(Expository Notes). 

CE has been selected because Wonhyo's commentaries 
are very Gifficult to follow if the appropriate passages 
from AFM are not included with the commentaries for refer- 
ence; CE includes AFM whereas the Taisho edition of 
Wonhyo's commentaries does not. However, the arrangement 
of CE necessitates a retranslation of those portions of 
AFM contained in the first roll of CE. It might be 

thought that sucn retranslation is hardly necessary in 

116 

view of the fact that AFM has already been translated 
a number of times. But Wonhyo's commentaries reflect his 
own understanding of each passage of AFM; no previous 
translation of AFM adequately reflects his understanding. 
Therefore, a retranslation of those passages of AFM 
with which Wénhyo is concerned in the first roll of CE 
is hardly avoidable. 

In Korea, CE is the most popular text for studying 
AFM. The xylographs from which it was first printed in 
Korea are still preserved at Hae-in Monastery. The 
Haeinsa edition is identical with the Zokuzokyo edition 
of the text published by Maeda Eun over the period 1905- 
i912 (Z. vol. 71). It is also identical with the Chin- 
-ling-ke-ching-ch'u edition published in Shanghai, China, 
in 1899. According to A Comprehensive Catalogue of 
Korean Buddhist Works and Materials ( Fe AH AEC 
RE FASS), compiled in 1976 by the Korean Buddhist 
Research Institute, Dongguk University, the xylographs 
preserved at Hae-in Monastery were carved on the basis 
of the Chin-ling-ke-ching-ch'u edition. If so, then, 
the earliest attested date of CE is 1899, which is the 
date found in the colophon of the Chin-ling-ke-ching- 
-ch'u edition. However, none of the three editions 
(Haeinsa, ZokuzoOkyoO and Chin-ling-ke-ching-ch'u) gives 

any indication of who edited CE, nor what texts were used 

117 

as its basis. So far, the editor's identity has not been 
determined, nor when and where the texts used were collated 
in their present Hoe-bon form. The only thing of which 

one can be certain is that the editor must have been a 
scholar of superior ability. This is easily discernible 
from the skillful way in which the three texts are inter- 
calated. It is not, therefore, surprising that CE is 

sO popular in Korea. 

Inasmuch as, outside of Korea, the Zokuzokyo edition 
of CE is the most readily available edition of that text, 
I have chosen it as the basis for my translation. However, 
as CE represents a collation of AFM, RC and EN, and as the 
Taisho edition of those texts is more readily available 
than the Zokuzokyo edition of CE, citations of page num- 
bers from the original text in the Notes refer to the 
Taisho edition. 

Translations of Chih-k'ai's preface to AFM and 
Kakugen's preface to RC as found in the Taisho edition 
of AFM and RC follow my translation of the first roll 
of CE. Parentheses enclose any word or phrase not found 
from the Chinese but whose inclusion in the English trans- 
lation is necessary for clarifying either the organiza- 
tion of the text or the meaning of a sentence for the 
English reader. Thus, parentheses enclose not only words 

or phrases added to a sentence, but section headings as 

118 

well. Where so much explanatory material is needed to 
clarify a sentence that its inclusion within parentheses 
would impair the readability of the sentence, that material 
is not included in the sentence and is not placed within 
parentheses. Instead, an explanation of the sentence 
is placed in a note. Notes are also used where my trans- 
lation of AFM differs significantly from previous trans- 
lations, and where it is necessary to justify the trans- 
lation of a particular passage from Wonhyo's commentary 
because several different translations of that passage 
are possible. 

Furthermore, it was sometimes found necessary to 
correct the original text itself, as certain passages 
are clearly corrupt, probably due to copyists' errors. 
For example, in line 7 of page 314-la of the Zokuzikyo 
edition, the character Be li, “to depart," must be in- 
serted between & che and aT fen, otherwise the sentence 
makes no sense. Likewise, in line 9 of the same page the 

characters FR pu-chiu, "not to seek," must be inserted 

betweentz yeh and 24) ming-li for the same reason. 
Finally, a note on the format of this translation 

as it compares with the format of CE in Zokuzokyo: in 

Zokuzokyo, CE comprises pages of Chinese characters ar- 

ranged vertically to form lines. Passages from AFM begin 

at the top of the page, RC is indented down the space of 

119 

one character, and EN is indented down the space of two 
characters. In this translation passages from the AFM 

are indented and printed in block capitals, but passages 
from RC and EN are not indented. Instead, they are pre- 
ceded by the headings "Running Commentary" and "Expository 

Notes" respectively. 

II. Translation 

Treatise on Awakening Mahayana Faith,+ Combined 

TS 

Edition” with the Running Commentary~ and the 

Expository Notes,“ Volume One 

The Treatise was written by Bodhisattva agvaghosa,> 
translated during the Liang Dynasty by the Indian 
Tripitaka Master Paramartha, ° with running commentary 

and expository notes by the Korean monk Wonhyo. / 

120 

(Running Commentary) 

This treatise will be explained in three parts.® 
The first reveals the essence of the doctrine; the 
second explains the title; the third clarifies the 
meaning of the sentences.” 
10 

I. On Revealing the Essence of the Doctrine 

The essence of Mahayana is generally (described as 

L121 

being) completely empty and very mysterious.1? (However, ) 

no matter how mysterious it may be, 7? how could it be 
anywhere but in the world of the myriad phenomena? No 

matter how empty it may be, it is still present in the 

conversation of the people.? (Although) it is not any- 

. . 4 
where but in phenomena, none of the five eyes* can see 

its form. (Although) it is present in discourse, none 

of the four unlimited explanatory abilities?> can 

describe its shape.t® One wants to call (it) great, (but 

it) enters the interiorless and nothing remains. One 
wants to call (it) infinitesimal, (but it) envelops the 
exteriorless without exhausting itself. One might say 
it is something, yet everything is empty because of it. 
One might say it is nothing, yet the myriad things 

arise through itt? I do not know how to describe it; 

(therefore,) I am compelled to call it "Mahayana. "1 

Expository Notes?? 

How empty its essence is! Like space, it keeps 

122 

nothing at all private. How vast (its essence is!) Like 
the ocean, it is extremely impartial. 7° Because it is 

so impartial, movement and stillness alternate.“ 

Because it keeps nothing private, the impure and pure 

are here alloyed. Because the impure and pure are 
alloyed, the absolute and conventional are equalized. 7? 
Because movement and stillness alternate, rising and 
falling are different. Because rising and falling are 
different, the way of prayer and response is open. 3 
Because the absolute and conventional are equalized, the 
path of thinking is cut off. 74 Because thinking is cut 
off, the person who embodies it (i.e., who cuts off the 
path of thinking) rides shadows and echoes and is 
without impediment. Because the way of prayer and 
response is kept open, the person who prays transcends 
names and forms and returns (to the Source) .7> The 

Shadows and echoes ridden?® 

(by the person who cuts off 
thinking) are neither seen nor spoken. Yet, if names 

and forms have been transcended, what (can one) transcend? 
Where (can one) return? This is called the Supreme 

Principle, (even if it seems) not to be a principle, 

the Great Suchness, (even if it seems) not to be Suchness.27 

(Running Commentary) 

Who indeed, unless (one is) Vimalakirti-® 

(or) One- 

glance Hero, 7? can discuss Mahayana (in the state of) 

123 

wordlessness; (who can) awaken deep faith (in the state 

of) no-thought? =? 

Because Bodhisattva ASvaghosa (had) 
unconditioned great compassion, >2 he was distressed 
over those people whose minds, moved by the wind of 
ignorance and delusion, are easily tossed about. He was 
grieved that the true nature of Original Enlightenment 
which sleeps in a long dream is difficult to awaken. 
(Since Bodhisattva ASvaghosa) had the power of wisdom 
(by which one regards others) as his own body, °° he 
patiently wrote this treatise which expounds the deep 
meaning of the Tathagata's profound sltras. He wished 
to cause scholars who open this small treatise (even) 
for a moment to completely extract the meaning of the 
Tripitaka; (he wished to cause) practitioners to 

permanently stop the myriad (illusory) phenomena (and) 

in so doing finally to return to the source of One Mind. 

Expository Notes 

In this treatise there is nothing not established; 
there is nothing not refuted. (However, treatises) such 
as the Madhyamaka-Sastra, °° the DvadaSanikaya-Sastra,>* 
etc., only refute all attachments and go on te refute 
the refutation. But (they) do not further admit that 
there is the refuter and that which is refuted. (There- 
fore,) these are called treatises which refute but are 

not complete. >> (On the other hand,) treatises such as 

124 

' the Yogacarabhimi-Sastra, °° the Mahayanasamgraha-Sastra, >’ 

etc., by penetratingly establishing (what is) profound 

and (what is) shallow, distinguish between teachings. 

But (they) do not reject the theories (they) themselves 

establish. (Therefore,) these are called treatises 

which affirm but fail to negate. °° 
Now this treatise (on awakening Mahayana faith) 

not only (contains) wisdom but also benevolence. (Its 

39 (There- 

doctrine is) both mysterious and encyclopedic. 
fore, in it) there is nothing not established. However, 
(it ultimately) rejects (everything). (In it) there is 
nothing not refuted. However, (it) still admits (every- 
thing). "Still admits" indicates that if the refuter 
(carries) refutation to (its) extreme he will have 
completely established. "(Ultimately) rejects" clarifies 
that if an affirmer (carries) affirmation to (its) 

extreme he will have negated. This is why the doctrine 

of (On Awakening Mahayana Faith) is called the patriarchal 
teaching of all treatises; (this is why its author is 

called) the chief arbitrator of all controversies. 7? 

(Running Commentary) 

Although what is discussed (in the treatise) is 
vast, it may be summarized in (the following) words. By 
revealing two aspects in One Mina, “@? it comprehensively 

2 3 

includes the 108 jewels of the Mahayana teaching,“ 

125 

and by showing the essential purity in phenomenal im- 
purity, *4 it completely synthesizes the subtle truth of 
the Srimaladevisimhanada-sitra's fifteen chapters. *> 
(The synthesis) includes (doctrines) such as (the 
Mahaparinirvana-sittra's) teaching of One Taste preached 
at Sala forest, 7° the (Saddharmapundarika-sutra's) 

message of non-duality preached at Grdhrakita, “7 the 

Suvarnaprabhasauttamaraja-sitra’® and the Mahayanabhisa- 

maya-sitra's *? 

(teaching of) Ultimate Result which is 
(stated in its) trikaya (doctrine) ,°° the Avatamsaka-sutra” 
and the Ying-lo ching's>? (teaching of) Profound Cause 
which is (stated in its) Four Stages (doctrine), the 
Pahcavim$atisahasrikaprajnaparamita-siitra>> and the 
Mahavaipulyamahasamnipata-stitra's>* 
ing of) the Ultimate Path, and the (teaching of) the 

broad and vast (teach- 

secret doctrine's mysterious gate (expounded in) the 

Suryagarbha>> 

Mahavaipulyamahasamnipata-sttra. It is only this treatise 
(i.e., On Awakening Mahayana Faith) which penetrates the 

and the Candragarbha>° chapters of the 

essence of all these sutras. Therefore, the following 
sentence’ (from On Awakening Mahayana Faith) says, 

because this treatise aims at 

comprehensively embracing the limit- 

less meaning of the Tathagata's 

broad, great and profound teaching, 

it must be written. 

Since such is the intent of this treatise, when 

unfolded, immeasurable and limitless meanings (are found 

126 

in its) doctrine; when sealed, the principle of two 
aspects (in) One Mind (is found to be its) essence. >® 
Within the two aspects are included myriad meanings 
without confusion. (These) limitless meanings are identi- 
cal with One Mind and are completely amalgamated (with 
it). Therefore, (it) unfolds and seals freely; it 
establishes and refutes without restrictions. Unfolding 
but not complicating; sealing but not narrowing; estab- 
lishing but gaining nothing; refuting but losing nothing 
-- this is ASvaghosa's wonderful skill and the essence 
of On Awakening Faith.>? 
However, the meaning of this treatise is so pro- 
found that interpreters hitherto have seldom presented 
its doctrine completely. Indeed, (this is) because since 
all of them were attached to what they had learned, they 
distorted the (meaning of the) sentences. Not able to 
abandon their preconceptions, still they sought the 
meaning. Therefore, (their interpretations) do not come 
close to the author's intent. Some hoped (to reach the) 
source but got lost in the streams; some grasped the 
leaves but forgot the trunk; some cut the collar and 
patched (it) to the sleeves: some broke the branches 
and grafted (them) to the roots. Now I (shall) directly 
correlate the sentences of this treatise with appropriate 
parts of the sutras hoping (that my commentary) may 

provide some information to people on the same path. ©9 

127 

"On Revealing the Essence of the Doctrine" ends. 

61 

Ii. On Explaining the Title (: TREATISE ON AWAKENING 

MAHAYANA FAITH) 62 

On the word "MAHAYANA" 

"Maha" is a name representing the dharma; it means 
broadly containing. ©? "Yana" is a simile which designates 
carrying. Although (this) is (valid) asa general explana- 
tion (of "Mahayana"), if one investigates (its meaning 
further one) finds two ways of doing it. The first is 
an explanation based on the stitras;: the second is a 
Clarification based on the Sdstras. 

A. The Explanation Based on the Sutras 

As the AkaSagarbha-sutra°* says, 

Mahayana is so called because (it is) 
immeasurable, limitless and boundless, 
(because) it is ubiquitous, just as 

the simile of space (illustrates), be- 
cause it is so broad and great that it 
accepts all sentient beings, and 
because it is not shared by Sravakas 
and Pratyekabuddhas. (Therefore, its) 
name is Mahayana.6> Furthermore, as 

to yana (vehicle), 

"Right Abiding in the Fourfold Com- 
prehensive Practice of Accepting (all 
Sentient Beings)"66 is the wheels (1); 
"Purifying Well the Tenfold Good Karmas"67 
is the spokes (2); 

"Purifying the Nourishment of Merit" is 
the hub (3); 

"Persistence, Purity and Concentration" 
is the tires, linch-pins, nails and 
cotter-pins (4); 

128 

"Achievement of all Meditation and 
Liberation" is the axle (5); 

"Four Boundless (States of Mind)"68 is 
the skillful control (of the horse) (6); 
"The Master" is the charioteer (7); 
"Knowledge of Timeliness and Untimeli- 
ness is (what) starts the chariot (8); 
"The Sermon on Impermanence, Suffering, 
Emptiness and Non-self”" is what whips 
(the horse) (9); 

"Seven Jeweled Skeins of Enlightenment"69 
is the harness (10); 

"Pure Five Eyes" is the bridle (11); 
"Universal and Upright Application of 
Great Compassion" is the pennant (12); 
"Pourfold Right Effort"70 is the 
guard-rail (13); 

"Four Applications of Mindfulness"71 is 
the (charioteer's) concentration (before 
Starting) (14); 

"Four Bases of Psychic Power"/72 is the 
(chariot's) rapid advance (15); 

"Five Excellent Powers"/3 is gazing at 
the target (16); 

"The Eightfold Noble Path" is charging 
directly (at the target) (17); 
“Unimpeded Wisdom towards all Sentient 
Beings" is the awning (18); 

"Non-Abiding in the Six Perfections"?4 
is the turning toward perfect wisdom (19); 
"Four Noble Truths of Non-Contradiction"/5 
is arriving at the Other Shore (20). 
This is Mahayana. 

Explanation: Through the above twenty phrases (the 
sutra) illustrates the dharma using similes in order to 
clarify the meaning of "yana." 

Again the following sentence says: 

All Buddhas enjoy this vehicle (1); 
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas observe 
it (2); 

all Bodhisattvas ride it (3); 

it is fitting that world-protectors 
like Sakra and Brahman revere it (4), 
that all sentient beings worship it 
with offerings (5), 

129 

that all wise men praise it (6), 
(and) that (people in) all worlds 
return to it (7); 

no demons can destroy it (8); 

no heretics can imagine it (9); 
(no one in) all the worlds can 
compete with it (10). 

Explanation: Through the above ten phrases about 

people, (the sutra) clarifies (the meaning of) Mahayana. 

B. The Clarification Based on the Sastras 

Some (Sastras list) seven (kinds of greatness); 
some (list) three. The concept of three kinds of great- 
ness is explained a little later (in the treatise itself). 

The seven kinds of greatness are of two kinds. First, as 

the Abhi dharmasamuccayavvakha ‘© says, 

It is called Mahayana because it 
corresponds to the seven kinds of 
greatness. What are the seven? 

(They are:) 1. (Buddha's) world is 
said to be great because the 
Bodhisattva's path takes the broad 
and great doctrines of the hundreds 
of thousands of innumerable sitras 

as (its) world; 2. (Buddha's) prac- 
tice is said to be great because he 
correctly performs all broad and 
great actions which benefit (both) 
himself and others; 3. (Buddha's) 
wisdom is said to be great because 

he comprehends the broad and great 
(principle of) no-self with respect 
to the ego-principle; 4. (Buddha's) 
effort is said to be great because 

he diligently performs countless hard 
actions using numerous expedient means 
during the course of the three great 
aeons; 5. (Buddha's) skillful expedient 
means is said to be great because he 
dwells neither in samsara nor nirvana; 

130 

6. (Buddha's) Enlightenment is said 
to be great because he attains in- 
measurable and innumerable great 
merits such as all of the Tathagata's 
powers, fearlessness and the eighteen 
Buddha-dharmas not shared (by ordinary 
people); 7. (Buddha's) acts are said 
to be great because until the world 
of samsara is extinguished (Buddha, 
in) showing (himself) everywhere, (in) 
bringing about wisdom, etc., will 
perform all of Buddha's broad (and) 
great work. 

(Explanation:) In the above, the first five are 

causes; the next two are effects. // 

Second, the Prakaranaryavaca-Sastra/® says, 

It is called Mahayana because the 
nature of Mahayana indicates the 
Bodhisattvayana which perfectly 
corresponds to the seven kinds of 
greatness. What are the seven? 

(They are:) 1. the greatness of 
dharma, which refers to the exnedient, 
broad, and great teaching included 
in the Bodhisattvapitaka of the 
twelve divisions (of the Buddhist 
canon);/9 2. the greatness of 
generating (wisdom) mind, which 
means that the mind of Supreme and 
Perfect Enlightenment is already 
generated; 3. the greatness of 
excellent understanding, which indi- 
cates excellent faith and understand- 
ing in the greatness of the dhariia 
mentioned above; 4. the greatness 

of joyful mind, which means passing 
the stage of excellent understanding 
and practice (and) entering the 
joyful stage of pure and excellent 
mind; 80 5. the greatness of nourish- 
ment: because of the achievement of 
the two kinds of nourishment--bliss 
(and) wisdom---Supreme Perfect Wisdom 1 
can be attained; 6. the greatness of 
time, which indicates that Supreme 

131 

Perfect Wisdom can be attained (at 
any time) during the three great 
incalculable aeons;82 7. the great-— 
ness of the achievement (i.e., 
Perfect Enlightenment), which means 
that there is no comparison between 
the wisdom of Supreme Perfect Wisdom 
and wisdom achieved by other (means) 
--how could (the latter) excel the 
former? 

Both the Yogacarabhimi-Sastra?? and the Bodhisattvabhimi °4 
(contain) explanations similar to this. 
The Yogacarabhimi-Sastra says, °> 
Of these (seven kinds of greatness 
mentioned in the Prakaranaryavaca- 
~sastra), the six kinds of great- 
ness from the greatness of dharma to 
the greatness of time are the causes 
of the greatness of Perfect Enlighten- 
ment. The greatness of Perfect 
Enlightenment is the effect of the 
preceding six kinds of greatness. 

Explanation: These two ways of grouping the seven 
kinds of greatness, although their numbers are identical, 
were established for different reasons. The reasons for 
their establishment, if sought, can be known. 

The Explanation of Mahayana ends. 

On the words "AWAKENING FAITH" 

This treatise causes people's faith to be awakened, 
hence the words, "Awakening Faith." Faith is a term 
which indicates being certain. What is called (faith 
means) faith that the principle really exists, °® faith 

that practice can get results, (and) faith that when 

132 

practice does get (results) there Will be boundless merit. 
Of these, faith that (the principle) really exists is 
faith in the greatness of the essence (o£ Suchness). 
Because (we) believe that all dharmas are unobtainable, 
consequently, (we) believe that there really is the dharma- 
-world of equality.°? Faith that (practice) can get 
results is faith in the greatness of the attributes (of 
Suchness). Because (Suchness) completely possesses the 
merits of the essence which permeates (all) sentient beings, 
consequently (we) believe that because of the permeation 
of the attributes (we) are bound to return to the Source. 
Faith in the operation of boundless merit is faith in the 
greatness of the operation (of Suchness), because there is 
nothing (that Suchness) does not dc. If one can awaken 
these three faiths, °3 one can enter (the world of) Buddha- 
~dharma, produce all merits, be free from all devilish 
States, and attain the Peerless Way. As the verse of the 
(Avatamsaka-)sUtra says: 

Faith is the Origin of the Way and 

the Mother of merit. 

(It) causes all the roots of good- 

ness to grow; 

(It) extinguishes all doubts; 

(It) reveals the Peerless Way (and) 

Makes (it) grow. 

Faith is able to transcend all 

devilish states. 

(It) reveals the Peerless Way of 

liberation; 

(It) is the indestructible seed of 

all merits; 

(It) produces the tree of Peerless 
Wisdom. 

133 

Faith has such a limitless merit. Based on this treatise 
one can generate (wisdom) mind. Hence the words, 

“Awakening Faith." 

(On the word TREATISE") 

What is meant by treatise is (a work) which treats 
a very profound theory and principle by making clear state- 
ments that can be followed. Based on the idea of treating, 
(such a work) is called a treatise. 

In conclusion: "Mahayana" is the essence of the 
doctrine of this treatise; "awakening faith" is its effic- 
acious operation. (Thus,) the title is composed (in such 
a way as) to show the unity of essence and operation. 

Hence the words, "Treatise on Awakening Mahayana Faith."?9 

TII. On Clarifying the Meaning of the Sentences ”~ 
(STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS) 77 

The treatise is divided into three parts. (A) The 
first three lines (are) verses stating (the author's) 
intention to return to (the Three Treasures) with 
reverence. (B) (The words) after "(I) declare" properly 
comprise the main bodv of this treatise. (C) The last 
verse concludes with (the author's) turning (all merits 
toward all sentient beings). 

(A. On the author's stating his intention to return with 
reverence to the Three Treasures) 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

Two intentions are (stated) in the first three 
verses. The first two verses (express) a direct return 

134 

to the Three Treasures.?* The last verse states (the 
author's) purpose in writing the treatise. 

(Treatise) 

(OFFERING UP MY) LIFE, 

I RETURN TO HIM WHO (PERVADES) ALL 
THE TEN DIRECTIONS, WHOSE ACTS ARE 
MOST EXCELLENT (BECAUSE) HE IS 
OMNISCIENT, 

WHO HAS FORM BUT IS UNIMPEDED AND 
OMNIPOTENT-- 

THE GREATLY COMPASSIONATE ONE WHO 
SAVES THE WORLD-- 

AND TO THE ESSENCE AND MARKS OF HIS 
BODY, THE SEA OF DHARMA ESSENCE AND 
SUCHNESS, 

TO THE STOREHOUSE OF LIMITLESS VIRTUE, 
(AND TO) THE REAL PRACTICES. 

(Running Commentary) 
(On the words "OFFERING UP MY LIFE, I RETURN TO...") 

There are two (aspects to the verses on the author's) 
returning with reverence (to the Three Treasures with 
which the text) begins. The two phrases, "(offering up 
my) life" and "I return to..." are the returner's charac- 
teristics. (The part) following "(pervades) all the ten 
directions" indicates the merit of that to which return 

34 As to the returner's characteristics, "I 

is made. 
return to..." has two meanings: "(I) revere and obey," 
and "(I) advance quickly toward." "Life" means the 
Faculty of life, which controls all (other) faculties. 
The essence of the body is nothing but life, (which) is 
the lord (of the body). Nothing is valued by all living 
beings more than that (i.e., life). (Now,) by offering 

95 

up this one life to the Supreme Lord, (the author) 

135 

shows utmost faith. Therefore, (the author) said, 
"Offering up (my) life, I return to..." 

In addition, "Offering up my life, I return to..." 
means to return to the Source. The reason is that al- 

though the six faculties’® 

derive from One Mind, (they) 
repudiate (their) source and chase after the six objects. ?/ 
Now, with (one's) whole life (one should) totally with- 
draw the six senses’ ® (from their illusorv objects) and 
return (them) to their origin which is the source of One 
Mind. Therefore, (the author) said, "(Offering up my) 

nt 

life, I return to... Because the One Mind to which (one) 
returns is nothing but the Three Treasures, (one returns 

to it).?? 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

(The part) following "(pervades) all the ten direc- 
tions" indicates the virtues of (the Three Treasures) to 
which the author returns. At this point, the meaning of 
"Three Treasures" should be explained. (But its) meaning 
(will be) explained later. 

Now, (let us) proceed to analyze the (rest of) the 
sentence, which mentions the Three (Treasures): (1) 
Buddha, (2) Dharma, (3) Sangha. 

(1. On the Buddha Treasure) 

(The part of the sentence) referring to (the Buddha) 
Treasure has three significations: (a) praising the 
excellence of (Buddha's) mind: (b) praising the excellence 
of (Buddha's) form; (c) concluding the praises of the 

person. 

136 

(a. On praising the excellence of Buddha's mind) 
In praising the excellence of "Buddha's) mind, (one) 

: 8 . 1 
is praising operation and essence.129 

On the words "WHO (PERVADES) ALL THE TEN DIRECTIONS, 
WHOSE ACTS ARE MOST EXCELLENT" 

This praises the operation of acts, which refers to 
the act of transforming sentient beings as made apparent 

by the eight marks? °1 

(of Buddha's life), etc. Through- 
out the world of ten directions ,+°? by penetrating the 
three worlds of time (past, present and future, and) in 
accompanying all (beings) to be transformed, (Buddha) 
dees all Budéha's work. Therefore, it is said, "who 
(pervades) all the ten directions, whose acts are most 

excellent." As the Abhidharmasamuccayavyakha says, 1°? 

(Buddha's) acts are said to be great 

because until the world of samsara 

is extinguished (Buddha, in) show-= 

ing (himself) everywhere, (in) bring- 

ing about wisdom, etc., will perform 

all of Buddha's broad (and) great 

work. 
That (text) illustrates (what is meant by "whose acts are 
most excellent" by referring to) the three (temporal) 
worlds; this (text, however) likens (what is meant by 
"whose acts are most excellent" to) the ten (spatial) 
directions. 

On the word "OMNISCIENT" 
woe WES OVENS OC LENG 

This (word) extols the essence of wisdom. The 

137 

reason the overation of acts pervades the ten directions 
is that nowhere does the essence of his (i.e., Buddha's) 
wisdom not penetrate. The essence of wisdom pervadingly 
penetrates. Hence the word, "omniscient." 
As the Mahayanasamgraha-Sastra says,+°4 
Just as space penetrates all boundaries 
of form without the changes of arising, 
dwelling, (decaying and) ceasing, 
so also does the Tathagata's wisdom, 
because it penetrates everything to be 
known without being distorted or changed. 
On Praising the Excellence of (Buddha's) Mind Ends. 
(b>. On praising the excellence of Buddha's form) 
(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 
There are also two aspects to this. "Unimpeded" 
extols the marvelousness of the essence of (Buddha's) form. 
The word “omnipotent” extols the excellence of the opera- 
tion of (Buddha's) form. 
(On the word "UNIMPEDED") 
The foregoing words "essence of (Buddha's) form" 
(refer to) the Tathagata's physical body which was acquired 
(as the result of verforming) myriad actions and mysterious- 
ly permeates. (Therefore,) although (the Buddha) has 
Marvelous form, (he) is unimoeded. Not one (of Buddha's) 
marks, not one (of his) excellences is bounded or limited. 
Therefore, the word "unimpeded" is applied. As the 

105 

Avatamsaka-sutra says, "If sought, the furthest limit 

of space could be found, (but even) one of Buddha's pores 
is boundless." Because Buddha's excellence is so 

mysterious, it is called the Tathagata's pure wisdom. 

138 

Although unimpeded, (Buddha) does, however, have the 
aspects of (having) direction and location. Therefore, 

he acquired the name "(he who has) form but is unimpeded." 
On the word "OMNIPOTENT" 

(This word) extols the operation of (Buddha's) form. 
(This) means the mutual operation of the five faculties, 1° 
the mutual action of the ten bodies, 1°? etc. Hence the 
words, "who has form but is...ommipotent."” (What is meant 
by) the mutual operation of the five faculties is like the 
explanation (given) in the eighth chapter of the Maha- 

parinirvana-stitra on the eight omnipotencies.1 

(What 
is meant by) the mutual action of the ten bodies is like 
the explanation (given) in the Avatamsaka-sttra's "Ten 
Stages" chapter. 29? 

On Praising the Excellence of (Buddha's) Form Ends. 
-On the words "THE GREATLY COMPASSIONATE ONE WHO SAVES 
THE WORLD" 

These (words) introduce (the third section of “On 
the Buddha Treasure," namely) on concluding the praises 
of the verson. 

(c. On concluding the praises of the person) 

Buddha, like the great elder (in the third chapter 
of the Saddharmapundarika-sttra), regards (all) sentient 
beings as his sons and enters the burning house of the 
three worlds to save (the people who are) suffering in 

110 

the fire. Hence the words, "who saves the world." 

139 

The merit of saving the world (consists in) precisely 
this great compassion. It is compassion which does not 
distinguish between self and others. It is unconditional 
compassion. Of all compassions it is the most excellent: 
hence the words, "greatly compassionate." 

Of the myriad virtues associated with the stage of 
Buddhahood, the Tathagata uses only great compassion as 
(his) strength. Therefore, by solely referring to this, 

(this treatise) shows people (what) Buddha (is). As the 

Ekottaragama says:ttt 

The strength of (people, be they) world- 
lings or saints, is of six kinds. What 

are these six? (1) Babies use crying as 
(their) strength. When they have something 
to say it is necessary that they should 
first cry. (2) Women use anger as (their) 
strength. Having become angry, they say 
what there is to say. (3) Monks and 
Brahmanas use patience as (their) strength. 
Having always considered themselves lower 
than others, they speak. (4) Kings use 
arrogance as (their) strength. Using this 
tremendous power they utter their pronounce- 
ments. (5) Arhats, using versistent effort 
as (their) strength, state their case. 

(6) All Buddhas, the World-honored ones, 
use great compassion as (their) strength 
inasmuch as they greatly benefit (ali) 
sentient beings. 

From this (we) know that all Buddhas use great 
compassion as (their) power exclusively. Therefore, in 
order to indicate (what manner of) man (Buddha is, the 
treatise) calls (him) "greatly compassicnate one." 

With the preceding three phrases, the praise of 

the Buddha Treasure ends. The next two phrases clarify 

the Dharma Treasure. -t? 

(2. On the Dharma Treasure) 

140 

On (the words) "AND TO THE ESSENCF AND MARKS OF HIS BODY" 

(These words) refer to the Tathagata's body, which 

was treated above. (This body) is nothing but the reward 

(body of) Buddha which (in turn) is nothing but the 

dharma realm. Therefore, (the treatise) says that (the 

dharma realm) is the essence and marks of his body. Thus, 

while (ostensibly) referring to Buddha, (the treatise 
is actually) alluding to his dharma. The next phrase 

(proceeds) to explicitly mention the essence and marks 

of the Dharma Treasure.-?? 

On the words "DHARMA ESSENCE" 
This indicates Nirvana which is dharma's original 

essence; hence (Nirvana) is called dharma essence. As 

the Mahavrajnaparamita-Sastra says: 174 

Dharma is called Nirvana hecause it 
lacks any sort of conceptual play; 
essence is called the original seed. 
For example, a gold bearing stone has 
the essence of gold while a silver 
bearing stone has the essence of 
Silver. 

Just like this, in all dharmas there is contained the 

essence of Nirvana. Hence the words, "dharma essence.' 

On the word "SUCHNESS" 
"Such-" denotes (that there is) nothing to be 

eliminated; "-ness" denotes (that there is) nothing to 

116 

be established. As a later passage (from the 

141 

“ 

treatise) says, +t! 
This essence of Suchness does not have 
anything which can be eliminated because 
all dharmas are altogether real. Also, 
there is nothing which can be established 
because all dharmas are exactly the same. 
(One) must perceive that all dharmas are 
incapable of being explained or thought 
about. Hence the name "Suchness." 

On the word "SEA" 

(Here) dharma is clarified by means of a simile. 
Briefly speaking, "sea" has four significations: l. great 
depth; 2. breadth and greatness; 3. (containing) all 
limitless treasures; 4. reflecting myriad images. (One) 
must realize that the great sea of Suchness is also like 
this, because it permanently terminates all mistakes, 
because it includes everything, because there is no merit 
which it does not possess, (and) because there is no 
image which does not appear (in it). Hence the words, 
“the sea of dharma essence and Suchness." As the Avatam- 
saka-sutra says, 118 

Just like the deep, great ocean 

(in which) precious treasures are 
inexhaustible (and) in which all 
images and forms of sentient beings 
are completely reflected, (so in) the 
sea of very profound causes and con- 
ditions (there are) inexhaustible 
treasures of merit, (and) in the 
pure body of dharma there is no image 
which does not appear. 

On praising the Dharma Treasure ends. 

(3. On the Sangha Treasure) 

The next two phrases praise the Sangha Treasure. 119 

142 

On the words "THE STOREHOUSE OF LIMITLESS VIRTUE" 
NS UE ie tbh VIERIUES 

(These words) indicate people by referring to (their) 
virtue. That is to say, in performing one action, the 

DaSabhutmika Bodhisattvas, +79 

(for example,) accomplish 
myriad actions. Each one of those actions is equal to 
the dharma realm and is limitless because it is the re- 
sult of the accumulation of merits. Hence the words, 
“limitless virtue." Such virtue belongs only to Bodhi- 
Sattvas, (yet) anyone can have (such ) virtue.1!, 
Therefore, (people) are called "the storehouse." 

On the concluding words "REAL PRACTICES" 

(These words) are in praise of the virtue of practice. 

According to the Mahayanottaratantra~$astra, +77 right, 

essential wisdom??3 

is called real practice; wisdom which 

is obtained later! is called perfected practice. Now, 

the words "real practice" designate right, essential wisdom. 
The final magn t25 (of "nractices") refers to wisdom which 

is obtained later. If (we) base (our interpretation on) 

the explanation (given) in the Dharmasangiti-sutra, /7° 
then all the myriad vractices from beginning to end are 
completely included in (what is meant by) the two phrases 
"real practice" and "diligence." As that sutra says ,*?/ 
“real practice" refers to the vow of producing wisdom; 
“diligence” refers to the vow or fulfilling wisdom. 
Furthermore, "real practice" means to practice giving, 

while "diligence" means not to seek (its) reward. Thus, 

143 

by keeping the pure precepts, no-retreat is achieved; by 
practicing patience the seal of non-arising is attained; 
while seeking all roots of gocdness there is no tiredness; 
by abandoning all conditioned affairs meditation is prac- 
ticed without there being abiding in meditation; (and,) 
while accomplishing wisdom the conceptual play of dharma 
is not indulged in. 

"Real practice" and "diligence" may be interpreted 
in this way. This could be explained at greater length. 
Here, the words "real practice" include the vow of prod- 
ucing wisdom up to (the vow of) fulfilling wisdom. The 
final "-s" (of "practices") refers to diligence, which 
is nothing but the vow of fulfilling wisdom up to (the 
vow of) not indulging in the conceptual play of dharma. 

(The explanation of) returning with reverence to 
the Three Treasures ends here. 

(Treatise) 
BECAUSE I WISH TO CAUSE SENTIENT 
BEINGS TO ELIMINATE DOUBTS AND FORSAKE 
WRONG ATTACHMENTS, AND IN ORDER TO 

AWAKEN (IN THEM) RIGHT MAHAYANA FAITH 
SO THAT THE BUDDHA SEED NOT PERISH...128 

(Running Commentary) 

This (passage) states the basic reasons for writing 
the treatise. There are two basic reasons for writing the 
treatise, and no more. The first half (of this passage) 
illustrates (the author's desire) to save sentient beings; 

the second half demonstrates (his desire) to broaden 

144 

Buddha's way .77? 

Sentient beings fall into the sea of life and death 
for so long and do not hasten to the shore of Nirvana 
only because of doubts and wrong attachments. Therefore, 
the essence of (what is) here (meant by) saving sentient 
beings is causing (them) to eliminate (their) doubts and 
forsake (their) wrong attachments. (Although) there are 
Many avenues (of approach) to a general discussion of 
doubt, two things (specifically) are doubted by those seek- 
ing Mahayana. The first is doubting the principle, which 
prevents the production of (wisdom) mind; the second is 
doubting the method, which prevents practice. 

The words “doubting the principle" mean creating this 
doubt: is the essence of the principle of Mahayana one 
or many? If it is one, then no other principle exists. 
Because no other principle exists, then no sentient being 

130 (Then) for whose sake should the Bodhisattva 

131 

exists. 
make the great vow? If there are many principles, 
then there is not one essence. Because there is not one 
essence, the thing and I are sevarate (from) each (other). 
(Then) how can (one) get the great compassion (by which 
one regards others) as his own body to arise? Due to 
these doubts, (people) are unable to produce (wisdom) mind. 
As to (what is meant by) saying "dcubting the method," 

if the teaching method established by the Tathagata is 

manifold, then according to which method should one 

145 

first start practicing? If all may be depended on, then 
(one) cannot immediately enter (the way). If (one may) 
depend on one or two, which is to be ignored and which 
is to be followed? Because of such doubts, (people) are 
unable to start practicing. Therefore, for the sake of 
eliminating these two doubts (the author) here establishes 
the principle of Gne Mind and reveals (its) two aspects. 
Establishing the principle of One Mind causes that 
first doubt to be eliminated. (It) clarifies that the 
principle of Mahayana is only One Mind; apart from One 
Mind there is absolutely no other principle. Only because 
of ignorance are (people) deluded as to their own One 
Mind, which causes all (sorts) of illusion and trans- 

Migration through the six destinies to arise??? 

Although 
the waves of the six destinies arise, they do not exist 
except in the sea of One Mind. Indeed, it is due to the 
movement of One Mind that the six destinies are created. 
Therefore, it is possible to make the vow of saving all 
(sentient beings). (Also,} the six destinies do not exist 
except in One Mind; therefore, (one) can make the great 
compassion (by which one regards others) as his own body 
arise. (By thinking) like this (one) eliminates doubts 
and can produce Great Mina.133 
The revelation of two asnects (in One Mind) removes 

the second doubt. It clarifies that although teaching 

methods are many, there are not more than two methods in 

146 

first beginning to practice. Based on the aspect of 
Suchness the practice of Tranquilizationt=4 is cultivated, 
and based on the aspect of arising and ceasing the prac- 

tice of Clear Observation!?> 

is begun. If both Tranquili- 
zation and Clear Observation are practiced, myriad prac- 
tices are thereby performed. If (one) embarks on these 
two methods. (one) is practicing all other methods. (By 
thinking) like this (one) eliminates doubts and can begin 
to practice. 

On (the words) "FORSAKE WRONG ATTACHMENTS” 

There are two (kinds of) wrong attachment: attachment 
to persons and attachment to concepts. A later part (of 
the treatise) will exvlain the meaning o£ forsaking these 
two. 

(STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS) 

(The first half of the passage illustrating the 
author's desire to) save sentient beings ends here. The 
following twe phrases (demonstrate the author's desire) 
to broaden Buddha's way. 

(On the words “AWAKEN (IN THEM) RIGHT MAHAYANA FAITH") 

| By eliminating these two extremes of doubt (discussed 
above), one can awaken certain faith. (Then one can) 
believe and understand that Mahayana is only One Mind. 
Hence the words, "awaken (in them) right Mahayana faith." 
(On the words "THE BUDDHA SEED NOT PERISH") 

Having forsaken the previously (mentioned) discrimi- 

nations (which arise as a result) of the two (kinds of) 

147 

attachment, (one) obtains the wisdom of non-discrimination, 
is born into the Tathagata's family, and is able to take 
Buddha's place. Hence the words, "the Buddha seed not 

perish." As the treatise! 76 

explains, in the great sea 
of Buddha's teaching faith is (that by which one) can 
enter; wisdom (is that by which) one can be saved. There- 
fore, by mentioning faith and wisdom, (the author) clari- 
fies (what is meant by) broadening Buddha's way. 

At the beginning of the verse it says "because;" 
later, (at the beginning of) the concluding (part) it 

137 

says "in order to." (This) is in order to illustrate 

that (the author) had two reasons for writing this 

treatise. 
"On (the author's) stating (his) intention to return 
with reverence (to the Three Treasures)" ends. 
(B. On what comorises the main body of this treatise) 
(STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS) 

Prom here begins the second (part) of the treacise, 
Which properly comprises its main body. There are three 
(sections) in this part. The first indicates the doctrine 
(which will be) established throughout (the treatise); 
the second enumerates the chapters; the third is the 
interpretation divided by chapter. (These) sections are 
(easily) discernible (from the treatise itself). 

(1. On the doctrine which will be established through- 
Out the treatise) 

(Treatise) 

> 
(I) DECLARE? °8 THAT THERE IS A 

PRINCIPLE WHICH CAN AROUSE THE ROOT 

148 

OF MAHAYANA FAITH. THEREFORE, (I) 
MUST EXPLAIN (IT). 

(Running Commentary) 

The words "there is a principle" which begin the first 
(section of this part of the treatise) refer to the prin- 
ciple of One Mind. If people are able to understand this 
principle, they are bound to arouse the broad and great 
root of faith. Hence the words, "which can arouse the 
root of Mahayana faith." The marks of the root of faith 
are like (the description of faith given in) the explana- 
tion of the title. When the root of faith is established, 
(one) immediately enters Buddha's way. Having entered 
Buddha's way, (one) obtains inexhaustible treasure. Such 
a great benefit (can be) obtained if (one) relies on 
(the teaching of this) treatise. Therefore, (the prin- 
ciple) must be explained. 

"On the doctrine (which will be) established through- 
out (the treatise)" ends here. 

(2. On enumerating the Chapters) 

(Treatise) 
THE EXPLANATION IS IN FIVE CHAPTERS. 
WHAT ARE THE FIVE? CHAPTER ONE IS ON 
REASONS (FOR WRITING THE TREATISE); 
CHAPTER TWO IS ON ESTABLISHING (WHAT 
MAHAYANA) MEANS: CHAPTER THREE IS 
THE EXPLANATION (OF THE PRINCIPLE OF 
MAHAYANA); CHAPTER FOUR IS ON PRAC- 
TICING FAITH; CHAPTER FIVE IS THE 
EXHORTATION TO PRACTICE (INDICATING) 

THE BENEFITS (TO BE DERIVED THERE- 
FROM) .139 

149 

(Running Commentary) 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 
(The words,) "is in five chapters" refer to the 

number of chapters. After (the words,) "what are the 
five)?" the names of the chapters are enumerated. 

On (the first) chapter, "On Reasons (for Writing the 

Treatise) " 

Without reasons, one (can)not begin (writing) a 
treatise, because the wise man must of necessity know 
first what is to be done (before he may do it). 

On (the second) chapter, "On Establishing (what Maha- 
yana) Means" 

When reasons (for writing) have been stated, (one) 
should (then proceed to) establish the right meaning, 
because until (the meaning) has been definitively estab- 

lished, the essence of a doctrine cannot be known. 

On (the third) chapter, "The Explanation (of the Principle 
of Mahayana)" 

Once a doctrine has been precisely established, it 
must be followed by a comprehensive explanation, because 
where an explanation is lacking, meaning and principle 
are difficult to understand. 

On (the fourth) chapter, "On Practicing Faith" 

Based on the explanation (of the principle of Maha- 
yana) faith will arise; (this faith) must (then) be put 
into practice, because to have understanding without prac- 

tice is not in accord with the intent of (this) treatise. 

150 

On (the fifth) chapter, "The Exhortation to Practice 
(Indicating) the Benefits (to be Derived Therefrom)" 

Even if shown the principle and methods for practic- 
ing faith, those whose roots of goodness are weak are 
unwilling to start practicing. Therefore, by indicating 
the benefits (to be derived from practice, the author) 
exhorts (those people) on the necessity of practice. 
Hence the words, "the exhortation to practice (indicating) 
the benefits (to be derived therefrom) ." 

3. On the interpretation divided by chapter 

(STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS) 

Beginning from here (the treatise) is (divided into) 
five chapters. 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

There are two (parts) to the first (chapter). The 
first is the title; the second explains the (reasons for 
writing). 

(Treatise) 

FIRST, (I SHALL) EXPLAIN THE CHAPTER 
ON REASONS (FOR WRITING THE TREATISE). 

(Running Commentary) 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

In (the chapter) explaining the reasons (for writing) 
there are two (pairs of) questions and answers. The first 
(answer) is a direct explanation; the second eliminates 
doubts. 

(a. The direct explanation) 

(Treatise) 

QUESTICN: WHAT REASONS ARE THERE FOR 
WRITING THIS TREATISE? 

151 

ANSWER: THE REASONS ARE EIGHT. 
WHAT ARE THE EIGHT? 

THE FIRST CHARACTERIZES (MY) REASONS 
IN GENERAL. NAMELY, (I WRITE) IN ORDER 
TO CAUSE SENTIENT BEINGS TO FREE THEM- 
SELVES FROM ALL SUFFERING AND OBTAIN 
ULTIMATE HAPPINESS: IT IS NOT BECAUSE 
(I) SEEK FAME, PROFIT OR RESPECT FROM 
THE WORLD. 

THE SECOND IS BECAUSE (I) WANT 
TO EXPLAIN THE FUNDAMENTAL MEANING OF 
THE TATHAGATA'S (TEACHING) IN ORDER 
TO CAUSE ALL SENTIENT BEINGS TO 
UNDERSTAND CORRECTLY AND AVOID ERROR. 

THE THIRD IS TO CAUSE SENTIENT 
BEINGS WHOSE ROOTS OF GOODNESS ARE 
DEVELOPED TO UPHOLD THE TEACHINGS OF 
MAHAYANA AND NOT BACKSLIDE IN FAITH. 

THE FOURTH IS TO CAUSE SENTIENT 
BEINGS WHOSE ROOTS OF GOODNESS ARE 
SMALL TO PRACTICE FAITH. 

THE FIFTH IS TO MAKE KNOWN AN 
EXPEDIENT MEANS THAT BREAKS THE BONDS 
OF EVIL KARMA, GUARDS THE MIND WELL, 
ELIMINATES FOLLY AND PRIDE, AND 
(ENSURES) ESCAPE FROM THE NET OF 
WRONG (THINKING AND BEHAVIOR). 

THE SIXTH IS TO MAKE KNOWN (HOW) 
TO PRACTICE TRANQUILIZATION AND CLEAR 
OBSERVATION IN ORDER TO CORRECT THE 
MENTAL FAULTS OF ORDINARY PEOPLE AND 
HINAYANISTS. 

THE SEVENTH IS TO MAKE KNOWN AN 
EXPEDIENT MEANS OF SINGLE-MINDED CHANT-— 
ING WHEREBY (ONE MAY) BE BORN IN 
BUDDHA'S PRESENCE AND CAN BE CERTAIN 
OF NOT BACKSLIDING IN FAITH. 

THE EIGHTH IS TO MAKE KNOWN THE 
BENEFITS OF PRACTICE AND THE EXHORTA- 
TION THERETO. 

FOR SUCH REASONS (I MUST) WRITE 
(THIS) TREATISE. 

(Running Commentary) 
(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 
The question can be seen at the beginning (of the 

passage). The answer has three (parts): (1) the general 
signification; (2) the specific explanation: (3) the 

152 

general conclusion. Of the eight reasons (given) in the 
second (part), the specific explanation, the first 
characterizes (the author's) reasons in general (while) 
the next seven specifically describe (those) reasons. 

(i. On the General Signification) 

(On the first reason) 

The words “characterizes...in general" in the (state- 
ment of the) first (reason) have two meanings: 1. all 
Bodhisattvas have things to do, all of which are in order 
to cause sentient beings to free themselves from suffer- 
ing and obtain happiness. (This reason) is not (operative) 
solely in the writing of this treatise; hence the words, 
“characterizes...in general." 2. Although (with) this 
reason (the author) hopes to lead into the (second) 
chapter, "On Establishing (what Mahayana) Means," yet 
the chapter, "On Establishing (what Mahayana) Means," 

(was written) solely for the purpose of providing a basis 
for the (third) chapter, "The Explanation (of the Principle 
of Mahayana), etc. (Therefore,) this reason aiso leads 
into them. Therefore, on the basis of these implications 
(inherent in the first reason), a further understanding (of 
the words,) “characterizes...in general," (is possible). 

The words, “to free themselves from all suffering," 
mean (to be free from) all suffering (caused by) change 

. . . 140 
and discrimination. 

"Ultimate happiness" (means) the 
happiness of peerless wisdom and the great liberation. 

Not seeking from the world (means) not hoping to enjoy the 

153 

wealth of men nor that of heaven in the next life. Not 
seeking fame, profit, or respect (means) not seeking 

141 The next 

things which are ephemeral, empty and false. 
seven reasons are specific, because while (the first shows) 
only what provided the primary reason (for writing) this 
treatise, the next seven give the specific secondary 
reasons. 
(ii. On the Specific Explanation) 
On the second reason 

The (third) chapter, "The Explanation (of the Prin- 
ciple of Mahayana), has three sections. (The second 
reason was established) to provide the reason for (the 
first) two (of these sections), namely, “Revelation of 
Right Meaning” and "Correction of Wrong Attachments." 
In "Revelation of Right Meaning" it says, "based on the 
principle of One Mind there are two aspects. Each of 
these two aspects completely embraces all dharmas." It 
must be known that (this) is exactly the fundamental mean- 
ing of all teachings uttered by the Tathagata, because 
within this One Mind and two aspects there is not a single 
principle or signification not included. Hence the words, 
"because (I) want to explain the fundamental meaning of 
the Tathagata's (teaching)." 

The second (section of the third chapter), "Correction 
of Wrong Attachments," (was written) to cause sentient 

beings to forsake the two kinds of wrong attachment: 

154 

(belief in the. own-being of) persons and (belief in the 
own-being of) dharmas. Hence the words, "in order to cause 
all sentient beings to understand correctly and avoid 
error." 
On the third reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for what is said in the third section of the (third) chap- 
ter, "The Explanation (of the Principle of Mahayana) ." 
That section, "Clarification of the Way to be Followed," 
(was written) to cause men of sharp faculties to produce 
(wisdom) mind without fail and advance along the Great 
Way, 14? and to make them cavable of remaining in a state 
of not backsliding (in faith). Hence the words, "to 
cause (sentient beings whose) roots of goodness...not 
backslide in faith." 
On the fourth reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for what is said about the four kinds of faith at the 
beginning of the next chapter, "On Practicing Faith," 
as well as (what is said about) the (first) four (of 
the five) practices. Hence the words, "to cause...to 
practice faith." 
On the fifth reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for approximately five lines explaining the method of 

removing obstacles (occurring) after the end (of the 

155 

description of) the (first) four practices following the 
statement, “furthermore, even though a man practice faith, 
because he has obstacles (which arise as the result) of 
much heavy evil karma pursuing (him) from former lives..."+47 
Hence the words, “to make known an exvedient means that 
breaks the bonds of evil karma...and (ensures) escape 
from the net of wrong (thinking and behavior)." 
On the sixth reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for approximately three parts (of the fourth chapter, "On 
Practicing Faith"), from (the line) stating, "how to 
practice Tranquilization and Clear Observation" to (the 
line stating), "if (either) Tranquilization or Clear 
Observation is wanting, then (one) cannot enter the way 

144 Hence the words, "practice Tranquilization 

of Wisdom." 
and Clear Observation...Hinayanists." 
On the seventh reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for approximately eight lines encouraging (the desire) 
to be born in the Pure Land (occurring) at the end of 
the (fourth) chapter, "On Practicing Faith," following 
the statement, "furthermore, people beginning to learn 

n145 Hence the words, "to make known an 

this teaching... 
expedient means of single-minded chanting whereby (one 

may) be born in Buddha's presence..." 

156 

On the eighth reason 

(This reason was established) to provide the reason 
for the fifth chapter, "The Exhortation to Practice 
(Indicating) the Benefits (to be Derived Therefrom) ." 
Hence the words, “to make known the benefits of practice 
and the exhortation thereto." 

(iii. On the General Conclusion) 

The final words, "for such reasons (I must) write 
(this) treatise," (constitute) the third (part of the 
first answer explaining the reasons for writing, namely, 
the direct explanation). 

The direct explanation of the reasons (for writing) 
ends here. 

(b. The elimination of doubts) 
(Treatise) 

QUESTION: IN THE SUTRAS THIS PRINCIPLEL?® 
IS PRESENTED IN DETAIL. WHY DO YOU HAVE 
TO EXPLAIN IT AGAIN? 

ANSWER: ALTHOUGH THIS PRINCIPLE IS PRESENTED 
IN THE SUTRAS (I MUST EXPLAIN IT) BECAUSE 
PEOPLE'S CAPACITIES AND (ABILITY TO) 
PRACTICE ARE NOT THE SAME; CONSEQUENTLY, 
THE CONDITIONS OF THEIR ACCEPTANCE AND 
UNDERSTANDING ARE DIFFERENT. THAT IS TO 
SAY, WHEN THE TATHAGATA WAS IN THE WORLD, 
PEOPLE WERE SHARP AND THE TEACHER WAS 
EXCELLENT IN HIS PHYSICAL AND MENTAL, 
CONDUCT. THE PERFECT VOICEL47 spoxE 

ONCE AND DIFFERENT KINDS (OF PEOPLE) 
UNDERSTOOD EQUALLY (WELL). CONSEQUENTLY, 
NO TREATISE WAS NEEDED. HOWEVER, SINCE 
THE TATHAGATA'S DEATH (THE SITUATION 

HAS CHANGED): SOME (PEOPLE) ARE ABLE BY 
THEIR OWN POWER TO UNDERSTAND (THE TEACH- 
ING) THROUGH LISTENING EXTENSIVELY: SOME 
(PEOPLE) ARE ABLE, ALSO BY THEIR OWN 
POWER, TO UNDERSTAND MUCH THROUGH 

157 

LISTENING A LITTLE: SOME PEOPLE LACK 
MENTAL POWER OF THEIR OWN BUT OBTAIN 
UNDERSTANDING THROUGH (READING) 
EXTENSIVE TREATISES. BUT THERE ARE 
ALSO SOME PEOPLE WHO, REGARDING THE 
WORDINESS OF EXTENSIVE TREATISES AS 
ANNOYING, PREFER GENERAL COMPENDIA 
TERSE IN STYLE BUT RICH IN MEANING, 
BY MEANS OF WHICH THEY ARE ABLE TO 
UNDERSTAND (THE TEACHING). THUS, BE-. 
CAUSE THIS TREATISE AIMS AT COM-- 
PREHENSIVELY EMBRACING THE LIMITLESS 
MEANING OF THE TATHAGATA'S BROAD, GREAT 
AND PROFOUND TEACHING, IT MUST BE 
WRITTEN. 

(Running Commentary) 

The (answer of) the second (pair of) questions and 
answers {in the chapter explaining the reasons for writing 
aims at) eliminating doubts. The words of the question, 
"In the sutras this principle is presented in detail," 
mean that the principles upon which what is discussed in 
the preceding eight reasons is based, for example, from 
the principle (and its) meaning (in the second) chapter, 
"On Establishing (what Mahayana) Means," to the principle 
of benefit indicated (in the last) chapter, “The Exhorta- 
tion to Practice (Indicating) the Benefits (to be Derived 

wT 

Therefrom) -- all such principles are completely ex- 
plained in the sutras. All of them are (designed) to 
cause people to free themselves from suffering and obtain 
happiness. But still (the author) persists in writing 
this treatise and repeating what is explained in those 

teachings. How is he not to be regarded as seeking fame, 

profit, etc.? Because of this the treatise says, "Why 

158 

do you have to explain it again?" This creates doubt by 
raising a question. The answer has three (parts): (first,) 
a brief response; (second,) an extensive explanation; 
third, a brief concluding response. 

(i. The Brief Response) 

The words of the answer, "Although this principle is 
presented in the sutras," refer to the (precedins) 
interrogatory ohrase. (The words,) "capacities and 
(ability to) practice are not the same: consequently, the 
conditions of their acceptance and understanding are 
different," eliminate doubts. Although there is no dif- 
ference between the principles expounded in the sitras 
and (those expounded in the) treatises, nevertheless, the 
capacity and conduct of those (now desirous of) accepting 
and understanding (them) are not the same (as they were 
before). There are some who rely on the sutras (but have) 
no need of the treatises; there are some who rely on the 
treatises (but have) no need of the sttras. Therefore, 
for that (last group of) people (this) treatise must be 
written. Such is the intent of the answer. 

ii. The Extensive Explanation 

There are two (parts) to (the extensive explanation). 
The first clarifies the fact that when Buddha was in the 
world both teacher and audience were excellent; the second 
illustrates that after the Tathagata's death (the people's) 

Capacity and condition (to accept and understan@ the 

159 

teaching) were different (from what they were before). 
The words in the first (part), "when the Tathagata was 

in the world, people were sharp," clarifies the excellence 
of the audience. (The words), "the teacher was excellent 
in his physical and mental conduct" illustrate the 
teacher's excellence. (The words), "the perfect voice 
spoke once" attests to the excellence of the speaker. 
(The words), "different kinds (of people) understood 
equally (well)" attests to the audience's excellence. 
(The words), "no treatise was needed" concludes (the ex- 
planation) of the meaning of excellence (by showing how 
it applies to) both (teacher and audience). 

The words, "the perfect voice," (mean) nothing but 
the one voice, and the one voice (is nothing but) the 
perfect voice. What does this mean? Since ancient times 
the explanation of each scholar has varied (on this issue) .+78 
(One) scholar will insist that all Buddhas are nothing but 
the embodiment of the first principle in which the myriad 
appearances are forever terminated. Formless and soundless 
(itseli, Buddha's voice, speaking) in direct accordance 
with (people's) capacities, manifests in limitiess forms 
and voices, just as an empty valley, (itself) soundless, 
echoes in accordance with (the kind of) shout (uttered 
within it). Consequently, (when one) speaks (of voice) 
in reference to Buddha, (one must say that) no voice is 

one (voice). (But when one) discusses (voice) in reference 

169 

to (people's) capacities, (one must say that) many voices 
are not one (voice). What does this mean? 

(The statement,) "one voice (is nothing but) the 
perfect voice” indeed results from the fact that at the 
same time and (at the) same assembly (people) of different 
levels understand equally (well). According to his 
capacity and nature each hears the one voice (he can 
understand) to the exclusion of the other voices (he does 
not understand), but (the assemblv) is neither disordered 
nor confused. (This) illustrates the marvellousness of 
this voice. Therefore it is called one voice. (This) 
voice (also) pervades the ten directions according to the 
maturity of (people's) capacity (to understand); nowhere 
is it not heard. Therefore it is called perfect voice. 
It is not to be confused with the void which pervades 
everywhere but lacks a distinctive rhyme or tune. As a 

sutra says, 179 

"according to their level (of understanding), 
the voice informs sentient beings everywhere." This is 
what is meant (by perfect voice). 

There is another explanation. (When one) speaks (of 
voice) in reference to Buddha, who really has form and 
voice, his voice is perfect. Nowhere does it not pervade. 
As (in his voice) there is no difference at all between 

50 

C and D (of the pentatonic scale) ,1 where is there to 

be found (from his voice) the distinction between the 

51 

even and the rising (tones) 2+ Because it does not vary 

its tune it is called "one voice." Because there is no- 
thing it does not pervade it is spoken of as perfect voice. 
Oniy due to this perfect voice are additional conditions??? 
(for understanding) created. According to the difference 
in (people's) capacities it appears as many voices, just 
as a full moon has only one round shape but appears as 
many images inasmuch as the containers (of water reflect- 
ing it) are different. (One) should know that the prin- 
ciple in question here is the same. As a sutra says,l>> 
"Buddha expounds the dharma with one voice, but each 
person understands (it) according to his level (of under- 
standing). 

There is another explanation. The Tathagata actually 
has many voices. (Therefore,) all people's voices are 
not excluded from the Tathagata's voice which (turns) the 
wheel of the Law. Only Buddha's voice is unhindered and 
unobstructed. (Therefore, in him) one is everything and 

154 

everything is one. Since (in him) everything is one, 

(his) is called the one voice. Since (in him) one is 
everything, (his) is called the perfect voice. As the 
Avatamsaka-sutra says, 

The way every sentient being (regards) 
spoken language is that once a word 

is spoken it is exhausted; nothing is 
left. Therefore, if he truly desires 
to completely understand the pure and 
subtle voice (of the Tathagata), the 
Bodhisattva will first produce (wisdom) 
mind." 

162 

Moreover, Buddha's voice is unimaginable and indes- 
cribable. One voice, when it speaks, is not only every 
voice, it also pervades everything equally. Now (let me) 
briefly indicate the six pairs which illustrate the marks 
of its equally pervading. 

First, (Buddha's one voice) equally (pervades) all 
sentient beings and all things; 

Second, (it) equally (pervades) all lands in the ten 
directions and all kalpas in the three time periods; 156 
Third, (it) equally (pervades) the Tathagata's 
entire response-body and Buddha's entire transformation- 

body;1?/ 

Fourth, (it) equally (pervades) all dharma worlds 
and the world of space; 

Fifth, (it) equally (pervades) the world of unhindered 
mutual enteringt>® and the world of limitless production; ?°9 
Sixth, (it) equally (pervades) the world of every 

action and the world of tranquility and liberation. 1®9 

(I) have explained these concepts following the 
Avatamsaka-sutra's three kinds of no-hindrance (doctrine) .+°1 
Each sound equally (pervades) these six pairs, but the 
voice is never confused. 

If there were something (described) in (one of) these 
Six pairs which the one voice did not pervade, then (it 

would simpiy be} voice; it would not be perfect. If, due 

to the fact that it equally pervades (the things described 

163 

in the six pairs, the voice) were to lose its tune, then 
(it would simply be) perfect; it would not be (one) 

voice. But in the present case (i.e., Buddha's) the tune 
is not destroyed yet (the voice) pervades (everything) 
equally; (the voice) does not stop pervading (everything 
equally) yet the rhyme (remains) distinct. Due to this 
principle (Buddha's voice) actually becomes perfect voice. 
This is not something to be fathomed by the thinking of 
the (ordinary) mind or consciousness because it is what 

is meant by the freedom of (Buddha's) Dharma body. Brief- 
ly speaking, this is what is meant by "one voice." But 
(let us) forego further discussion (of this point) and 
return (to the task of) interpreting the original sentences 
(of the treatise) .16? 

After this (i.e., the first part of the extensive 
explanation, clarifying the fact that when Buddha was in 
the world both teacher and audience were excellent,) the 
second part (of the extensive explanation begins,) clari- 
fying the fact that after Buddha's death (people's) capa- 
cities and actions were different (than they were before). 
Concerning this fact (one can} specifically discover 
(people having) four kinds of capacity. The first two 
are those who obtain understanding through relying on the 
sutras; the next two are those who rely on the treatises 
and then obtain understanding. The words, "are able by 

their own power to understand (the teaching) through 

164 

listening extensively," (refer to) the first (kind of 
rerson) who, since (he) understands the Buddha's meaning 
through listening to extensive sttras, does not need the 
treatises. Hence the words, "their own power." The 
words, “some (people) are able, also by their own power, 
to understand much through listening a little," (refer to) 
‘the second (kind of person) who, although not needing to 
listen extensively to the sentences of all the sitras, is 
able profoundly to understand the meaning of the sitras. 
(This kind of person) also does not need the treatises. 
Hence the words, "their own power." The words, "some 
people lack mental power of their own," (refer to) the 
third (kind of person) who, if (he) relies directly on 

the Buddhist sutras, cannot understand (the teaching). 

Hence the words, "lack...power." (But) with the help of 
(treatises such as) the Mahaprajtiaparamita-éastra,*°° the 

YogAcarabhimi-Sastra,*°4 etc., (this kind of person) can 

actually understand the meaning of what is expounded in 
the sutras. Hence the words, "but obtain understanding 
through (reading) extensive treatises." The words, "But 
there are also some people who, regarding the wordiness 
of extensive treatises as annoying..." (refer to) the 
fourth (kind of person) who, although sharp, (can)not 
endure the prolix. These people only rely on treatises 
whose style is concise but whose meanings are plentiful 

in order to deeply understand the message expounded in the 

165 

Buddhist sUtras. Hence the words, “prefer general com- 
pendia terse in style but rich in meaning, by means of 
which they are able to understand (the teaching)." Of 
these four (kinds of people), the first three (are not the 
kind of people for whom) the present (treatise) was written. 
What is written here is for the fourth (kind of) person. 
(iii. The General Conclusion) 

Following (the word) "thus" (there begins) the third 
(part of the answer), the general conclusion. The word 
"thus" indicates all four kinds of people (mentioned) pre- 
viously. (The rest of the sentence,) following (the word) 
"treatise," is specifically directed towards the fourth 
(kind of) person and conclusively clarifies the necessity 
of writing the treatise. Now, this treatise (fills) only 
one roll, (but) it contains the meaning of all the sitras 
without exception. Hence the words, "because (this treat- 
ise aims at) comprehensively embracing the limitless 
meaning of the Tathagata's broad, great and profound 
teaching..." That fourth type (of person) prefers the 
general compendium class (of writings). Relying only on 
a treatise (like) this (he) then can awaken to the Way. 
Because of this, therefore, (the author) says, "this 
treatise...must be written." 

(Treatise) 
(I) HAVE EXPLAINED THE CHAPTER ON 

REASONS (FOR WRITING THE TREATISE). 
NEXT (I SHALL) EXPUAIN THE CHAPTER 

166 

ON ESTABLISHING (WHAT MAHAYANA) MEANS. 
IN GENERAL, THERE ARE TWO WAYS OF 
EXPLAINING (THE TERM) "MAHAYANA." 

WHAT ARE THE TWO? THE FIRST IS (ACCORD- 
ING TO ITS) PRINCIPLE; THE SECOND IS 
(ACCORDING TO ITS) SIGNIFICATIONS. THE 
WORD "PRINCIPLE" MEANS THE MIND OF 
SENTIENT BEINGS. THIS MIND EMBRACES ALL 
DHARMAS IN THE MUNDANE AND SUPRAMUNDANE 
WORLDS. ON THE BASIS OF THIS MIND THE 
MEANING OF MAHAYANA IS REVEALED. WHY? 
BECAUSE THE SUCHNESS ASPECT OF THIS 
MIND SHOWS THE ESSENCE OF MAHAYANA, 
(WHILE) THE CAUSAL AND CONDITIONAL 
ASPECT OF THE ARISING AND CEASING OF 
THIS MIND CAN SHOW _THE ATTRIBUTES AND 
OPERATION OF MAHAYANA'S ESSENCE ITSELF. 

THE SIGNIFICATIONS (OF MAHAYANA) ARE 
THREE IN NUMBER. WHAT ARE THE THREE? 
FIRST IS THE GREATNESS OF (ITS) ESSENCE, 
WHICH MEANS THAT BECAUSE THE SUCHNESS OF 
ALL DHARMAS IS EQUAL, (IT) NEITHER IN- 
CREASES NOR DECREASES. SECOND IS THE 
GREATNESS OF (ITS) ATTRIBUTES, WHICH 
MEANS THAT THE MATRIX OF TATHAGATA IS 
COMPLETELY FILLED WITH THE IMMEASURABLE 
VIRTUES OF (BUDDHA) NATURE. THIRD IS 
THE GREATNESS OF (ITS) OPERATION, WHICH 
MEANS (THAT MAHAYANA) CAN GENERATE ALL 
GOOD CAUSES AND EFFECTS IN THE MUNDANE 
AND SUPRAMUNDANE WORLDS. 

BECAUSE (IT IS WHAT) ALL BUDDHAS 
WITHOUT EXCEPTION HAVE ORIGINALLY RIDDEN, 
AND BECAUSE ALL BODHISATTVAS WITHOUT 
EXCEPTION USE THIS PRINCIPLE TO REACH 
THE STAGE OF TATHAGATA, (IT IS CALLED 
A VEHICLE) .165 

(Running Commentary) 

The second chapter (of the treatise), "On Establishing 
(What Mahayana) Means," has two (parts). The first con- 
cludes the previous and begins the subsequent (discussion). 
The second (part) follows (the word) "Maha (yana)" and is 
the correct explanation which establishes the twe aspects, 

namely, the principle and the significations. "Principle" 

is the essential principle (indicated by the term) Maha- 
yana; "significations" (indicates) the meaning of (the 
term) "Mahayana." 

The principle, which is (mentioned) in the first 
(part of) "On Establishing (What Mahayana Means) ," 
initiates the part (of my commentary) on the essential 
principle, (which will be) explained first in the follow- 
ing explanation. The significations, which are (mentioned) 
in the second (part of) "On Establishing (What Mahayana 
Means)," initiate the part (of my commentary) on explain- 
ing the significations, beginning with "furthermore, the 
attributes of Suchness itself..." Concerning the prin- 
ciple, which (I shall) explain first, there are two more 
(principles) to be explained: the first is a general 
definition referring to the essence which begins the 
general explanation (appearing) first in the following 
explanation; the second is a specific definition based 
on the aspects which begins the specific explanation, 
beginning with the word "Suchness" in the following 
(explanation). 

(The words) at the beginning, "the word 'principle' 
means the mind of sentient beings," (mean that Mahayana) 
itself is named as principle. Now, in (the teaching) of 
Mahayana, no entity has an essence different (from that 
of any other entity); (all of them) use One Mind as their 

essence. Hence the words, "'principle'means the mind of 

168 

Sentient beings." The words, "this Mind embraces all" 
clarify that the principle of Mahayana is different from 
that of Hinayana.+©® Indeed, due to the fact that this 
Mind penetrates and embraces all entities, all entities 
themselves are simply One Mind. This is quite different 
from the Hinayana (principle) that all entities each have 
their own essence. Therefore, (the author) explains that 
One Mind is the principle of Mahayana. 

(On the words, "ON THE BASIS OF THIS MIND , THE MEANING OF 
MAHAYANA IS REVEALED") 

(The passage) following the question, "Why2"t? {con- 
Sists of) specifically establishing (the meaning of Maha- 
yana) on the basis of (its) aspects. This sentence ("On 
the basis of this Mind...") contains two meanings: (1) (the 
author) hopes that what precedes (it) will explain the 
meaning (of Mahayana) in general; (2) (he) hopes that 
what follows (the word, "Why?") will establish the specific 
aspects (of One Mind). Although Mind and dharmas are 
one, the meaning of "Mahayana" is broad. (One might ask,) 
"by what means, therefore, is the meaning of Mahayana 
directly to be revealed on the basis of this Mind?" Hence 
the word, "Why?" 

What follows (the word "Why?") explains the meaning 
(of Mahayana) by saying that although Mind and dharmas 
are one, nevertheless, (One Mind) has two aspects. The 

aspect of Suchness contains the essence of Mahayana; the 

169 

aspect of arising and ceasing contains (its) essence, 
attributes and operation. The meaning of Mahayana is not 
beyond these three. Therefore, it is on the basis of 

One Mind that the meaning of Mahayana is revealed. 

On the words, "SUCHNESS...OF THIS MIND" 

(This) is a general reference to the aspect of Such- 
ness, which will introduce the subsequent (part of the 
treatise) beginning with the passage, "...is nothing but. 
One Dharma World. "168 
On the next word, "ASPECT" 

(This word) refers to the marks of Suchness which will 
introduce the subsequent (part of the treatise) beginning 
with the passage, "furthermore, according to a linguistic 
analysis (of the term), there are two aspects. "1°? 
On the words, "ARISING AND CEASING OF THIS MIND" 

(This) is a general reference to the aspect of aris- 
ing and ceasing, which will introduce the subsequent (part 

170 "on the 

of the treatise) beginning with the passage, 
basis of the matrix of Tathagata, there exists the mind 
of arising and ceasing." 
On the words, "CAUSAL AND CONDITIONAL" 

(These words) refer to the causes and conditions of 
arising and ceasing, which will introduce the subsequent 
(part of the treatise) beginning with the passage, -/+ 

"furthermore, the causes and conditions of arising and 

ceasing..." 

170 

On the next word, "ASPECT" 
(This word) refers to the aspect of arising and ceas- 
ing which will introduce the subsequent (part of the 

treatise) beginning with the passage,+/? 

"furthermore, 
arising and ceasing..." 
On the words, "...CAN SHOW...MAHAYANA'S ESSENCE ITSELF" 

(These words) refer to the mind of Original Enlighten- 
ment within the aspect of arising and ceasing. (It) is 
both the essence and the cause of arising and ceasing. 
Therefore, it is present within the aspect of arising and 
ceasing. Although the essence of Mahayana is explicitly 
spoken of in (connection with) the aspect of Suchness, 
(that) selfsame essence is now discussed in (connection 
with) the aspect of arising and ceasing. There is a pro- 
found reason (for this). Its significance will be clari- 
fied (in the) subsequent (part of my) interpretation. 

On the words, "ATTRIBUTES AND OPERATION" 

(These words) have two meanings. First, (the causal 
and conditional aspect of this Mind's arising and ceasing) 
Can show the attributes of (Buddha) nature's immeasurable 
virtues (found) in the matrix of Tathagata, which is no- 
thing but what is meant by the greatness of the attributes 
(of Mahayana). Again, (the causal and conditional aspect 
of this Mind's arising and ceasing) shows the unimaginable 
and indescribable karmic operation of the matrix of Tatha- 

gata. This is what is meant by the greatness of the 

171 

operation (of Mahayana). 

Second, the attributes of what is made impure by 
Suchness are called the attributes (of Mahayana); the 
operation of what is rendered pure by Suchness is called 

(its) operation. As a subsequent passage (from the treat- 

ise) says,+/? 

THE PURE DHARMA OF SUCHNESS IS 

REALLY LACKING IN IMPURITY. IT IS 
ONLY BECAUSE OF PERMEATION BY 
IGNORANCE THAT IT HAS THE ATTRIBUTES 
OF IMPURITY. THE IMPURE DHARMA OF 
IGNORANCE IS ORIGINALLY LACKING IN 
PURITY. IT IS ONLY BECAUSE OF PERMEA- 
TION BY SUCHNESS THAT IT HAS THE 
OPERATION OF PURITY. 

"Section on Establishing the Principle" ends here. 

{Section on Establishing the Significations) 
(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

From here the second section, "On Establishing the 
Significations," begins, which also contains two (sub- 
sections): the first clarifies the meaning of "maha" 
("great"); the second illustrates the meaning of "yana" 
("vehicle"). This (section) also serves to_ introduce 
the subsequent part (of my) interpretationl/’4 (explaining 
the principle of Mahayana). On arriving at that point, 
again (the treatise and my interpretation) will be made 
to correlate with each other. 

Of the (three) significations of "maha," the greatness 
of essence is found in the aspect of Suchness; the two 
greatnesses of attributes and operation are found in the 
aspect of arising and ceasing. Within the aspect of arising 

and ceasing is contained the essence (of Mahayana) itself. 

172 

Only because (at this point in the treatise discussion of) 
the essence is subordinated to (discussion of) the attri- 
butes, (I will) not specifically discuss it (at this 
point in my commentary either). 
On the words, "THE MATRIX OF TATHAGATA IS COMPLETELY FILLED 
WITH THE IMMEASURABLE VIRTUES OF (BUDDHA) NATURE" 

Of the (first) two kinds of matrix, (these words 
refer to) the matrix of Tathagata which is non-empty, and 
of the (second) two kinds of matrix, (these words refer 
to) the matrix of Tathagata (which denotes that sentient 

beings) contain (the Tathagata within them) .t/° 

The signi- 

fication of the virtues of (Buddha) nature and the signi- 

fication of the greatness of operation shall be analyzed 

in detail in a later (part of my) interpretation.1/® 
Two phrases {of the treatise explain) the significa- 

tions of "yana": (1) "Because (it is what) all Buddhas 

without exception have originally ridden"??? 

explains the 
Signification of "yana" by indicating the effect of (plac- 
ing one's} hopes (in such a) cause; (2) "because all 

Bodhisattvas without exception use this principle to reach 

the stage of Tathagata"! /8 

explains the signification of 
"yana" by documenting the cause for hoping (for such) an 
effect. 

(On the Third Chapter, "The Explanation of the Principle 
of Mahayana") 

(STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS) 

173 

In the third chapter, "The Explanation (of the Prin- 
ciple of Mah@y&na)." there are also two sections: the 
first concludes the previous (section) and initiates the 
following (section); the second is the correct explanation. 
The correct explanation contains three (subsections) : 
first, a general indication by (simple) enumeration; 
second, enumeration of the sections; third, a specific 
explanation chapter by chapter. 

(Treatise) 

(I) HAVE FINISHED EXPLAINING THE _ 
CHAPTER ON ESTABLISHING (WHAT MAHA- 
YANA) MEANS. NEXT (I SHALL) EXPLAIN 
THE CHAPTER ON THE EXPLANATION (OF 

THE PRINCIPLE OF MAHAYANA). THE 
CHAPTER ON THE EXPLANATION (OF THE 
PRINCIPLE OF MAHAYANA DISCUSSES) THREE 
(THINGS). WHAT ARE THE THREE? FIRST, 
THE REVELATION OF RIGHT MEANING; SECOND, 
THE CORRECTION OF WRONG ATTACHMENTS; 
THIRD, THE EXAMINATION OF THE WAY TO 
BE FOLLOWED.179 

(Running Commentary) 

In this chapter, the section on the revelation of 
right meaning correctly explains what was established in 
the chapter on establishing (what Mahayana) means. (The 
sections) on the correction of wrong attachments and the 
way to be followed clarify the method of leaving the 
wrong and adhering to the right. 

(CONTENT ANALYSIS) 

in the specific explanation (chapter by chapter) 
there are three sections. In the first section, which 
explains the revelation of right meaning, there are two 
major (subsections): the first correctly explains the 
meaning; the second shows the method of entering (the Way). 
In the correct explanation (of the meaning), on the basis 
of (the structure elucidated) above, there are two (further 
subsections): the first explains the aspects (mentioned 
in) the section on principle; the second explains the 
aspects (mentioned in) the section on significations. 
The first (further subsection) also contains two (further 

174 

subsections): the first, a general explanation, explains 
(what is) generally established in the preceding (sub- 
section); the second, a specific explanation, explains 
(what is) specifically established in the preceding (sub- 
section) .18 

(Treatise) 

REVEALING THE RIGHT MEANING (MEANS 
THAT) BASED ON THE PRINCIPLE OF ONE 
MIND THERE ARE TWO ASPECTS. WHAT ARE 
THE TWO? THE FIRST IS MIND'S SUCH- 
NESS ASPECT; THE SECOND IS MIND'S ARIS- 
ING AND CEASING ASPECT. THESE TWO 
ASPECTS EACH WITHOUT EXCEPTION COM- 
PLETELY EMBRACE ALL DHARMAS. WHAT 
DOES THIS SIGNIFY? (IT SIGNIFIES THAT) 
THESE TWO ASPECTS ARE INSEPARABLE 
FROM ONE ANOTHER. 181 

(Running Commentary) 

On the words of the first (sentence) "BASED ON THE PRIN- 
CIPLE OF ONE MIND THERE ARE TWO ASPECTS" 

As a sutra says, 184 “tranquilization is termed ‘One 
Mind:' One Mind is termed 'matrix of Tathagata.'" 

On the words "MIND'S SUCHNESS ASPECT" 

(These words) explain (this part of the foregoing 
quotation from) that sitra:~°> "trangquilization is termed 
"One Mind.'” 

On {the words) “MIND'S ARISING AND CEASING ASPECT" 

These (words) explain (this part of the foregoing 
quotation) from the sutra: "One Mind is termed ‘matrix 
of Tathagata.'" 

(On tranquilization's being termed "One Mind") 

(Tranquilization is termed "One Mind") because all 

dharmas neither arise nor cease; “(tney are) originaliy 

175 

tranquil. (Therefore, they are) nothing but One Mind. 
Thus (this aspect) is called Mind's Suchness aspect. 
Hence the words, "trangquilization is termed 'One Mind.'" 
(On One Mind's being termed "matrix of Tathagata") 
Again, the essence of this One Mind is Original 
Enlightenment, but (its operation), responding to ignor- 
ance, creates arising and ceasing. Therefore, in this 
aspect (of arising and ceasing) the Tathagata's nature is 
hidden; it does not make (itself) manifest. (Hence, ) 
it is called "matrix of Tathagata." As a sutra says, 724 
"The matrix of Tathagata is the cause 
of good and bad; (therefore,) it is 
able everywhere to create beings in 
all the destinies. (This may be) com- 
pared to an actor's transforming (his 
appearance) and appearing (in the 
guise of) any (being in any one of the 
Six) destinies." 

Such meanings as these are to be found in the aspect of 

arising and ceasing. Hence the words, "One Mind is 

termed 'matrix of Tathagata.'" 

These (words also) reveal One Mind's arising and 
ceasing aspect. As a subsequent passage (in the treatise) 
says, 28° "(what is meant by) Mind's arising and ceasing 
is that based on the matrix of Tathagata there is the 
mind of arising and ceasing..." (and so on,) up to "this 
consciousness has two significations: first, the signifi- 
cation of Enlightenment: second, the signification of un- 

186 

Enlightenment." It must be known that not only is the 

176 

mind of arising and ceasing to be taken as the aspect of 
arising and ceasing, (but it is also) te be fully taken 
as both the essence of arising and ceasing itself as 
well as the attributes of arising and ceasing. Both 
significations are inherent in the aspect of arising 
and ceasing. 18? 
(On the term "One Mind") 

If the two aspects are like this, what (could) One 
Mind (possibly) be? It is said, "the nature of all pure 
and impure dharmas is not two;" (also,) "the two aspects 
of truth and falsity cannot be different. "188 Hence 
it is called "One." At this point of non-duality all 
dharmas are completely real. This is quite different from 
Space: (Buddha) nature knows (everything) miraculously 
by itself. Hence the name, "Mind." But if already there 
are not two (things), what could possibly be "One?" (But 
if) there is nothing which is "one;" then who is to say 

189 

"Mind?" A principle like this is beyond words and 

divorced from thought. (I) do not know how to designate 
it; (I) am compelled to call (it) "One Mina. "29° 
On the words "THESE TWO ASPECTS EACH WITHOUT EXCEPTION 
COMPLETELY EMBRACE ALL DHARMAS" 

(This sentence) explains (the statement,) "This mind 
embraces all dharmas in the mundane and supramundane 

191 

worlds," found in the previous (chapter) on establishing 

(what Mahayana means). The previous (chapter) simply 

177 

Clarifies that Mind embraces all dharmas. Now this 
(chapter), "The Explanation (of the Principle of Maha- 
yana)," illustrates that the two aspects of (One Mina) 
each completely embrace (all dharmas). 

On the words "(IT SIGNIFIES THAT) THESE TWO ASPECTS ARE 
INSEPAPABLE FROM ONE ANOTHER" 

This (sentence) explains the meaning of the two 
aspects' each completely embracing (all dharmas). (In 
Saying this, the author also) wishes to clarify that the 
aspect of Suchness is the attribute that impurity and 
purity have in common. There is no impurity and purity 
lacking (this) common attribute. Therefore, (the aspect 
of Suchness) can completely embrace all dharmas of im- 
purity and purity. (On the other hand,) the aspect of 
arising and ceasing manifests impurity and purity as 
separate. (However, each) dharma, (whether it is) of 
impurity or purity, has nothing it does not include. 
Therefore, (the aspect of arising and ceasing) also com- 
pletely embraces all dharmas. Although the common and 
the separate are distinct, (they each) equally lack some- 
thing to be rejected. Hence the words, "(these) two 
aspects are inseparable from one another.” 

The general explanation of the meaning ends. 
(Expository Notes)??? 

193 

The aspect of Suchness is the attribute common to 

all dharmas. There are no dharmas lacking (this) common 

178 

attribute. All dharmas without exception are embraced 
by (this) common attribute. It is like the bits of clay 
which are the common attribute of earthenware. There is 
no earthenware lacking (this) common attribute. {(Also,) 
all earthenware is included in (the class of items) made 
up of bits of clay. The aspect of Suchness is like this 
also. 

As for the aspect of arising and ceasing, this Such- 
ness is the cause of good and bad, because it creates all 
dharmas in conjunction with (various) conditions. Al- 
though it reaily creates all dharmas, (its) true nature is 
never corrupted. Therefore, in this aspect (of arising 
and ceasing) Suchness is also embraced. It is like the 
nature of bits of clay which join to make an earthen vessel 
but never lose the attributes of (being of) the nature of 
bits of clay. Therefore, the aspect of earthenware em- 
braces bits of clay. The aspect of arising and ceasing 
is like this also. 

(But) suppose that although the two aspects do not 
have different essences, (nevertheless,) the two aspects 
are mutually exclusive and do not have a common attribute. 
Then it must be that in the aspect of Suchness the prin- 
ciple (alone) is embraced whereas phenomena are not em- 
braced, while in the aspect of arising and ceasing 
phenomena (alone) are embraced whereas the principle is 

not embraced. 194 In fact, however, (these) two aspects 

179 

are fused with each other; (their) boundaries are indis- 
tinguishable. Therefore, each of them without excention 
completely embraces all dharmas of principle and phenomena. 
Hence the words, "(It signifies that these) two aspects 
are inseparable from one another.” 

Question:19° 

If each of these two aspects embraces 
both principle and phenomena, why then in the aspect of 
Suchness is only the essence of Mahayana shown, while in 
the aspect of arising and ceasing all (three)--the essence, 
attributes and operation (of Mahayana)--are shown? 

Answer: The meanings of "embracing" and "showing" 
are different. Why? The aspect of Suchness (functions) 
to obliterate the attributes so as to manifest the prin- 
ciple. But the obliterated attributes are not eliminated; 
therefore, (the aspect of Suchness) is able to embrace 
the attributes. (Nevertheless,) the obliterated attri- 
butes are not present; therefore, the attributes (of Maha- 
yana) are not shown (in the aspect of Suchness). (On the 
other hand,) the aspect of arising and ceasing (functions) 
to grasp the principle so as to perfect phenomena. (But 
Since) grasping the principle does not destroy (the prin- 
ciple, the aspect of arising and ceasing) is able to em- 
brace the principle. (However,) grasping the principle 
does not obliterate (the principle); therefore, (the 
aspect of arising and ceasing) also shows the essence 

(of Mahayana) .+7® 

180 

Because (I) based (my answer) on this (understanding 
of) the meanings (of "embracing" and "showing"), (I) pro- 
visionally said that (the meanings of "embracing" and 
“"showing") are not the same. But speaking from a (more) 
penetrating (understanding of the meanings of "embracing" 
and "“showing"), the meanings of the two are the same. 
Therefore, (even) in the aspect of Suchness the attributes 
of phenomena must be shown. Simply because (the author of 
this treatise was) brief, (he did) not explain (this 
further) .1?7 

Question: The meaning of the two aspects' not being 
the same has been made clear. (But I) still do not know 
whether the principle and phenomena embraced by the two 
aspects also differ in meaning according (to which) aspect 
(embraces them) or not? 

Answer: There is a distinction according to aspect; 
therefore, (the meanings of principle and phenomena as 
embraced by each of the two aspects) are not the same. 

Why? The principle of the phenomena embraced by the 

aspect of Suchness is differentiatedness, because it is 
explained that since (in the aspect of Suchness) no Dharma 
arises or ceases~-all are originally tranquil--it is only 
on the wasis of illusory thinking that there is differen- 
tiation. The principle of the phenomena explained (as 
being embraced by) the aspect of Mind's arising and ceasing 

is dependence, because it is explained that when the causes 

181 

and conditions of all dharmas unite there is arising and 
ceasing. But although these two natures (i.e., differen- 
tiatedness and dependence) are not one, nevertheless, 
they are not different either. Why? All arising and ceas- 
ing dharmas produced by causes and conditions are in- 
Separable from illusory thinking; as a result, they are 
differentiated (from one another). Therefore, differen- 
tiatedness does not differ from dependence; (it,) too, 
exists in the aspect of arising and ceasing. Furthermore, 
the arising of causes and conditions cannot be produced 
by the self, by others, or all together. Therefore, de- 
pendence does not differ from differentiatedness; (it,) 
too, exists in the aspect of Suchness.198 
(But) although these two natures (i.e., differentiated- 
ness and dependence) are not different, nevertheless, they 
are not one either. Why? The principle of differentiated- 
ness is not originally something, but nothing. (On the 
other hand,) although the principle of dependence is not 
something, nevertheless, it is not nothing either. There- 
fore, the two natures are likewise not contradictory. As 

199 "the three natures~ 0° 

the Mahayanasangraha-Sastra says, 
are interdependent; therefore, they are neither different 
nor the same." (The two natures) should (also) be so 
explained. If one is able to understand the meaning of 

these three natures' being neither one nor different, 

there will be nothing unresolved in the disputes of all 

182 

philosophers. 

(Let us now discuss what is meant by saying that) 
the principles embraced by (each of) the two aspects are 
not the same. As far as the principle explained (as 
being embraced by) the aspect of Suchness is concerned, 
although it is designated "Suchness," it is not obtainable, 
but it is not nothing either. With or without Buddha, its 
essence and attributes always exist. They never change; 
they cannot be destroyed. The terms "Suchness," "Reality," 
etc., which are provisionally established (as being) in 
this aspect (of Suchness), are explained in all the Prajna- 
paramita sutras, such as the PancavimSatisahasrika-prajha- 
paramita, “°2 etc. As far as the principle embraced by the 
aspect of arising and ceasing is concerned, although the 
essence of the principle is separate from the attributes 
of arising and ceasing, nevertheless, it does not maintain 
the nature of permanence either, but transmigrates through 
(the world of) birth and death in accordance with the 
conditions of ignorance. Although it really becomes 
tainted, its self-nature remains pure. The terms "Buddha- 
-nature," "Original Enlightenment," etc., which are 
provisionally established (as being) in this aspect (of 
arising and ceasing), are explained in sutras such as the 
Mahaparinirvana-sutra, the Avatamsaka-sutra, “07 etc. How- 
ever, the sutras which the present treatise is discussing, 

(such as) the Lankavatara-sutra, -?? etc., take the 

183 

penetration throughout the two aspects as the essence of 
(their) doctrine. The meanings of these two are not, how- 
ever, different, because although (they) are free from 
arising and ceasing, nevertheless, (their) permanent nature 
is also unobtainable. Although it is said, "according 

to conditions they are transformed," nevertheless, they 
have never changed because they are free from the nature 

of arising and ceasing. *°4 Because this meaning (attaches 
to what is) in the aspect of Suchness, (the treatise) says 
only, "not destroyed, "795 and provisionally savs, "reality." 
(As it is said,) "all dharmas are established without 

changing the real worl, "76 

Of the aspect of arising and 
ceasing (the treatise) says, "the pure mind of self-nature 
moves due to the wind of ignorance. 7°? (As it is said,) 
"(it) is not colored yet (it) colors; (it) colors yet 
(it) is not colored. "298 
Question: Concerning the aspect of Suchness, only 
the meaning of Emptiness is explained; concerning the 
aspect of arising and ceasing, (only) the meaning of non- 
emptiness is explained. Is not (their) relationship, 
(then,) really like this? 
Answer: If matching (the terms) is the only considera- 
tion, then such a conclusion is unavoidable. Therefore, 
in the (second) chapter, "On Establishing (what Mahayana) 

w 

Means," concerning the aspect of Suchness (the treatise) 

184 

Says only that (in it) the essence of Mahayana can be shown, 
while concerning the aspect of arising and ceasing (the 
treatise) says that (in it) the attributes and operation 

of Mahayana are manifested. In truth, however, this is 

not so. Therefore, later in the treatise the two aspects 
both explain the meaning of non-emptiness. 799 

Question: If both meanings are (contained) in the 
aspect of arising and ceasing, the meaning of its non- 
-emptiness may mean the creation of arising and ceasing 
according to conditions. Emptiness means nothingness. 

How (can it) mean the creation of something according to 
conditions? 

Answer: The two meanings are one; (one) cannot say 
that (they) are different. If (we) agree as to the mean- 
ing of Emptiness, then (we must also agree that it) can 
create something. Why? If Emptiness is definitely empty, 
it should not be able to create something. But this 
Emptiness is also to be emptied; therefore, it can create 
something. However, this emptying of Emptiness has two 
further meanings. First, there is the emptiness of dharma 
nature. This emptiness is also to be emptied. Both 
something and Emptiness are not obtainable; such emptying 
of Emptiness is the aspect of Suchness. As the Pancavim- 
Satisahasrikaprajnaparamita-sttra says,-1° 

are empty; this Emptiness is also empty. This is called 

"all dharmas 

emptying Emptiness." Second, (Emptiness) is like some- 

185 

thing not having the nature of something. Therefore, it 
can be empty. This is called Emptiness. Such Emptiness 
does not have the nature of Emptiness: therefore, it can 
create something. This is called emptying Emptiness. 

Such emptying of Emptiness is present in the aspect of 
arising and ceasing. As the Mahaparinirvana-sutra says, “+t 
“being both something and nothing~-this is called empty— 
ing Emptiness. Being both affirmed and negated--this is 
called emptying Emptiness." Such emptying of Emptiness 
cannot be attained even in the slightest degree by a 

212 how 

Bodhisattva (who is already in the) tenth stage; 
much less (can it be attained) by the rest of the people? 
The difference between the two aspects should be under- 
stood in this way. With this the explanation of the general 

establishment of the principle in the foregoing chapter 

ends. 

186: 

Notes to Translation 

1. Treatise on Awakening Mahayana Faith is how we 
have chosen to translate the title of the Ta-ch'eng ch'i- 
~hsin lun KE #2 (2 wHithereafter referred to as AFM). 
This is in contrast to all previously published transla- 
tions of this text--D.T. Suzuki's, Timothy Richard's, 
Wai~tao's, and Yoshito Hakeda's. However, we believe 
that cur translation better reflects Wonhyc’s understand- 
ing of the relationship between Mahayana and awakening 
faith, as stated in section two of Part One. 

2. A combined edition is a text in which two or 
more texts are combined. Three texts have been combined 
here: AFM (T. 1666), Wonhyo's Running Commentary (T. 1844), 
and Wonhyo's Expository Notes (T. 1845). The order 
followed in the intercalation of the commentaries is in 
strict accord with the order of the text in T. 1666. 

All of the Running Commentary is included in this edition, 
but overlapping parts of the Expository Notes have been 
omitted. The editor of the Combined Edition (hereafter 
referred to as CE) has never been identified. 

3. Running Commentary is our translation of the 

title of Wonhyo's Ki-shin-non so Hee 2S (T. 1844), 

jo 
which may more literally be translated as Commentary 

on Awakening Faith. This commentary is commonly referred 

187 

to as the Haedongso, yy Ose meaning Korean commentary. 
It has not been translated into English nor into Japanese. 
However, it has been translated into modern Korean three 

times. Two of these translations are: "Tae-sting Ki-shin- 

" 

-non so," translated by Séng Nakhun, in Han'guk iti 
sasang dae chénjip, vol. 1 (Tong'hwa ch'ulp'ansa: Seoul, 
Korea, 1972), pp. 39-132; "Tae-sting Ki-shin-non so," 
translated by Dongguk yokkyong won, in Han'gul taejang- 
-gyong, vol. 156 (Dongguk yékkyong won: Seoul, Korea, 
1976), pp. 21-248. Both of these translations are to 
be read with due regard given to the fact that they are 
often too free and sometimes even omit translation of 
whole passages. The third translation, by Rhi Ki-young, 
contained in his Wonhyo's Thought (Hongbépwon: Seoul, 
Korea, 1967), is a translation of many’ important passages 
in the Running Commentary, but these translations are 
so free that it is almost impossible to consider them 
real translations. 

4. Expository Notes is our translation of the title 
of Wonhyo's Taesiting Kishinnon Pyolgi KF #2 fe SRN STZ. 
(T. 1845), which more literally translated is Special 
Notes on Treatise on Awakening Mahayana Faith. This 
commentary appears to have been written before the 
Running Commentary, as the latter sometimes quotes the 

former, but the precise date of the publication of either 

188 

text is unknown. The Running Commentary seems to be both 
an expanded version and revision of the Expository Notes. 
Thus, by comparing these two texts, it is possible to 
trace the development of Wonhyo's understanding of AFM. 
The Running Commentary shall henceforth be designated RC; 
the Expository Notes shall henceforth be referred to as 
EN. 

5. Wonhyo did not doubt that AFM was written by 
ASvaghosa (see T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 2026, line 22). How- 
ever, he treated AgSvaghosa as having lived after the 
Madhyamika master Nagarjuna and the Yogacara master Asanga. 
Therefore, any biographical information about a$vaghosa 
obtained from the Ma-ming p'u-sa chuan (T. 2046) is not 
relevant to a discussion of the author of AFM, because 
the Ma-ming p'u-sa chuan is the biography of the ASvaghosa 
who lived before Nagarjuna (150-250 A.D.)}. All. other 
sources referring to ASvaghosa refer to this ASvaghosa 
also; so far no biographical information has been un- 
covered which pertains to the author of AFM. For a more 
detailed argument of this point, see Ui Hakuju, Daijd 
Kishinnon (Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1936), pp. 135-137 

6. According to Fei Ch'ang-fang's catalogue (T. 2034, 
vol. 49, p. 99a, line 5), Paramartha translated AFM from 
Sanskrit into Chinese in 550 A.D. This is the traditional 

view of the matter. However, some later scholars have 

189, 

challenged this view; the most important argument against 
it is Mochizuki's (cf. Mochizuki Shinko, Daijo kishinnon 
no Kenkyu, pp. 5-14). Wonhyo never explicitly mentioned 
Paramartha in his commentaries. Thus his Silence can 
most likely be construed as meaning that he accepted the 
traditional account, of which he was most certainly aware. 

7. Cho Myong-gi, in his book entitled Silla pulgyo 
bi inyém kwa yéksa (pp. 96-121), states that Wonhyo wrote 
about one hundred books in approximately two hundred and 
forty rolls, of which only twenty books in twenty-two 
rolls survive. According to Uich'én's catalogue (T. 2184, 
vol. 55, p. 1175a), Wonhyo wrote five commentaries on AFM, 
of which, unfortunately, only two survive: T. 1844 and 
T. 1845. 

8. The first sentence of RC is a complex sentence 
consisting of two clauses of four characters each: the 
first four characters constitute the subordinate clause 
in which Wénhyo clarifies what he is about to do while 
the next four characters comprise the main clause in 
which Wonhyo states that his commentary has three sec- 
tions. The first sentence literally says, “In explaining 
this treatise, I would like to have three distinctive 
divisions.” In our translation the sentence is simpli- 
fied and made passive. The Taishd edition of RC has 

shuo 24 instead of shih = as the second character of the 
| 

190 

sentence. But if one takes shuoz¥ to be an abbreviated 
form of shuo-ming 2% BH , then there is no difference in 
meaning between the two versions. 

9. EN has only two parts: the first explains the 
general meaning of AFM while the second explains the mean- 
ing of each of its sentences. Therefore, one may say 
that Wonhyo expanded the discussion of the general mean- 
ing of AFM into two parts, the first giving the essence 
of the doctrine and the second explaining the title. 
Therefore, the addition to RC is in the explanation of 
the title. 

10. This section, which discusses the essence of 
the doctrine (chongch'ae ee : tsung-t'i), is the most 
important part of RC for understanding Wonhyo's stand- 
point, because in discussing the essence of the doctrine 
Wonhyo is really discussing the essence of Mahayana. 

ll. We have translated sugon kongjék = BERK 
and tami ch'unghyon ME Ree. as "completely empty” 
and "very mysterious.” Sugoén and tami are taken as 
functioning adverbially to qualify kongjok and ch'unghyon 
for emphasis. Therefore, we feel that in this context 
it is acceptable to render sugon and tami using the 
adverbs “completely” and "very" respectively. With 
respect to doctrine this passage focuses on the two 
aspects of the essence of Mahayana: being empty and 

being mysterious. 

191 

12. This sentence is virtually identical with the 
first half of the last sentence of the first chapter of 
the Tao-te ching: Hstan-chih yu-hsiian ZZXZ. The 
difference is Wonhyo's addition of anotherZ chih at 
the end. See Arthur Waley, The Way and its Power (New 
York: Grove Press, 1958), p. 141. 

13. The expressions "being empty" and "being, mysterious," 
used to describe the essence of Mahayana, might lead some 
to think that Mahayana is something extraordinary, beyond 
ordinary experience. Therefore, with the two "no matter 
how..." constructions Wonhyo intends to draw attention 
to the phenomenal world and people's everyday conversa- 
tion. Paekka RM usually denotes the one hundred philoso- 
phers, or schools of philosophy, but in this context it 
means simply ordinary people. 

14. The five eyes of Buddhism are: 1. jou-yen Al BE 
or physical eye; 2. ttien-yen FAR or heavenly eye; 

3. hui-yen 3 aKRor wisdom eye; 4. fa-yen SE RROF Dharma 
eye; 5. fo-yen ARBAB ox Buddha eye. See Ta-chih-tu-lun, 
vol. 33 (T. 1509, vol. 25, pp. 305¢-306a). See also 
Kumarajiva's translation of the Vajracchedikaprajnapara- 
mita-sutra (T. 235, vol. 8, p. 75lb, lines 13-20). 

15. The four unlimited explanatory abilities are: 

1. the unlimited ability to explain each and every dharma; 

2. the unlimited ability to explain the meaning of each 

192 

and every dharma; 3. the unlimited ability to explain 
each and every dharma and its meaning via any mode of 
written expression; 4. the unlimited ability to explain 
each and every dharma and its meaning via any mode of 
verbal expression. For a further discussion of this con- 
cept, see Ta-chih-tu-lun, Roll 25 (T. 1509, vol. 25, 

p- 246a-c) and Mochizuki, BDJ, vol. 3, p. 2020a-c. 

16. If one is told that the essence of Mahayana is 
in the world of myriad phenomena and in the conversation 
of the people, then one expects it to be visible and 
describable. But that is a false expectation. In fact, 
no matter how wonderful one's faculties are, one cannot 
perceive the form of the essence of Mahayana nor can one 
describe its shape. Therefore, being beyond the apprehen- 
sion of human faculties, the essence of Mahayana must 
remain invisible and indescribable. 

17. The original of this sentence in RC differs 
from that in EN. RC reads 

ZIZ PF ee HHS 

FELW BE ZORA HE 
A literal translation of this would be: "One might try 
to lead it into Being; however, everything is empty 
because of it. One might try to get it out of Non-being, 

but a myriad things arise through it." But EN reads 
Hep ASP te wz iz 
WARP Bi Axe 

193 

Our translation is based on the EN version of this 
sentence, because a translation of that version makes 

more sense in English than a translation of the RC ver- 
Sion. However, both versions are practically identical 

in meaning. Both imply that the terms Being and Non-being 
are irrelevant in describing the essence of Mahayana. 

See T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226a, lines 16-17. 

18. With this sentence WSnhyo makes clear the fact 
that the term "Mahayana" is symbolic. The essence of 
Mahayana is always present, but at the same time it cannot 
be grasped through the use of language, nor through thought. 
A point of note is that originally, in EN, Wonhyo ended 
this sentence with Tao 33 , not Ta-ch'eng Kee - The 
sentence in EN reads: Pu chih ho i yen chih; ch'iang wei 
tao ARefepul Sx FRB - See T. 1845, vol. 44, 

p. 226a, line 17. What follows is an outline of the dis- 

cussion so far in RC. 

The essence of Mahayana 

empty mysterious 
Still present in but in the world of 
the conversation of the myriad phenomena 
the people 
none of the four none of the five eyes 
unlimited explanatory can see its form 
abilities can describe 
its shape 

Great? 
but it enters the interiorless 
and nothing remains. 

194 

Infinitesimal? 
but it envelops the exteriorless 
without exhausting itself. 

Being? 

yet everything is empty because of it. 

Non-being? 
yet a myriad things arise through it. 

I do not know how to describe 

it, so that I am reluctant- 

ly compelled to call it "Mahayana." 

19. Here the editor of CE has inserted about nine 

lines from EN (from line 17 to line 25 on p. 226a, T. 1845 

vol. 44) because RC does not have them. 

f 

That Wonhyo 

Should omit such a powerful and splendid passage from RC 

is surprising. 

20. The train of thought embodied in this paragraph 

may be diagrammed as follows: 

EN how empty 
(like space) 

1. nothin srivate 
oes 

2. the impure and pure are 
nere amalgamated 

3. the absolute and the 
conventional are 
equalized 

4. the path of thinking 
is cut off 

5. the person is without 
impediment 

6. the shadows and echoes 

how vast 
{like ocean) 

extremely impartial 

movement and stillness 
alternate with each other 

ascending and descending 
are different 
the way of prayer and 

response is open 

the person returns to 
the Source 

if names and forms have 

ridden by the person are 
neither seen nor spoken. 

been transcended 
what can one transcend? 
where can one return? 

195 

Conclusion: 
Supreme Principle Great Suchness 
even if it seems even if it seems 
not to be a principle not to be Suchness 

21. Wonhyo's statements concerning movement and 
stillness in this passage should not be confused with 
the traditional Chinese view that movement and still- 
ness should be one and the same (Tung-ching i-ju S71 3e 
—wwz , or, in movement there should be stillness; in 
stillness there should be movement: Tung-chung-ching, 
ching-chung-tung By eee , Se Sh which pertains to 
the ideal life-style. In this passage Wénhyo is trying 
to explain the harmonious alternation between the move- 
ment and stiliness of the ocean as a means of indicating 
the ocean's impartiality. By analogy, therefore, in 
Mahayana itself both movement and stillness are possible 
as phenomenal facts because all phenomena are the opera- 
tion (yung fi ) of the empty as substance (t'igk). 

22. Based on the emptiness aspect of Mahayana, 
Wonhyo states almost all of the major Mahayana Buddhist 
ideals, such as the world of nothing private, the amalgama- 
tion of the impure and pure, the equalization of the 
absolute and conventional, and the world of no-thought, 
in succession. The progressicn from emptiness to nothing 
private, to the amalgamation of the impure and pure and 
to the equalization of the absolute and conventional is 

effected using the conjunction ku px : "because." Thus 

196 

this passage gives the effect of being a logical progres- 
sion from one thing to another. Despite this, however, 
one cannot help feeling that Wonhyo's style here is 
poetic, appealing to the reader's intuition, rather than 
logical, because the elements of the progression are, 

upon analysis, perceived not to be contingent uson each 
other. See Ko Ikchin's paper entitled "Wonhyo ti Kishin- 
nonso wa pyOlgi rul t'ong'hae bon chinsok-wélyung muaegwan 
kwa ku sOngnip iron" in Pulgyo hakpo, Vol. 10 (Seoul: 
Dongguk University, 1973), pp. 287-321. 

23. Here, the Chinese character t'ong has been 
translated as "open." However, one should be aware that 
tiong is one of the most important concepts in Wonhyo's 
thought and means "interpenetration." Such a meaning 
is present in this sentence also, because the openness 
of the way of prayer and response is nothing but the 
interpenetration between the prayer and the response. 

24. The relationship between the equalization of 
the absolute and conventional and the cutting off of the 
path of thinking should not be viewed as one of cause 
and effect. Rather, the former is the ground of the 

possibility of the latter. 

197 

25. With the sentences that follow Wonhyo is attempt- 
ing to elucidate that therefore it is both impossible and 
meaningless to separate the vath of "thinking is cut off" 
from the path of "prayer and response is open" (which are 
usually misinterpreted as being two different tendencies 
in Buddhist practice. 

26. The Taisho (T. 1845, vol. 44, o. 226, line 23), 
Zokuzokyo (Z. vol. 71, p. 310-2b, line 1) and Chin-ling- 
-k'e-ching-ch'u @PE%!| 2K (vol. 1, p. 2a, line 8) 
editions of EN all have suse : ch'ui, "to hang down," 
but the Haeinsa Lope (Roll 1, p. 2a, line 8) edition 
has sting $ : ch'eng, "to ride." Our translation follows 
the Haeinsa edition because its reading makes more sense. 

27. The phrase, "muli chi chili, pulydn chi taeyon 
ASEL BIE , RHAKE +: weli chih chih-li, pujan 
chih ta-jan," has been rendered into English as "the 
Supreme Principle, (even if it seems) not to be a prin- 
ciple, the Great Suchness (even if it seems) not to be 
Suchness." This expression, which is one of Wonhyo's 
favorite (see Wonhyo's Kumgang Sammaegyéng non, T. 1730, 
vol. 34, p. 96la, line 14), is very difficult to trans- 
late into proper English. Our translation lacks the 
dynamism of the original, but it is the best to have so 
far offered itself. 

28. Vimalakirti is traditionally regarded as being 

one of the most prominent lay disciples of Gautama Buddha. 

198 

Chih-chien (T. 474, vol. 14, pp. 519-537) and Kumarajiva 
(T. 475, vol. 14, pp. 537-557) both render his name into 
Chinese as Wei-mo-chih SE VES - Hsuan-tsang renders it 
as Shuo-wu-kou-ch'eng = zat te 4% or "it is suitable to. 
call (him) stainless" (see T. 476, vol. 14, pp. 557-588). 
But here Wénhyo calls Vimalakirti Tugu taesa FLEAE : 
Tu-k'ou ta-shih or "Silent Bodhisattva," a soubriquet 
deriving from Vimalakirti's having kept silent when asked 
about entering the dharma-door of non-duality. See 
T. 475, vol. 14, p. 551c, line 22 and Robert Thurman's 
The Holy Teaching of Vimalakirti (University Park, Phila- 
delphia: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1976), 
p. 77 and note 15, pp. 131-132. 

29. "MokkyOk changbu ASE CE mu-chi chang-fu" 
ox "One-glance Hero" indicates both Confucius and Wen-po 
Hstieh-tzu who, according to the Book of Chuang-tzu, did 
not say anything to each other when they met even though 
Confucius had wanted to meet Wen-po Hslieh-tzu for a lon 
time. When Confucius was asked the reason by his disciple, 
Tzu-lu, he said, “With that kind of man, one glance tells 
you that the Way is there before you. What room does 
that leave for any possibility of speech?" See The Com- 
plete Works of Chuang-tzu, translated by Burton Watson 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1968), p. 223. 

30. Here there is again a difference between the 

RC and EN wording of a passage. Here EN reads 

199 

while RC reads 

EE FE SG KH BES 
#2; 1S EH 

(CE. note 18). 

Vv 
31. Muyon taebi Ae EERIE .: wu-ylan ta-pei or 

"unconditioned great compassion" is one of the two impor- 

tant qualities of the Bodhisattva's nature. The other is 
wisdom. See below, note 32. 

32. Tongch'ae chiryok fe) Be AR): t'ung-t'i chih- 
“li or "the power of wisdom (by which one regards others) 
as his own body" is the other important quality of the 
Bodhisattva's nature. 

33. By "Chunggwan non CEB Se: Chung-kuan lun" 
Wonhyo is apparently indicating the Chung lun (Madhyamaka- 
karika), translated by Kumarajiva (304-409 A.D.), which 
includes a commentary written by Pingala (active in the 
early fourth century A.D.) as well as Nagarjuna's 445 
Slokas {the Sanskrit original contains 449 $lokas). See 
T. 1564, vol. 30, pp. 1-39 and Mizuno Kogen, Butten kaidai 
jiten, pp. 126-128. From Buddhist catalogues such as 
Seng-yu's Ch'u-san-tsang-chi-chi (T. 2145), Fa-ching's 
Chung~ching mu-iu (T. 2146) and Chih-sheng's K'ai-ywuan 
shih-chiao lu (T. 2154) it is obvious that Chung-iun is 

the original title given the Sastra by Kumarajiva. (See 

200 

T. 2145, vol. 55, p. lla, line 19; T. 2145, p. 76c, 

line 13; T. 2145, p. 77a, line 15; T. 2146, vol. 55, 

p. 141lb, line 7, etc.). But Chih-sheng admits that the 
text was also called the Chung-kuan lun (see T. 2145, 
vol. 55, p. 713c, line 13). The Chung-lun became known 
as the Chung-kuan lun probably because from earliest days 
the Chung-lun was considered the text most representative 
of the Chung-kuan school which was the name given in 
China to Nagarjuna's Madhyamika school. The Madhyamaka- 
-karika has been translated into English several times, 
for example, Frederick J. Streng, Emptiness, (Nashville: 
Abingdon Press, 1967), pp. 181-220 and Kenneth K. Inada, 
Nagarjuna: Mulamadhyamaka-karika, Tokyo: The Hokuseido 
Press, Tokyo. 

34. The Shibimun non += PF : Shih-erh-men lun 
or DvadaSanikaya-Sastra (sometimes also referred to as the 
DvadaSamukha-Sastra) is attributed to Nagarjuna and was 
translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva. However, a Sanskrit 
original has not been found and a Tibetan translation 
is not known to exist. Chi-tsang gay (549-623 A.D.), 

a famous San-lun master, said in his Shih-erh-men lun su 
+= PT RER, (T. 1825) that Nagarjuna wrote only the 
Slokas of the text while Pingala wrote the commentary. 

This would be similar to the case of the Chung lun (T. 1564) 

(cf. note 33). See Mizuno Kogen, Butten kaidai jiten, 

201 

pp- 129-130 and Aiyaswami Sastri, "DvadaSamukha-Sastra 
of Nagarjuna" in ViSva-Bharati Annals, Vol. VI. 

35. For what we have translated as "not complete," 
Zokuzoky6 has pu-pien 7 4 (Z. vol. 71, p. 310-2b, 
line 12) but Taisho has pu-pien 734A (T. 1845, vol. 44, 
Pp. 226b, line 8). As pien 4 and pien3# are interchangeable 
there is no difference in meaning. 

36. The Yogacarabhumi-Sastra is attributed to 
Maitreya-natha (270-350 A.D.) and was translated into 
Chinese by the famous Tripitaka master Hstuan-tsang (600- 
664 A.D.). Its Chinese title is Yii-ch'ieh shih-ti lun 
=4y (42 Eprt SF (T. 1579, vol. 30, pp. 279-883). It 
consists of 100 rolls. The most comprehensive study of 
the text is Ui Hakuju's Yugaron no kenkyu, Tokyp: Iwanami 
Shoten, 1958. 

37. The Mahayanasamgraha-Sastra by Asanga was 
translated into Chinese several times: by BuddhaSAnta in 
531 A.D. (T. 1592, vol. 31, pp. 97-113), by Paramartha 
in 563 A.D. (T. 1593, vol. 31, pp. 113-132) and by Hstan- 
-tsang between 647 A.D. and 649 A.D. (T. 1594, vol. 31, 
pp. 132-152). See Sasaki Getsusho, Kanyaku shihon taisho 
Sho daij6 ron Je 3R oz KAY 8. KS 1931 and Ui 
Hakuju, Sho daijo ron no kenkyu, Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1935. 

38. Whether or not Wonhyo's criticism of these 

Madhyamika and Yogacara texts is valid is debatable. For 

202 

further discussion of this subject see Park Chong-hong, 
“A History of Korean Philosophy," in Han'guk sasangsa 
eR BS , compiled by Han'guk sasang yén'guhoe 
(Seoul: Ilshinsa, 1966), pp. 28-88. 

39. Zokuzdkys has pak {&: po, “encyclopedic” 
(Z. vol. 71, p. 310-2b, line 14), while Taishd has chdn 
Ag : chuan, "penetrating" (T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226b, 
line 9). Chi4€: chih, "wisdom," and in{=: jen, 
"benevolence," are two important requirements for the 
Confucian sage. (See D.C. Lau, tr., Mencius (Baltimore: 
Penguin, 1970), p. 79 and James Legge, tr., The Works of 
Mencius (New York: Dover, 1970), p. 193). On the other 
hand, hyon & : hsuan, "mysterious," and pak {® : po, 
"encyclopedic," are found in the first and last chapters, 
respectively, of the Tao-te ching ¥@4# 4% and are regarded 
aS opposites. (See Chang Chung-yuan, tr., Tao: A New Way 
of Thinking (New York: Harper, 1975), p. 3 and p. 210). 
Thus discernible in this passage is some measure of both 
Confucian and Taoist influence on Wénhyo's mode of 
expression. In this regard we note that the KosOn monast- 
ery inscription reports that Wénhyo had read non-Buddhist 
religious literature. See the facsimile of the KosdOnsa 
Sddang hwasang t'appi in Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, ed., 
Wonhyo chonjip (Seoul: Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, 1973), 
p. 383. 

203 

40. Here Wénhyo insists on the supremacy of AFM 
over the texts of the Madhyamika and Yogacara schools. 
Yogacara scholars, however, are critical of AFM. See 
Ueda Yoshifumi, Bukkyo shisOshi kenkyi, Kyoto: Nagata 
Bunshodo, 1951 and Nagao Gadjin, "HOzd no sanshdsetsu 
ni taisuru jakukan no gimon" in Miscellanea Kiotiensia: 
Essays in Celebration of the Semicentennial of the 
Paculty of Letters of Kyoto University (Kyoto: Kyoto 
University, 1956), pp. 183-206. 

This part of EN is eliminated from RC. However, a 
very similar idea is expressed in T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202b, 
lines 18-23. (See also Z. vol. 71, p. 31l-la, lines 6-11). 
It is interesting to note the omission of these remarks 
on Madhyamika and Yogacara texts from RC. Although Wonhyo 
wrote Many commentaries on texts of both schools--his 
Samnon chong'yo =% oa RE Paengnon ch'waryo Beem: 
Haeshimmil-gy65ng so DRRET., Yugaron-so chungsil 
ithe By am re , and Soptaesting non so 4 KE Be 
are some examplies--none of them survive except his preface 
to the Haeshimmil-gydng so (see Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, ed., 
Wonhyo ch8njip (Seoul: Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, 1973), 
pp. 175-176). Therefore, we are not in a position to 
critically evaluate Wonhyo's position concerning these 
schools. But we can state that Wonhyo places emphasis 

on AFM because he sees it as attempting to synthesize the 

204 

opposing tendencies manifested by the Madhyamika and 
Yogacara schools. See section five of Part One. 

41. The two aspects in One Mind are (1) hsin chen- 
cJucmen ss \6hy PA , literally, "the aspect of Suchness 
in One Mind," and (2) hsin sheng-mieh-men AS ESP , 
or "the aspect of arising and ceasing in One Mind." See 
T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576a, lines 5-6. Hakeda translates 
the Taisho passage as follows: 

One is the aspect of Mind in terms of 

the Absolute (tathata; Suchness), and 

the other is the aspect of Mind in terms 

of phenomena (samsara; birth and death). 

(AF-H, p. 31) 

42. The number "108" should not be taken literally. 
In Buddhist texts this number is frequently used to 
indicate abundance, for example, "the 108 defilements." 
(See Ta chih-tu lun in T. 1509, vol. 25, p. 110b, line 7). 

The Sanskrit "marakatam," rendered into Chinese as 
mo- Lo Ji Fs , Ieans "emerald." Here mo-lo es is translated | 
simply as "jewels." See Nakamura, Bukkydgo daijiten, 
vol. 2, p. 1280c. 

6 Sh 

43. Song Nakhun translates kwang-go jest : kuang- 
-kao as “many teachings." We read kwang fs : kuang as 
pang-kwang 7 j= : fang-kuang or kwang-dae je : kuang-ta, 
so we translate kwang-go ees : kuang-kao as "Mahayana 

teaching." See Song Nakhun, "Taestng kishin non so" in 

Han' guk ai sasang taejonji , Vol. 1, p. 40a. 

205 

44, We have translated séng-jéng HESS : hsing- 
~ching as "essential purity" and sang-yom fp : hsiang- 
~jan as "phenomenal impurity." Originally (1) hsing-hsiang 
HEB and (2) ching-Jjan ie Re were technical terms 
denoting (1) the nature of anything and its phenomenal 
expression (see Soothill's Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist 
Terms, p. 259b) and (2) the purity of our original nature 
and its impurity, which results from its being in accord 
with changing phenomena. Here wonhyo combines these two 
technical terms in order to stress the crucial message 
of the Srimaladevisimhanada-sutra, namely, that essential 
purity, i.e., Buddha nature, is to be seen in phenomenal 
impurity, i.e., people's defilements, based on the 
Tathagata-garbha theory. See Alex and Hideko Wayman's 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1974, especially 
pp. 37-55. 

45. Yusa Sey BY : yu-she is the shortened form 
of Pa] Zar EE or "Ayodhya," a castle in ancient India 
where Queen Srimala lived. Wonhyo uses it for the name 
of the text. See T. 353, vol. 12, p. 217a, line 11 and 
Alex and Hideko Wayman, The Lion's Roar of Queen Srimala 
(New York: Columbia, 1974), p. 60, footnote 6. 

46. Fox Wonhyo's understanding of the Mahaparinir- 

vana-sitra (T. 375, vol. 12, pp. 605-852) see YOlban 

206 

chong'yo ai oe which is contained in T. 1769, 
vol. 38, pp. 239a-255c. 

47, W6nhyo wrote four books on Kumarajiva's 
translation of the Saddharmapundarika-sutra (T. 262, vol. 
9, pp. 1-62). The only one extant is the Pophwa chong'yo 
AE RE , which is contained in T. 1725, vol. 34, 

PP. 870c-875c. 

48. The Suvarnaprabhasauttamamaraja-sitra has 
various Chinese titles. See T. 663, vol. 16, pp. 335- 
457. "Kumgo SSF : chin-ku," which Wonhyo uses here, 
indicates "Kumgwang-myong EF, BF : chin-kuang-ming." 

See T. 2183, vol. 55, p. 1153b, line 24. 
49. See T. 673, vol. 16, pp. 640c-652c. 
50. Here samshin = 4 : San~shen (trikaya) refers 
to the three bodies of Buddha: 
- (1) fa-shen BH ox “dharma body" (dharmakaya) ; 

(2) pao-shen 28 or "reward body" (sambhoga-kaya); 

(3) huavshen {y # or "transformation body" (nirmanakaya). 
For an examination of the trikaya theory see Nagao Gadjin, 
"On the theory of Buddha-Body," The Eastern Buddhist 
(New Series), Vol. VI, no. 1, May 1973. 

51. According to Uich'on's catalogue (T. 2184, 
vol. 55, pp. 1165b-1178c) Wonhyo wrote four books on the 

Hua-yen ching 26 Be AE (T- 278, vol. 9, pp. 395-788). 

Unfortunately only the preface and third roll of Wénhyo's 

207 

Hwaomgyong so # BCCOIL: Hua-yen-ching su or "A 
Commentary on the Avatamsaka-sttra" in ten rolls has 
Survived. T. 2757, vol. 85, pp. 234c-236a represents 
the contents of the third roll; Wénhyo chénjip, edited 
by Pulgyohak tong'inhoe, has both the contents of the 
third roll as well as the preface to the whole commentary 
(ibid., pp. 73-79). 

52. Two texts in TaishS bear the name Ying-lo 
Ching: (1) P'u-sa ying-lo ching SS EPRse ez ir. 656, 
vol. 16, pp. 1-126) and (2) P'u sa ying-lo pen-yeh ching 
SIRE (T. 1485, vol. 24, pp. 1010b-1023a). 
Thus it is impossible to determine which Ying-lo ching 
is meant simply on the basis of the title Wonhyo gives. 
However, as Wonhyo wrote a commentary on T. 1485, it 
might be reasonable to assume that that is the text meant. 
Moreover, although T. 1485 belongs to the Vinaya section 
of the Tripitaka, it discusses the four stages doctrine 
as does the Avatamsaku-stitra. For Woénhyo's commentary 
on the P'u-sa ying-lo pen-yeh ching see Wénhyo chonjip, 
pp. 131-169. 

53. The Pancavim$atisahasrikapr: “aparamita-sitra 
has been translated into Chinese several times, by 
Moksala (T. 221, vol. 8, pp. 1-146), by Dharmaraksa 
(T. 222, vol. 8, pp. 147-216), by Kumarajiva (T. 223, 

vol. 8, pp. 217-424) and by Hstan-tsang (T. 220, vol. 7, 

208 

pp. 1-426). By saying Taep'um Kor? Ta-p'in, Wonhyo 
indicates that he means Kumarajiva's translation (T. 223). 
See Seng-yu's Ch'u san-tsang-chi chi (T. 2145, vol. 55, 
p.- 10, line 16). Taehyedogyong chong'yo KEE: = 
, Wénhyo's commentary on T. 223, is included in 

Taisho (T. 1697, vol. 33, pp. 68b-74a). 

54. See T. 397, vol. 8, pp. 1-407. 

55. See ibid., pp. 233-297. 

56. See ibid., pp. 298-381. 

57. This sentence occurs in T. 1666, vol. 32, 
p. 575c, Lines 16-17. 

58. There is a striking similarity between both 
the ideas and the style of this sentence and Ch'eng I's 
Sentence at the beginning of the Doctrine of the Mean: 

Ch'eng I Wonhyo 
TLL FGAE BIS RUAR ER 
% x BBR HK FB AG = PA S252 BR 

Unroll it, and it fills When unfolded, immeasur- 

the universe able and limitless 
meanings (are found in 
its) doctrine; 

Roll it up, and it When sealed, the principle 

retires and lies in of two aspects (in) One 

mysteriousness. Mind (is found to be its) 
essence. 

In spite of their similarity, however, one must not 
ignore the differences between them. The sentences 
immediately following in each serve to reveal these 

differences: 

209 

Ch'eng I Wonhyo 

--- SE Ft --EW RB SRE 
F] 

Bee HAE +> BA i 7K 

Bee AL AKI EREE AK 

---The whole of it is -.-therefore, (it) 

solid learning. When unfolds and seals freely; 
the skillful reader ---Unfolding but not 

has explored it with complicating; sealing 
delight till he has but not narrowing... 

apprehended it, he may 

carry 1t into practice 

all his life, and will 

find that it cannot be 

exhausted. 

In short, Wonhyo keeps pursuing the theoretical explana- 
tion of the relationship between k' ai FA and ho“> , show- 
ing the two as being completely amalgamated, whereas Ch'eng 
I turns from theoretical to practical considerations. 
See James Legge, Confucius: The Doctrine of the Mean 
(New York: Dover, 1971), pp. 382-383. 

59. This paragraph is found only in RC (T. 1844, 
vol. 44, p. 2025, iines 18-23); EN does not have it.” 
EN, however, has a similar paragraph (T. 1845, vol. 44, 
p. 226b, lines 5-14). 

60. The corresponding statement in EN is more in 
line with conventional expressions of humility: "I simply 
make a note for myself, I dare not expect this to be 

circulated to the world." (T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226b, 

line 25). 

210 

61. The discussion of the title, Invocation and 
Chapter One, "On Reasons (for Writing the Treatise)" 
(which occupy T. 1844, vol. 44 from p. 202b, line 28 to 
p. 206a, line 16), are not found in EN. 
62. See my discussion of the title in section two 
of Part One. 
63. In order to define "Maha" here, Wonhyo uses 
the formula of principle (fa sk) and its significations 
(i Es ), which is used for defining "Mahaydna" at the 
beginning of Chapter Two of the AFM itself. Chapter Two 
("On Establishing what Mahayana Means") begins: 
---in general, there are two ways 
of explaining the term "Mahayana." 
What are the two? The first is 
its principle and the second is its 
Significations. The word "principle" 
means the mind of sentient beings... 
The significations of Mahayana are 
three in number...the greatness of 
its essence...the greatness of its 
attributes...the greatness of its 
Operation... 

See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 20-28. 

64. Two texts fall under the rubric Hsu-k'ung-tsang 
ching or AkaSagarbha-sutra. One is BuddhayaSa's transla- 
tion (T. 405, vol. 13, p. 647¢ - p. 656b); the other is 
Fa-t'ien's (T. 1147, vol. 20, p. 604c - p. 607a). The 
latter was translated in the tenth century A.D. during 

the Sung dynasty. It is obvious, therefore, that Wonhyo 

is referring to the earlier translation. We have not 

211 | 

been able to identify the exact location of this passage. 
The analogy of a vehicle for yana also occurs in the 
Ta-~chih-tu lun. See T. 1509, vol. 25, p. 244c. 

65. Here the meaning of Mahayana is contrasted to 
that of Hinayana. Thus, it is not completely accurate to 
state that the meaning of "Mahayana" in the title of AFM 
is in no way to be understood as referring to Mahayana 
Buddhism as opposed to Hinayana Buddhism. See AF-H, p. 
28, author's explanatory comment. 

66. The ssu she fa a PK (also known as the ssu 
she shih wis & ) or catuh-samgraha-vastu are: 

(1) giving what others like (dana; 0 HE. ); 

(2) affectionate speech (priyavacana; ie ); 

(3) conduct profitable to others (arthakrtya; 4/47 ); 

(4) cooperation with and adaptation of oneself to 

others (samanarthata; jg} = ). 

(Adapted from Soothill's A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist 

Terms, p. 175b). 

67. Shih shan yeh +2 - This refers to the prac- 
tice of the ten precepts: not to kill, not to steal, not 
to commit adultery, not to lie, not to speak with "double- 

tongue, not to use coarse language, not to use filthy 
language, not to covet, not to become angry, not to have 
perverted views. (Adapted from ibid., p. 50a; see also 

ibid., p. 47a). 

212 

68. The ssu wu liang hsin wtie or catvari 

apramanani cittani are: 

(1) boundless mercy (in bestowing of joy or happi- 
ness (maitri apram&na citta; BES ss); 

(2) boundless compassion (in saving others from 
suffering) (karuna apramana citta; ab ee | S* )3 

(3) boundless sympathetic joy (on seeing others 
rescued from suffering) (mudita apramana citta; 
SSIs); 

(4) boundless even-mindedness (i.e., rising above 
the distinctions of friend and enemy, love and 
hate, etc.,) (upeksa apramana citta; SELES iS ). 

The ssu wu liang hsin wa 4E-S are four of the 

twelve dhyanas Ae! or concentrations, and are also known 
as the ssu teng oe , or the four equalities, and the 
ssu fan hsing aAK fF , or the four noble acts. (Adapted 
from ibid., p. 178a-b). 

69. The ch'i chifeh pao sheng +E FYE are usually 

known as the ch'i chitieh chih a ea (saptabodhyangani) 
or the seven limbs of enlightenment. They are: 

(1) mindfulness (smeti; 2); 

(2} investigation of dharmas (dharmapravica ar fe AR); 

(3) vigor (virya; RE): 

(4) joyous zest (priti: ); 

(5) tranquility (praSrabodhi; BEY); 

213 

(6) concentration (samadhi; ge ); 

(7) even-mindedness (upeksa; += ). 

The saptabodhyangani comprise one of the seven groups 
into which the thirty-seven conditions leading to bodhi 
or Buddhahood (saptatrimSad bodhipaksika dharmah 
Srk BH iz) are divided. The seven groups are: 

(1) the four applications of mindfulness (smrty- 

upasthana; wT); 
(2) the four right efforts (samyakprahana; Ww iE Sy ); 
(3) the four bases of psychic power (rddhipada; 
Wass E ); 

(4) the five spiritual faculties (pancaindriyani; 
BAR )3 

(5) the five powers (pancabalani; BA ); 

(6) the seven limbs of enlightenment (saptabodhyangani; 
BER 

(7) the eightfold noble path (astamarga; /\ E38 ). 
See the Ta-chih-tu lun, Roll 39, (T. 1509, vol. 25, pp. 
343-348) and Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 2, pp. 1548b-1550b. 

70. The ssu cheng ch'in WES or catvarisamyakpra- 
hanani are: 

(1) to prevent evil from arising (anutpannanam 
papakanam akuSalanam dharmanam anutpadaya chandam janayati 
vyayacchate viryam arabhati cittam pragrhnati samyak 
pradadhati; Fe ow a ); 

214 

(2) to put an end to existing evil (utpannanam 
papakanam akuSalanam dharmanam prahanaya; CHEE S AEST ): 

(3) to bring good into existence (anutpannanam 
kuSalanam dharmanam utpadaya FEZ A> HE ); 

(4) to develop existing good (utpannanam kuSalanam 
dharmanam sthitaye 'sampramosaya bhlyo bhavanatayai 
pariptranaya; CEE Nee ). 

(Adapted from Lancaster's Lists of Buddhist Terms, p. 5). 

71. The we =,0r smrty-upasthana are: 

(1) contemplating the body (kaya; & ) as impure; 

(2) contemplating feeling (vedana; iF) as resulting 

in suffering; 

(3) contemplating thought (citta;,|\\ ) as impermanent; 

(4) contemplating things (dharma; j% ) as having no 
seif-nature. 

72. The four bases of psychic power (catvari 
rddhipada) are known in Chinese, as the ssu ju-i tsu 
Wet F , the ssu shen tsu wr AE or the ssu ju-shih 
kuan Wer Be They are: 

(1) desire (chanda rddhipada; ASR REE ); 

(2) vigor (virya rddhipada; SHRP): 

(3) thought (citta rddhipada; ASAE )i 

(4) exploration (mimamsa rddhipada; Ba ek ). 

73. The Five Powers (pahcabalani BA } are: 

(1) power of faith (Sraddha bala; = v1) ); 

(2) power of vigor (virya bala; 3 7] ); 

215 

(3) power of mindfulness (smrti bala; & # ); 

(4) power of concentration (samadhi bala; 4 WO): 

(5) power of wisdom (prajna bala; 4 7] )- 

74. The Six Perfections (paramita) are: 

(1) giving (dana; te Re): 

(2) morality (Sila; RR ); 

(3) patience (kgantis Zk ); 

(4) vigor (virya; Ha): 

(5) concentration (dhyana; HF ); 

(6) wisdom (prajia; AH ); 

75. BAR SE expresses the profoundest under- 
Standing of the Four Noble Truths (arya~satya) which are: 

(1) suffering (dubkha; ); 

(2) origin of suffering (samudaya; & ); 

(3) cessation of suffering (nirodha: 3) ; 

(4) path leading to the cessation of suffering 

(mrga:3G ). 

76. The full Chinese title of this text is 
ET EB EB Be (T. 1606, vol. 31, pp. 694-774). 
It is usually called the Tui-fa lun Saw: It was 
written by Sthiramati and translated by Hstian-tsang. See 
KSL (T. 2154, vol. 55, p. 556b, lines 17-18). 

77. %It is clear that this sentence was not written 
by Wonhyo, but is a later addition because (1) all editions 

of RC and CE print this line as a double row of small 

216 

characters (cf. T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 203a, line 5; 

Z. vol. 71, p. 312-2a, line 11); (2) the first five can- 
not be taken simply as causes of the next two because 
without the last two the first five are actually imposs- 
ible. Should this line be regarded as Wénhyo's it might 
then be taken as an expedient means to emphasize the 
importance of practice. 

78. The Prakaranaryavaca-Sastra was written by 
Asanga and translated by Hstian-tsang between 645 and 646 A.D. 
The full Chinese title is Hsien-yang sheng-chiao lun 
Bain 2 Bk A (T. 1602, vol. 31, pp. 480b-583b) which 
was an important text of the Fa-hsiang school in China. 
See Ono Gemmyo, BKD, Vol. 3, p. 182c and T. 2154, vol. 

55, p. 556b, lines 9-10. 

79. The Twelve Divisions of the Buddhist Canon 
(dvadaSaiga-buddha-vacana +=GF#X) are: (1) sutra; 

(2) geya; (3) vyakarana; (4) gatha; (5) udana; (6) nidane; 
(7) avadana; (8) itivrttaka; (9) jataka; (10) vaipulya; 

(11) adbhuta-dharma; (12) upaceSa. For further informa- 
tion see Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 3, pp. 2337¢c-2339a and 

Egaku Mayeda, Genshi bukkyS seiden no seiritsushi kenkyw 
(Tokyo: Sankibo busshorin, 1964), esp. Part II, pp. 181-550. 

89. "Excellent Mind" is the English translation of 
i-lo z cS or a-shih-yeh Re EB (aSaya) which means "joy 
of the mind." See Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 1, p. 36a. For 

217 

further discussion of aSaya see Hsien-yang sheng-chiao 
dun, Roll 3 (T. 1602, vol. 31, pp. 491b-497a). 

81. Here sambhara (nourishment) for the attainment 
of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi (Supreme Perfect Wisdom), 
which is the achievement of bliss and wisdom, is 
mentioned. 

82. The term "three great asamkhyeya kalpas" 
(incalculable aeons) has various Chinese equivalents, 
such as Sree 4a or simply =/ BLE, or else 
EKA PG LSB , which Wonhyo uses here. 

83. This Sastra was written by Maitreya and trans- 
lated by Hsiian-tsang. Its full Chinese title is Yu- 
-chieh-shih-ti lun Seyihe Eapikaey (T- 1579, vol. 30, pp. 
279-882). See KSL (T. 2154, vol. 55, p. 556b, line 7). 

84. Nanjo's catalogue lists Maitreya as the original 
author of the text (Nj. 1806). However, Taisho does not 
“give the author's name (T. 1581, vol. 30, pp. 888-959). 

S x 
The text was translated by T'an Wu-ch'an E32 }GV (Dharma- 
ksema) at Ku-tsang. See KSL (T. 2154, vol. 55, p. 519c, 
line 24). 

85. Yugaron Pahoa : Yu-ch'ieh lun usually 
indicates Maitreya-natha's Yogacarabhimi-Sadstra (T. 1579). 
However, we have not been able to locate this passage 

in that text. 
86. This statement about faith, that the principle 

really exists, should not be misconstrued as contradicting 

218 

the Emptiness doctrine in Mahayana Buddhism. On the 
contrary, with this statement Wonhyo is trying to lead 
the reader away from a nihilistic view to the world of 
Stmyata. This is evinced by the statement soon follow- 
ing, that all dharmas are unobtainable. 

87. This is a key message pervading all the Prajha- 
paramita literature. See Edward Conze, Buddhist Wisdom 
Books (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1966), p. 36 and 
T. 225, vol. 18, p. 749b. 

88. Wonhyo apparently adopted the idea of three 
faiths from Paramartha's translation of Vasubhandu's 
Mahayanasangrahabhasya (She ta-ch'eng lun shih fg Kee . 
In the seventh roll of this work we read: AEG BFE 
EF =far[fs fe RE ae. See T. 1595, 
vol. 31, p. 199b, line 21. 

89. This is quoted from Buddhabhaura's translation 
of the Ta-fang-kuang fo-hua-yen ching KF JE N® BR KE ’ 
Roll 6. The first four lines are from T. 278, vol. 39, 

p. 433a, lines 26-27; the next four lines are from T. 278, 
vol. 9, Dp. 433b, lines 6-7. 

90. The relationship between chong ch'e Es fe 
tsung-t'i or "the essence of the doctrine," which corres- 
ponds to the Tae-sung KE : Ta-ch'eng of the title, and 
stingnting Agee: sheng-neng or "efficacious operation," 
which corresponds to the kishin FLAS : ch'i-hsin of the 

219 

title, is here considered by Wonhyo simply to be that of 
thi (AK) and yung (FA). Therefore, one must say that 
for Wénhyo Mahayana and awakening faith must not be treat- 
ed as two separate things but as one thing having two 
aspects. 

91. For the sake of consistency we have translated 
the phrase somun $4 xX : hsiao-wen, which WSnhyo uses 
here, in a manner similar to the way in which we trans- 
lated the phrase aimun hy inti (KX BEB: i-wen hsien-i, 
which Wonhyo uses in the first paragraph of RC, namely, 
as "on clarifying the meaning of the sentences." It is 
interesting to note the various ways in which Wonhyo 
expresses this idea. Besides the two variants indicated 

nd 

above, Wonhyo uses timun soshik /#R3C “aS @_: i-wen hsiao- 
shsi in the beginning of EN (T. 1845, vol. 44, D. 226a, 
lines 10-11), but later in EN he simply uses somun SEX : 
hsiao-wen (ibid, p. 226b, line 27). Thus we may say that 
Wonhyo employs soshik $4 @ : hsiao-hsi as identical in 
meaning with hyonii 25 -: hsien-i, and that he simplifies 
both as somun SAC : hsilao-wen. 

92. It is not clear who is responsible for the 
triangular marks which appear at the top of lines four 
and six on page 312-Lla, Z. vol. 71. Both the Chin-ling- 

-k'e-ching-ch‘u and the Haeinsa editions have these 

triangles. They are not found in the Taisho edition. 

220 

The nature of the sentences immediately following these 
marks makes their function clear: sometimes they indicate 
that an analysis of the organizational structure of 
Wonhyo's commentary follows: sometimes they indicate 

that an analysis of the content of the commentary follows. 
Thus, we have parenthetically indicated the presence 

and function of these triangular marks in our translation 
with the terms "structural analysis" and "content analysis" 
respectively. 

93. The Three Treasures, Fo-pao (#'¥. (Buddharatna), 
Fa-pao 2. (Dharmaratna) and Seng-pao Kee. (Sangharatna) 
are traditionally regarded as being the objects in which 
all Buddhists take refuge. However, we have deliberately 
avoided using the expression "taking refuge in..." In- 
stead, we employ the term "returning to" because (1) the 
Chinese term Kuei-ming Bea implies returning to the 
source, even at the expense of one's own life, and (2) 
in Wénhyo's understanding the Three Treasures are nothing 
but one's own original mind. In light of Wonhyo's under- 
standing, which we have adopted, returning to each of 
the Three Treasures means returning to one's own original 
mind. To speak of "taking refuge" in one's own original 
mind is rather odd; thus, we have refrained from employ- 
ing this customary rendering of Kuei-ming 5 

94. Here Wénhyo uses the neng-se FEAT or agent- 

object construction in analyzing the meaning of "returning" 

221 

(kuei §E). This would seem to contradict our interoreta- 
tion of Kuei-ming fe ein note 93. But if the neng-so 

BE Pr construction is regarded not as implying a dichotomy 
between agent and object but as an analytical device for 
exposing the dynamics of returning, then our interpreta- 
tion in note 93 is consistent with Wonhyo's statement 
here. 

95. It is both interesting and important to con- 
Sider what is meant in Wonhyo's system py "Supreme Lord": 
is it Buddha, who is not myself, or is it One Mind, which 
is my own original mind? This is a key issue of Wonhyo's 
thought which needs to be investigated. 

96. The six faculties are: 

(1) the faculty of eye (caksur-indriya; HEAR) ; 

(2) the faculty of ear (Srotra~indriya; HK); 

(3) the faculty of nose (ghrana~indriya; SHE ); 

(4) the faculty of tongue (jikva-indriya; 4 ZR ); 

(5) the faculty of touch (kaya~indriya; FR ); 

(6) the faculty of mind (mano~indriya; % R ) . 

See Hirakawa Akira's introduction to his Index to the 
AbhidharmakoSabhasya, Tokyo: Daizo shuppan kabushiki 
kaisha, 1973. 

97. The six objects are: 

(1) color and shape (ripa~artha; & 3 ); 

(2) sound (Sabda-artha; ag ); 

(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

98. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

99. 

222 

fragrance (gandha-artha; $8); 

taste (rasa~artha; URIS); 

tangibility (sprastavya~artha; Bee) ; 
dharma (dharma-artha: jKYE). 

The six senses are: 

the sense of 

the sense 
the sense 
the sense 
the sense 

the sense 

of 
of 
of 

of 

of 

eye (caksur-vijnhana; eae) ; 
ear (Srota-vijnana; # So Ys 
nose (ghrana-vijianar O3); 
tongue (jihva-vijnhana; 4 =a a) 
touch (kByaqvijSana; SRV); 
mind (mano-vijhana; ar & ). 

REE 

This is our translation of the original Chinese 

Py Be RPE Sek, (T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 203b, 
lines 18-19) which, together with Kz A wf 7g — SS 

(T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 204b, line 19) is one of the most 

important premises in Wonhyo's thought. 

100. 

Here Wonhyo explains the Buddha's excellence 

using the relationship of t'i UB) and yung ( )} or 

"essence" and its "operation." The following diagram 

shows Wonhyo's analysis of the excellence of Buddha. 

223 

The Excellence of Buddha Ate q we 
Excellence of mind Excellence of form 
SKE, &4z. 

Ts AR Omniscient Unimpeded 
(Essence) bee 
Mes 2 é gett 

Yung Most excellent acts Omnipotent 
(Operation) zx = te 

101. The p'alsang ,\7A +: pa-hsiang or eight marks 
of the Buddha's life are: 

(1) descent from the Tusita heaven; 

(2) birth in the Lumbini garden; 

(3) passing through the four gates; 

(4) leaving home; 

(5) practice in the Himalaya mountains; 

(6) the surrender of Mara; 

(7) preaching at Deer Park; 

(8) entering Nirvana. 

For the traditional account of the Buddha's life 
see The Life of Buddha, ed. by Zozayong, Seoul: Emille 
Museum, 1975. 

102. The ten directions are the eight points of 
the compass (N, E, S, W, NE, NW, SE, SW), the zenith 
and the nadir. 

103. Exactly the same passage was quoted by Wonhyo 
in his explanation of the meaning of Mahayana above. See 

T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 203a, lines 3-4. 

224 

104. We nave not been able to locate this passage 
in any of the three translations of this text made prior 
to the time of Wénhyo's writing: BuddhaSanta's (T. 1952, 
vol. 31, pp. 97-113), Paramartha's (T. 1953, vol. 31, 
pp- 113-132), and Hstan-tsang's (T. 1954, vol. 31, pp. 
132-152). 

105. See T. 278, vol. 9, p. 400a, line 7. 

106. The mutual operation of the five faculties 
means the ability to substitute one faculty for another, 
or the ability to make one faculty do the function of 
all the others, which is one of the Buddha's powers. 

107. Here "ten bodies" means the ten aspects of 
the Buddhakaya. See Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 3, pp. 2262a- 
2264c. 

108. T. 374, vol. 12, pp. 502c-503a. 

109. For the chapter of "Ten Stages" see T. 278, 
vol. 9, pp. 542-578. See especially p. 565b-c. 

110. T. 262, vol. 9, pp. 10b-19a. For the most 
recent English translation of this chapter from the 
Saddharmapundarika-sutra see Leon Hurvitz, Scripture 
of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine Dharma (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1976), pp. 49-83. 

lll. T. 125, vol. 2, p. 717b, lines 15-22. 

112. There is no disagreement among the traditional 

commentators concerning the three phrases extolling the 

225 

Buddha treasure which are found in the first two lines of 
the Invocation: 

(1) Him who pervades...; 

(2) Who has form but...; 

(3) The greatly compassionate one... 
(Z. vol. 71, p. 312-la, lines 8-9; T. 1666, vol. 32, 
p- 575b, lines 10-11.) There is a disagreement, however, 
between Wénhyo and other commentators, such as Hui-yuan 
and Fa-tsang, concerning the phrases extolling the Dharma 

Treasure. According to Wonhyo, only the two phrases 
RAR G BE Hana SEE Shoe refer to the Dharma 
Treasure. He regards the phrase that follows, xp fe sy , 
as referring to the Sangha treasure. Hui-ytian and Fa- 
-tsang, on the other hand, regard all three phrases as 
pertaining to the Dharma Treasure. For Hui-ytan's view 
see T. 1843, vol. 44, p. 117a, lines 4-13; for Fa-tsang's 
Opinion see T. 1846, vol. 44, p. 247b, lines 25 ff. 

113. Dharma Treasure (Fa-pao Ske ox Dharmaratna), 
one of the three treasures (san-pao ="=% or triratna) 
usually refers to the teaching of Buddha, or the Buddhist 
scriptures. But here Wonhyo tries to explain it, using 
the trikaya of Three Body theory, as meaning the 
sambogakaya or "Reward Body" of Buddha. 

114. The lines from the Ta-chih-tu lun KP SS 

that Wonhyo quotes here do not correspond exactly to 

226 

the lines as found in the Taishd edition of that text 
(see T. 1509, vol. 25, p. 298b, lines 19-21); WOnhyo 
probably condensed them. T. 1509 says: 

a At ESE KE FA Ee ee 

Aik & KAA eee BF 
Se ee $28 —in +e RDA YT 

WSnhyo's version is Ae terse for ascertaining the mean- 
ing; thus we based our translation on the Taishd version 
quoted above. 

115. "Gold bearing stone" is literally "yellow 
stone" ( &E ); “silver bearing stone" is literally 
"white stone" ( RA). 

116. Here Wonhyo applies the idea of affirmation 
and negation to the concept of Suchness; Wonhyo's concern 
with affirmation and negation was seen previously at the 
beginning of his EN (T. 1845, vol. 44, p. 226b, lines 4-9). 
We have not been able to determine whether the concern 
with affirmation and negation is originally Wonhyo's, 
whether he adopted it from Hua-yen teaching, or whether 
he derived it from the AFM itself. 

1i7. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576b, lines 15-18. 

118. T. 278, vol. 9, p. 788a, lines 4-7. 

119. By regarding the phrase Ae lZ © 
as pertaining to the sangha and not the Dherma, as opposed 

to both Hui-yuan (T. 1843, vol. 44, p. 176b, lines 18-19) 

227 

and Fa-tsang (T. 1846, vol. 44, p. 247b, lines 25£)-- 
modern Japanese scholars, such as Takemura Shoh6 (Daijo 
kishinron kodoku, Kyoto: Hyakukaen, 1959, p. 13) and 
Ui Hakuju (Daijo kishonron, Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1936, 
p- 98) follow Fa-tsang--Wonhyo seems to want to emphasize 
human beings, because the Sangha is a human community. 
However, not to mislead his readers into thinking that 
human beings are thereby confirmed in their ordinary 
condition, Wonhyo points to the DaSabhimika Bodhisattvas 
(see note 120), who had reached a certain stage of prac- 
tice, as the example of what the Sangha is. See note 112. 

120. DaSabhtmika Bodhisattvas are Bodhisattvas who 
are at the Shih-ti +i stage, the last group of ten 
stages in the fifty-two stage process of becoming a 
Buddha. The fifty-two stages are: 

1-10: the stage of ten faiths, shih-hsin +(5 ; 

11-20: the stage of ten dwellings, shih-chu +f ; 

21-30: the stage of ten conducts, shih-hsing + /7 ; 

31-40: the stage of ten returns, shih-hui-hsiang 

32 e7 

41-50: the stage of ten bhumi, shih-ti +itb; 

Sl: the stage of Identical Enlightenment, 
Af 
teng-chueh ae ; 
52: the stage of Marvelous Enlightenment, 

miao-chueh </,S. 
fg 

228 

See Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 2, pp. 1214a-1217a. See also 
Garma C.C. Chang, The Buddhist Teaching of Totality 
(University Park, Philadelphia: The Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1974}, pp. 28-47. 

121. By saying this Wonhyo clearly shows that he 
maintains the position that the possibility of having 
such limitless virtue is open to everybody, yet, in fact, 
such virtues belong only to Bodhisattvas. 

122. This is also called the Ratnagotravibhaga- 
mahayanottara tantra-Sastra BE se oe [ee translated 
into Chinese by Ratnamati. See T. 1611, vol. 31, pp. 
813-848. The most recent and comprehensive treatment 
of this text is that by the famous expert on Tathegata- 
garbha thought, Takasaki Jikido, entitled A Study of 
the Ratnagotravibhaga (Uttarantantra), being a treatise 
Rome, 1966. 

123. The term IE eehe, translated here as "right 
essential wisdom," is also called "fundamental wisdom" 
(milajiana; FEA }, or the "non-discriminating wis- 
dom of pure intuition" (nirvikalpajfiana; 4# 4¥i| ). 

124. The term 42 42-Fe (prsthalabdhajiiana), which 
could also be translated "subsequent wisdom," means the 
wisdom obtained after the fundamental wisdom (FER) is 

obtained. This wisdom is wisdom applied to worldly 

229 

affairs, especially to the situation of suffering human 
beings. See Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 2, p. 1269a. 

125. Wonhyo is here actually commenting on the 
plural particle #, which occurs right after the term 
NEAT, or "practice." 

126. The Dharmasangiti-sutra was translated by 
Bodhiruci into Chinese and is included in the Taisho 
edition of the Tripitaka. See T. 761, vol. 17, pp. 609c- 
650b. 

127. See ibid., especially p. 635b, line 29 - 

p- 636a, line 6. 

128. This is the third §loka of the invocation 
(T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575b, lines 14-15). In Chinese, 
this Sloka begins with wei & and ends with ku $f. 
Because of the wei...ku % ... dx construction, our trans- 
lation begins with the word "because." But a question 
for the commentator arises as to where the subordinate 
clause, beginning with wei & and ending with kudy, be- 
longs. In other words, what is the main clause? If it 
is the first two Slokas, then the subordinate clause 
serves to explain why the author, offering up his life, 
returns to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. If, on the 
other hand, this clause is meant to show why the author 
is writing the treatise, then the main clause would be 

the next sentence, which begins with lun-yueh am , or 

230 

"I declare that..." In terms of grammar and style, the 
former possibility is more likely; in terms of logical 
sequence, however, the latter possibility is more reason- 
able. Wd6nhyo chose the latter. This is one of the 
unique features of Wénhyo's interpretation. 

129. tk eB Ae , or "seek wisdom 
above; transform sentient beings below," is one of the 
most popular Buddhist maxims in East Asia. WdoOnhyo re- 
places 5K Sep with LFA ~~ "broaden Buddha's 
way..." But in so doing he has not really altered the 
meaning because to broaden Buddha's way can mean to 
attain Buddha's wisdom and transmit it to future genera- 
tions. (We have left shang } , "above" and hsia T , 
"below" untranslated, as omitting them does not make the 
meaning any less clear, whereas including them introduces 
a false dichotomy too reminiscent of "heaven above" and 
"earth below" to be admissible in this context.) 

130. The one principle alluded to is the principle 
that all sentient beings are Buddhas. The conclusion 
that seems to follow from this, “then no sentient being 
exists," causes a problem for the questioner. 

131. There are many vows for Bodhisattvas in Maha- 
yana Buddhism. In East Asia, four "great" vows are 
especially popular. They were formulated originally in 

the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. They are: 

—_——e i eee 

231 

I vow to save all sentient beings 
everywhere; 
I vow to cut off all the passions 
everywhere; 
I vow to study all the Buddhist 
teachings everywhere; 
I vow to achieve the unsurpassed 
Buddha Way. 
Quoted from Philip B. Yampolsky, The Platform Sutra of 
the Sixth Patriarch (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1967), p. 143. (For the original Chinese of the Tun-huang 
text of these vows, see ibid., p. 9 of the Appendix and 
also Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 2, pp. 1755a-1756c). Obviously, 
WOnhyo is here referring to the first of these four vows. 
132. The six destinies (gati) are: 
(1) gods (deva; KE )> 
(2) men (manusya; X Pj ); 
(3) asura (asura; Paigge)? 
(4) animals (tiryagyoni; @ pe ); 
(5) hungry ghosts (preta; By yi 

(6) beings in the hells (nairayika; tty yey ). 

133. BE NS , ox "producing great mind," is an 

abbreviated form of FEV ARSE HGS, = SEE or 

"producing the mind of Anuttarasamyaksambodhi. In Buddhism, 

there is nothing greater than Anuttarasamyaksambodhi, or 

“peerless right wisdom." Therefore, it is called 

or "Great Mind." 

232 

134. Chih i} (Samatha) is translated "cessation" 
or "tranquilization" by D.T. Suzuki and "cessation of 
illusion" by Hakeda. We have translated it as "tranquili- 
zation." See APM-S, p. 128, and AFM-H, p. 93. 

135. For kuan ey, (vipaSyana) Suzuki gives "intel- 
lectual insight" while Hakeda gives "clear observation." 

Here we follow Hakeda. See AFM-H, p. 93. 

136. The treatise referred to here is the Ta-chih-tu 
lun. See T. 1509, vol. 25, p. 63a, lines 1-2. 

137. "The verse" refers to the third $loka of the 
invocation (T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575b, lines 14-15). 
"Because" is wei Z ; "in order to" is ku $¢-. See the 
argument in note 128. 

138. In the expression lun-yteh Zee , both lun Se 
and yueh& are verbs. Therefore, the subject "I" is 
skipped. The expression is emphatic: it means "(I) declare." 
Takemura Shoho's analysis is in agreement with ours, where- 
as Ui Hakuju's is not. (See Takemura Shoho, Daijo kishin 
ron Kodoku (Kyoto: Hyakugaen, 1959), p. 15; Ui Hakuju, 

Daijo kishin ron (Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1936), p. 9). But Ui 
Hakuju's translation, "The treatise says," is improbable 

in this context. It would only be justified if AFM were 
quoting another treatise, which it is not. 

Suzuki seems to translate lun-yueh ee & as "discourse;" 

Hakeda seems to translate it as "the contents of the 

233 

discourse." See AFM-S, p. 48 and AFM-H, p. 24. 

139. Our translation of the chapter titles differs 
Somewhat from Hakeda's. These differences mainly reflect 
Wénhyo's understanding of the text. The important differ- 
ences with Hakeda are in the translations of the titles 
of the second and fourth chapters. Hakeda translated the 
title of the second chapter, 3148 77 , aS, Simply, "Out- 
line." He translated the title of the fourth chapter, 
NEAT Es > , aS "On Faith and Practice." We have 
translated the title of the second chapter as "On Estab- 
lishing (what Mahayana) Means" because 7,‘ means more 
than “outline;" that is, the second chapter may be com- 
pared to a proclamation of the doctrine while the third 
chapter is the explanation of the proclaimed doctrine. 
Therefore, Wonhyo says in his commentary on the second 
chapter below, 

Until (the meaning) has been definitive- 

ly established, the essence of a doctrine 

cannot be Known. 
We have translated the title of the fourth chapter as 
"On Practicing Faith," because the fourth chapter is not 
about faith and practice but about how to practice faith. 
See AFM-H, p. 24. 

140. It is very difficult to translate this sentence 
without adding the character 1: BE, "to be free from," 

immediately before fen-tuan FE. The original Chinese 

234 

sentence has probably been corrupted during the course 
of transmission. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 205a, line 3. 

141. Again, it is difficult to translate this sen- 
tence. It does not make sense unless one adds the two 
characters JE, "not seeking," at the very beginning of 
the sentence. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 205a, lines 5-6. 

142. In the context of AFM, "the Great Way" (38) 
refers to the Way of the Bodhisattva. See T. 1666, vol. 
32, p. 580b. 

143. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 582a, lines 6-12. 

144. Ibid., p. 582a, line 12 - p. 583a, line 1l. 

145. Ibid., lines 12-22. 

146. In Buddhist texts fa}# can be rendered in 
various ways: "dharma," "principle," "teaching," "method," 
etc. In Chapter One of AFM fa3# occurs four times (T. 1666, 
vol. 32, p. 575b, line 26; p. 575c, lines 7, 8 and 16). 

In all cases fai#is used in the same sense as in the 
first sentence after the Invocation: eG a Asx Stee. 
PER RT(Et , or "I declare that there is a principle 
which can arouse the root of Mahayana faith." For the 
meaning of "dharma" in Indian Buddhism see Theodore 

Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of Buddhism and 

———_#_ nee ee 

Society, 1923. 
147. "The Perfect Voice (yuan-yin a>) usually 

means the Buddha's teaching, which always avoids egocentric 

235 

partiality and represents perfect truth. Here Wénhyo 
tries to explain the meaning of the Perfect Voice using 
the Hua-yen notion of totality. For the meaning of total- 
ity, see Garma C.C. Chang, The Buddhist Teaching of 
Totality, Part One: "The Realm of Totality" (University 
Park, Philadelphia: The Pennsylvania State University 
Press, 1974), pp. 2-55. 

148. Below Wénhyo furnishes three scholars' opinions 
concerning the identity of Perfect Voice and One Voice. 
Wonhyo does not specify the scholars' names, so their 
identity is unknown, but a similar discourse is found in 
the first volume of the Ta-fang-kuang fo-hua-yen ching 
KFS EB Kee HE , written by Ch'eng-kuan YB BG (2-839) , 
the fourth patriarch of the Hua-yen school in China. See 
T. 1735, vol. 35, p. 508a, line 28 and following. For 
more information about the One Voice doctrine, see Mochi- 
zuki, BDJ, Vol. 1, p. 128a-b. 

149. We cannot identify this quotation; however, the 
idea is very similar to a well-known line in the First 
chapter of the Wei-mo ching, 48 VERE : Al Ee = Se Ze SK 
EE fa #8 48. A . See T. 475, vol. 14, p. 
538a, line 2. 

150. This is our translation of Pe2 ez . 
Kung ‘¥ and shang 7H are the first and second notes of the 

pentatonic scale used in traditional Chinese music. 

236 

151. The four tones, said to have been first 
classified by Shen Yo, are: 

(1) the even tone: p'ing sheng F ja? 

(2) the rising tone: shang sheng | BF; 

(3) the sinking tone: ch'u sheng +z ; 

(4) the entering tone: ju sheng NE - 

See Herbert A. Giles, A Chinese-English Dictionary (Taipei: 
Ch'eng wen Publishing Company, 1967), p. 1204b. 

152. The term Tseng-shang-ytian $B LEK or "addi- 
tional conditions," is adhipati-pratyaya in Sanskrit and 
Means "conditions which increase or amplify any main 
factor." (See Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 4, pp. 3070a-3071a). 
For the most systematic discussion of the term see 
Vasubandhu's AbidharmakoSa-Sastra, translated by Hsuan- 
~tsang, Roll 7, the chapter on indriya (T. 1558, vol. 29, 
pp. 36b-40c). 

‘\ 

. i- i . Roe. . e 14, s 
153 Wei-mo ching ae oe ae T. 475, vol Pp 

538a,line 2. 

154. This is a favorite expression of the Hua-yen 
school. The most popular text about it in Korea os the 
Popsonggye SF AEA or The Poem of Dharmata, by Uisan 
(625-702). Uisang was the founder of the Hwadém jong 
ner or Hua-yen school in Korea. See T. 1887, vol. 45, 
po. 7lla~-7l6a. 

155. This quotation from the Avatamsaka-sutra does 

not exist in Buddhabhadra's translation (T. 278) except 

237 

for the second phrase, in a slightly altered form, as 

follows: 
—, fm 
Wonhyo's text: —“SeHeeZee (T. 1844, vol. 44, 

p. 205c, line 12) 

were OL 
Buddhabhadra's text: — ES St, oe (T. 278, vol. 9, 
p. 399b, line 4) 

156. The three time pericds are the past, the present 
and the future. 

157. Both ying-shen eee and hua-shen he & are used 
to translate the Sanskrit nirmanakaya, or "transofmration- 
body." However, some texts such as Hui-ylian's ( oe 
523-592) Ta-ch'eng i-chang KESE (T. 1851), use ying- 
~shen in a special sense to denote the body of Sakyamuni 
Buddha as having thirty-two marks. Here Wénhyo follows 
Hui-ylan's usage and distinguishes ying-shen TE F , or 
"cesponse-body” from hua-shen {+ & , or “transformation- 
body." See T. 1851, vol. 44, pp. 840c-841c. 

158. PREAENE. which we have translated as 
"the world of unhindered mutual entering" most probably 
denotes “the world of the jewel net of Indra" mentioned 
in the Hua-yen ching. See Francis Cook, Hua-yen Buddhism 
(University Park, Philadelphia: The Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1977), especially the first chapter, 
"The Jewel Net of Indra," po. 1-19. 

159. $-S oh He , "the world of limitless produc- 
tion," is equivalent to "the world of Hua-yen," but it 

especially denotes its arising aspects. See ibid. 

238 

160. "The world of Hua-yen" is also called "the 
world of Santi Fe ee) and Nirvana ( Ee) " because in 
it there is no longer any conceptual play. 

161. Aithough we have not been able precisely to 
locate the three kinds of no-hindrance doctrine in Buddha- 
bhadra's translation of the Avatamsaka-sutra (T. 278), 
which Wonhyo must have used, the idea of no-hindrance 
(wur-ai “BER; apratihata) pervades the entire text, espe- 
cially the last chapter, entitled Ju-fa-chieh pilin IAF ca 

, or "Chapter on Entering into the Dharma World." 
(T. 278, vol. 9, pp. 676-788). For more information on 
no-hindrance, see Mochizuki, BDJ, Vol. 5, pp. 4828c-4829a. 

162. Wonhyo's long discussion about the nature of 
Buddha's perfect voice ends here. The focus of this dis- 
cussion is, simply, on how one voice becomes Perfect Voice, 
by which every sentient being can gain understanding. 

163. The Mahaprajhaparamita-Sastra (Ta~chih-tu lun 
KE ES is attributed to Nagarjuna (150-250 A.D.) 
and was translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva (344-413 A.D.). 
See T. 1509, vol. 25, pp. 57-756. Etienne Lamotte's 
partial translation of this treatise into French, which 
Nagarjuna and which is in three volumes (Louvain: 1944, 
1949, 1970), was based on Kumarajiva's Chinese transla- 

tion. 

239 

164. See note 36. 

165. Without adding the clause, "it is called a 
vehicle," to the end of this sentence, the sentence, which 
ends in the Chinese original with the character ku, 
is left dangling. The received text of AFM is probably 
corrupt at this point. What Wénhyo says below, Tez w= 2) , 
etc., (T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 206c, lines 1-3) supports this. 

166. Many twentieth century Japanese scholars such 
as Yoshito Hakeda, D.T. Suzuki, Ui Hakuju and Hirakawa 
Akira emphasize that in this context the meaning of Maha- 
yana is not the same as its meaning when contrasted to 
Hinayana. See AFM-H, p. 28; Ui Hakuju, Daijo kishin ron 
(Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1936), p. 97; AFM-S, p. 48, and 
Hirakawa Akira, Daijo kishin ron (Tokyo: Daizo shuppan, 
1976), p. 53. However, Wonhyo here clearly characterizes 

” Mahayana as being opposed to Hinayana. This is a signi- 
ficant difference between Wonhyo and modern scholars. 

167. The passage referred to is the one that reads, 

Because the Suchness aspect of this 
mind shows the essence of Mahayana, 
(while) the causal and conditional 
aspect of the arising and ceasing of 
this mind can show_the attributes and 
operation of Mahayana itself. 
(T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 23-24). 
168. This passage is found in T. 1666, vol. 32, 

p. 576a, line 8. 

240 

169. This passage is found in T. 1666, vol. 32, 

p- 576a, line 24. The two aspects of Suchness are "really 
empty" and "really non-empty.” 

170. Ibid., p. 576b, line 8. 

171. Ibid., p. 577b, line 3. 

172. The phrase, 4B HER, is not found in AFM. 
But if it refers to the aspect of arising and ceasing, 
then Wonhyo must mean the phrase KB ak } FESR AE £ , 
which is found in T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 577c, line 26. 

173. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 578a, lines 19-21. 

174. It is not clear what is being referred to by 

_ . 
the phrase PF #e FZ (T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 206b, line 
24). But, based on the context, we have taken it as 
referring to the subsequent part of Wénhyo's interpreta- 
tion, and not to a subsequent part of AFM. 

175. There are four kinds of matrix of Tathagata: 

(1) the matrix of Tathagata which is empty; 

(2) the matrix of Tathagata which is non-empty; 

(3) the matrix of Tathagata which denotes that 
sentient beings are contained in the Tathagata; 

(4) the matrix of Tathagata which denotes that 
sentient beings contain the Tathagata within them. Here 
Wonhyo is indicating that the matrix of Tathagata which 
is "completely filled with the immeasurable virtues of 

(Buddha) nature" refers to the second and fourth kinds 

241 

of matrix of Tathagata. See Hirakawa Akira, Daijo 
kishin ron (Tokyo: Daizo shuppan, 1976), p. 63. 
176. This refers to Wénhyo's discussion of Tatha- 
gatagarbha in T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 206c, and p. 208b. 
177. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 28-29. 
178. Ibid., p. 575c, line 29 - p.- 5762, line 1. 
179. Ibid., p. 576a, lines 1-4, 
180. This paragraph may be diagrammed as follows: 

Chapter 3, "Explanation of the Principle of Mahayana" 

1. 

Revelation of right meaning 

2. Correction of wrong attachments 

Examination of the Way to be followed 

Correct explanation of the meaning 

Method of entering the Way 

Section on principle 

-— 2. Section of significations 

1. General explanation 

2. Specific explanation 

181. Wonhyo devotes more space to interpreting this 
passage from AFM than to any other in the first roll of 
CE. This is not surprising, for it is known as the most 
important passage in Chapter Three. It is highly debatable 

whether chen-ju B-4r and sheng-mieh HP may be translated 

242 

as "Absolute" and "phenomena," respectively, as they have 
been by Yoshito Hakeda (AFM-H, p. 31), because such a 
translation gives a strong impression of dichotomy, while 
Bic and He SR are never dichotomously contrasted in AFM. 
That is why the treatise can say, "these two aspects are 

inseparable from one another" (pu-hsiang-1li ATE BE)- 

meaning of this important idea. 

182. This passage occurs at the end of the first 
chapter (Ch'ing-fo p'in Sate gz) of Bodhiruci's transla- 
tion in 513 A.D. See T. 671, vol. 16, p. 519a, lines 1-2. 

183. AR Ze here again refers to Bodhiruci's transla- 
tion of the Lankavatara-sttra. Wonhyo frequently quotes 
from this sttra without mentioning the full title. See 
Rhi Ki-yong, "Kyongj6én inyong e nat'anan Wonhyo fi 
tokch 'angséng” REZ | FA otf LboE t+ IE 4 FEA AE, 
HBS, pp. 177-223. 

184. A very similar passage is found at the beginning 
of the eleventh chapter (Fo-hsing p'in (ME Sb) of 

Bodhiruci's translation of the Lankavatara-sutra: 

MeK2G ZERFZBK 

SEEKS AER BRR 

Bite i$, HB 4S4E (< 
See T. 671, vol. 16, p. 556b, lines 22-24. 

185. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576b, lines 7-8. 

243 

186. Ibid., lines 10-ii1. 

187. Of the three greatnesses, tlie , hsiang +8 
and yung FA Pas ae we is usually regarded as the greatness 
that belongs to the Suchness aspect of One Mind, while 
yung Fi is usually taken as belonging to One Mind's aris- 
ing and ceasing aspect. Here Wonhyo is emphasizing that 
all three greatnesses inhere in both aspects, because of 
the nature of the Tathagatagarbha. 

188. Wonhyo already explained why the nature of 
pure and impure dharmas is not two at the beginning of EN. 
See the schema in note 20. 

189. Rhi Ki-yoéng translates this sentence, u Ae 

we 
te2 x . 
PA See @ IMS" (Pp. 1844, vol. 44, p. 207a, line 2), 

quite differently. In his famous book, Wonhkyo sasang 
(Seoul: Hongbopwon, 1976; p. 111), we read: 

Since "One" means having nothing, how 

can it be said that someone possesses 

Mind? 

130. This paragraph echoes the beginning of RC. 
See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202a-b; T. 1845, vol. 44, 

p. 226a-b. 

191. T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 575c, lines 21-22. 

192. This section of EN (T. 1845, vol. 44, pp. 227b- 
228a), which concludes the first roll of CE, has no 
counterpart in RC. Actually, EN begins with the inter- 
rogative sentence, " ApH S42 PF " (see T. 1845), which 

CE omits (see Z. vol. 71, p. 316-2a, line 15). 

244 

193. The term t'ongsang 38 KH t'ung-hsiang, or 
“common attribute," is much favored by Wonhyo in his 
interpretation of AFM. In East Asian Buddhist terminology 
ttong means penetration by which all seemingly contra- 
dictory aspects are fused together. T'ongsang was crucial 
in Wonhyo's effort to harmonize all disputes among the 
various Buddhist schools. WSnhyo alone of the carly 
commentators of AFM used the idea of penetration in ex- 
plaining pu-hsiang-li AHS ae , or the inseparability of 
the two aspects of Suchness and arising and ceasing. 
Later, Fa-tsang followed Wonhyo. For the opinions of 
the early commentators about puchsiang-li AGHBE, see 
T'an-yen, Chi~hsin lun i-su (Z. vol. 71, p. 268-1b, 
line 11 and following); Hui-yuan, Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun 
izsu (T. 1843, vol. 44, p. 179c, line 6 - p. 180a, line 7); 
Fa-tsang, Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun i-chi (T. 1846, vol. 44, 
p. 25lc, line 15 - p. 252a, line 13). 

194. Here Wénhyo introduces the ideas of 1i3, 
"principle," and shih Z, "phenomena," which later became 
very popular through Fa-tsang's commentary. See T. 1846, 
vol. 44, p.25lc, line 28 - p. 252a, line 7. The in- 

separability of the two aspects may be diagrammed as follows: 

245 

Diagram of Inseparability of Two Aspects 

=F AAS He 
Ete PY 

In the aspect 
of Suchness 
principle alone 
is embraced; 

by When... 

When the two 
aspects are 

mutually | phenomena are 
exclusive not embraced + 
= Po Ke fe =< t Sci: a= EE = 

When the two | 
aspects are 
fused with are completely 

each other ak embraced .— 4 
=P A = ah + 17 

both principle 
and phenomena 

> ‘ 

In the 1 cect 
of arising and 
ceasing 

only phenomena 
are embraced; 
principle is 
not embraced 

1:6: Se STE 

both principle 
and phenomena 

are completely 
embraced 

sar = msiz 

: 

195. Here follow four pairs of questions and an- 

swers. 

in his interpretation of the passage. 

His G4e48 Ep FR 

The first question was already raised by Wénhyo 

ese AT BBE 

Als eR Bes den Peer gee Bek 

See T. 1655, vol. 

vol. 44, p. 206b, lines 14-16. 

32, p. 575c, Lines 23-25 and T. 1844, 

196. Fa-tsang favored this answer, so he duplicated 

this pair of questions and answers in his commentary on 

AFM (T. 1846, vol. 

44, p. 251c, line 24 and following). 

However, this answer itself necessitates a question: what 

is the difference between embracing the meaning (FEZ) 

and showing the meaning (AE )? The term, she tir: 

"embracing," has, in this context, very ontological 

246 

connotations while shih 7K, "showing," is epistemological 
in intent. That is, the aspect of Suchness functions 
ontologically to embrace attributes, while the aspect 

of arising and ceasing functions epistemologically to 

show the essence. Thus, "embracing" and "showing" are 
used to show the difference between the two aspects. 

But Wénhyo warns that such an interpretation is very provi- 
Sional; i.e., there is ultimately no such difference 
between the two. Therefore, they are inseparable from 

one another. 

197. The author of AFM is quite theoretical when 
he maintains the difference between the two aspects. 
Wonhyo tries to go beyond this approach by drawing out 
the implications of t'ong 34, or penetration. 

198. In Wénhyo's answer there appear several techni- 
cal terms drawn from the two major Mahayana Buddhist 
schools of Wonhyo's time: Madhyamika an@ Yogacara. aa Fil ME. 
and “KALA are, respectively, Paramartha's translation 
of parikalpita-svabhava, or "differentiatedness" and 
paratantra~svabhava, or "dependence." (T. 1593, vol. 31, 
p- 113b, iine 24). The sentence, " Ree 2 He Be, 
Rat Rese ," which occurs in T. 1845, vol. 44, 
p. 227c, lines 15-16, is very similar to the third verse 
of the first chapter of Nagarjuna's Madhyamakakarika 
(T. 1564, vol. 30, p. 2b, lines 6-7). 

247 

199. Although this line does not occur in precise- 
ly this form in any of the three Chinese translations of 
the Mahayanasamgraha-Sastra, a similar sentence, "SE Ae 
a SUE SESE GPE SRE Beery » 
is found in Paramartha's translation of the $astra (T. 1593, 
vol. 31, p. 119c, lines 14-15). 

200. The two natures which Wonhyo has been discuss- 
ing are actually two of the three natures mentioned in 
the Mahayanasamgraha-Sastra. Paramartha and Hsuan-tsang 
did not use the same Chinese term for each of the three 

natures (trisvabhavas) : 

(T. 1593) _ (t. 1552) 1594) 
* Bape | PF AE — tiatedness 
3. parinispanna- a = WE. ely SAE perfected- 

svabhava ness 

See Francis Cook, Hua-yen Buddhism (University Park, Phila- 
delphia: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1977), 
pp. 56-57. 

201. Ta-p'in tfpis the abbreviated title of the 
ey BES Re eee in 27 rolls, translated by Kumarajiva. 
See T. 223, vol. 8, p. 217-424 and also note 53. 

202. For information about Wénhyo's understanding 
of the Mahaparinirvana-sitra and the Avatamsaka-sutra, 

See notes 46 and 5l. 

248 

203. This is good evidence for the commonly held 
view that Wonhyo regards the Lankavatdra-sttra as the 
basis of AFM. Wonhyo's views on the textual development 
of Mahayana scriptures are interesting to note (T. 1845, 

vol. 44, pp. 227c, line 25 - p. 228a, line 1): 

—_ 

e . f . - . — Phaed — ° — 
First stage: PaficavimSatisahasrika-prajnaparamita- 

~sutra, which devotes itself to the aspect of Suchness; 

Second stage: Mahaparinirvana-sttra and Avatamsaka- 
~sutra, which dedicate themselves to the aspect of arising 
and ceasing; 

Third stage: Lankavatara-sutra and AFM, which em- 
phasize the penetration of the two aspects. 

204. The notion of Sui-ytian FEZ%, "transformed 
according to conditions," as well as its counterpart, Pu- 
=pien RS "unchanging," was greatly developed by 
Tsung-mi (750-840), the fifth patriarch of the Chinese 
Hua-yen school. For a discussion of Sui-ytian BeS% and 
Purpien 7% , see Tsung-mi, Ch'an-yiian chu-ch'tan-chi 
tu-hsu ABVe Sh EAE (T. 2015, vol. 48, pp. 397-413). 

205. The term pu-huai RE "not destroyed," 
occurs in T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576a, line 12 in the form 
atc a 

206. " 7S, SPS Su es ." Judging from 
the context, this sentence appears to be a quotation 
concluding Wonhyo's discussion of the aspect of Suchness. 

However, we cannot ascertain its location. 

249 

207. See T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576c, lines 13-14. 

208. " RE HE SE iy H HE -" This also 
‘looks like a quotation, concluding Wénhyo's discussion 
of the aspect of arising and ceasing. Again, we cannot 
ascertain its location. 

209. According to Wonhyo's understanding cf AFM, 
the whole of the third chapter is devoted to clarifying 
the meaning of pu-hsiang she-li AHESEE, or the 
inseparability of the two aspects. Therefore, it may 
well be said that both aspects explain the meaning of 
non-emptiness. For the non-emptiness of the Suchness 
aspect, see T. 1666, vol. 32, p. 576b, lines 5-7. 

219. See T. 223, vol. 8, p. 250b, lines 19-20. 

211. See Roll 16 of Dharmaksema's translation of 
the Mahaparinirvana-sutra in T. 374, vol. 12, p. 461c, 
lines 16-17. 

212. Wonhyo's terms for the fifty-two stages 
(+ =A) of a Bodhisattva's career differ somewhat from 
the ordinary. Thus, he uses+¢for++%, or the tenth 
bhumi and+f%for+(:. However, this is common in old 
Buddhist texts. So, for example, Kumarajiva translated 
DaSabhumika-sttra as Shih-chu ching +-fF4% and not as 
Shih-ti ching +++ 42%, as one might expect. See T. 286, 
vol. 19, pp. 497-535. 

250 

Appendix: Preface to the Publication of the Korean 

Commentary” on On Awakening Faith 

Of the commentaries which interpret On Awakening 
Mahayana Faith, three are traditionally considered to be 
masterpieces.> (Their authors,) Fa-tsang, Hui-ylian and 
Wonhyo are called the three masters of this treatise. Of 
these commentaries, the first two have already been in 
circulation for a long time. This (is because) the time 
and conditions (for their circulation) have long been 
ripe. But I had only heard of the existence of this 
(i.e., Wonhyo's) commentary; I still had not read it after 
many years had passed only (because) the time was not yet 
right (for its circulation). As the Biography of (Eminent) 
Monks reports, when Ch'eng-kuan of (Mt.) Ch'ing-liang 
was instructed by Fa-tsang in the meaning of the Korean 
commentary on On Awakening Faith, he said that this text 
is far superior to all others. Tnis fact should be known. 
In our (i.e., Japanese) commentaries (this text) is often 
quoted, but we had never seen the work in its entirety. 
Therefore, we had trouble in investigating the framework 
of its interpretations. Accordingly, every student in the 
field could not but regret (this fact). 

Recently, a Mr. In told me that someone had given (him) 

251 

this silk edition and had given permission for it to be 
published and circulated. (Mr. In) wanted (me) to punctuate 
(it). He implored me very sincerely. Moreover, I regarded 
the right time (for its circulation) as having properly 
arrived. Since I was glad that this commentary had fallen 
into my hands, I accepted (this task) willingly. Immediate- 
ly I read it with reverence and edited it. However, I am 
dull by nature (and) I do not have the capacity for doing 

my best. How dare I think profoundly? (Therefore,) I 
“humbly beg that experts will--(and that would be) fortunate-- 

make all the (necessary) corrections. 

On an autumn day in the cyclical vear Heishi (1696 A.D.) 
of Ryuhi, the ninth year of Genroku (Tokugawa Period, Japan). 
Kakugen, of Chiseki's> school 

in Rakuto. 

252 

Notes to Appendix 

1. Kakugen's preface was written in 1696; only the 
Taisho edition has it. See T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202a. 

2. Haedong 3% literally Means, "East of the sea." 
ft was an early Chinese designation for Korea, because 
Korea is situated east of the Yellow Sea. There have 
been many commentaries written by Koreans, but Haedongso 
usually indicates Wénhyo's Taesung kishinnon so, proving, 
perhaps, that Wénhyo's commentary was the most popular 
Korean commentary ever written. Koreans and Japanese 
also like to use the designation EBA . 

3. Shinko tke literally means "Shaking the ancient." 
I have taken it to mean "from of old." following the 
definition given in Mathew's Chinese-English Dictionary 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969), p. 39a. 

4. Kakugen's quotation (T. 1844, vol. 44, p. 202a, 
lines 7-8) from the Kao-seng chuan is found in Tsan-ning's 
Kao~seng chuan (T. 2061, vol. 50, p. 737a, lines 12-13), 
but they are slightly different. T. 2061 omits the follow- 
ing nine characters: {82 SRF Seer ke , or "this 
text is far superior to all others." 

5. There is no record about Kakugen, but Chiseki's 
school, to which Kakugen belonged, is one of the Shingon 

schools in Japan. See BDJ, Vol. 4, p. 2585c - p. 3587a. 

253 

Bibliography 
I. CHINESE AND KOREAN SOURCES 
v. 
Chen-ti)B ,(Paramartha), trans. Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun 
pte - l roll, (T. 1666, vol. 32, pp. 
575a- 83b) . 

Ch'ten, Yin-k'o FRR 1. "Liang i Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun 
wei chih sad sane’ pe chip chen shih liao" 
Ware ee EEL ES et - Yen ching 
Asn pao, od * ve 

Chih-hsp . Fach image ch'i-hsin lun lieh wens su 
‘pp. oe ee 

Chih-k'ai ee pe . I-hsin erh-men ta-i —/— PAXR 
l roll, (Z. vol. 71). 

Cho, Myéng-gi 4H # aA - Silla pulgyo Ui inyom kwa yoksa 
aie ie RFA FEA ot a ae can . Seoul: Shin t t'aeyangsa, 

19 

Fa~t' noel (Vrddhimata), trans. Shih mo ho 
yen lun £R BE Soy ApS - 10 rolls, (fT. 1668, vol. 32, 
pp. 591c-668c). 

Fa-tsangs#9g . Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun i-chi 
Atteeeeso- 5 rolls, (T. 1846, vol. 44, pp. 240c- 
287b). 

------- Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun i-chi pieh~-chi Kee dt Ree Ba 

ee Se eee 

# St Bizz, - 1 roll, (T. 1847, voll 44, pp. 387b-395c) . 

Hui-ssu aa” - Ta-ch'eng chih-kuan fa-men KE ob Be 
3 - 4 rolls, (T. 1924, vol. 46, po. 641c-644a). 

Hui-yuan 23, Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun i-su Kae 
Use emi ay Lit ER, +- 2 rolls, (T. 1843, vol. 44, pp. 175a~ 
201c). 

------- Ta-ch'eng i chang ARHB. 20 rolls, (T. 1851, 
vol 44, pp. 465a—-875c). 

In~shun =P ea - Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun chiang-chi + 3E 

ack Se ac: - Taipei: Cheng-wen hstieh-she, 1951. 

254 

Ko, Ikchin aim = @. "Wwonhyo ii Kishinnonso pydlgi ritl 
t'ong'hae bon chinso -wol ung~muaegwan, kwa ki song 
iron" su Be 2] (SSR Fee =S a oH eel) er on 
TL RRILSES - Pulgyo hakpo, vol. 10. (Seoul: 

Dongguk University, 1973), pp. 287-321. 

----- "Wonhyo Ssasung ui silch'dén w1li." TRE BAS 2 
ES RSP. Han'guk pulgyo sasangsa, pp. 225-255, 
Sungsan Pak Kiljin paksa hwagap kinydom sadphoe: 

Iri, Korea, 1975. 

Kyondtng RS . Taesung kishinnon tong'i yakchip 
- 2 rolls, {vol. 71) 

Lee ei es oe eee wWeénhyc ti Ktinbon sasang HAE, = 4 
. Seoul: Tongbang sasang yon'guwon, 1977. 

Liang Ch'i-chao Gt PERE Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun kao 
cheng KES 4x4 27%. Commercial Press, Taipei, 

1968. oe 

Park Chong-hong FL ESr8 . Han'guk sasangsa LE mi 
AG ee - Seoul: SOmundang, 1972. 

P! u-t ist apy ee ice - Chien ch'a shan o yeh pao ching 
ZRz = 839, vol. 17, 

eR A 2 rolls, (T. 
pp. 901c-910c). 

Rhi Ki-young Te OE Fe Wénhyo sasang ARE, B: 1. Seoul: 
Hongbépwon, 1967. 

Shih T'ai-hsu SERTE - Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun chen-wei 
pien 5 fe 2 pe BAB Fe . Wu-ch'ang, China, 1923. 

T' aehyon KE . 3a kishinnon naeui yakt'amgi 
Kes ee fe = eo roll, (T. 1849, vol.44 , 
PP. 409b— oN 

Taesun ung kishinnon so ki hoebon ie ee HERES . 
6 rolls, editor unknown, (Z. vol. 71, pp. 310-2a - 
351-l1b). 

qT! an-yen & 2¢ RE. Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun su 43 Sz SeKE 
Ase 2 rolls, (only roll 1 extant) (Z. vol. 71). 

Tsungsmi Ke - Ta-ch'eng ch'i-hsin lun su KR BUS 
a 4 rolls, (Shukusatsu ronso bu, cho 8). 

or 
Tzu-hsuan 4.¢/— . Ch'i-hsin-lun su-pi hsueh-chih se(S 36 Ft th 
sien $35 . 20 rolis, (T. 1845, vol. 44, pp. 

226a-240c). 

255 

Wonhyo TSE, . Taestng kishinnon pyolgi * 3€3 BEE = 
eRe, - 2 rolls, (T. 1845, vol. 44, pp. 226a- 
) 

----- Taesung kishinnonso KREME EH aR 2 rolls, 
(T. 1844, vol 44, pp. 202a-226a). 

256 

It. JAPANESE SOURCES 

Akanuma Chizen ASE ES . "Kishin ron no shinnyo ni 
tsuite" Ze4z Sao “Etre Duee Otani gakuho, 
1, 1929. 

Akashi Etatsu BASE . R Byoyaku aku taishd naiyo bunka , 
daijo kishin ron MRR ee Sse SE k S22 oH 

Nagada bunsh bunshodo, 1935. 

Ets Sokuo at Ep FS . Daijo kishin ron kogi RE 

REA aA Be (vol. 12 of Daizdkyd koza 3 KR FE 
SERB). Toho shoins 1932. 

Fujiwara Rosho Re an 3. "Zendo to kishin ron 2S z 
= ay ." Otani gakuho, 46-4, 1967. 

Hara Tanzan A 384 HyOchi daij o kishin ron rydyaku 

shogi # ee Se ip By RE a. - Bussensha, 
1885. Aso included in Tanzan Osho Zensht (KOryikan: 
Tokyo, 1909). 

Hatani Rydtai AA > 4 Z Ilse. "Ogisho to kishin ron ze 
AE Ue ." Tetsugaku kenkyi, 3-22,23, 1918. 

Hayashi SS Et 5 Rae Kishin ron no shin kenkyi 
ge, 1945. 

Hayashiya Tomojiro SkE kee eV. "Kishin ron no seiritsu 
mondai ni tsuite: tokuni Mochizuki Hakase ano kishin 
ron shina sanjutsu setsu_ni tsuite" 4e(2 $60 mUh|SB 
Det — SF SA Peo PAM (: Hi ct Shukyo 
kenkyu (new series), 3-6, 1926. 

Higure Kyoyu B- ELE. "Kishin ron ni okeru_butsu 
sania no gengo o ronzu" Senet i= 2645 1h 5? 

2emey". shukyo kenkyu, 6-3, 1929 
Hirose Bungo TEREX a a. "Kishin ron ni gkeru ninshiki 

jissen no sanso" Z2(Ei@' 7T> FORK FER =HA 
Tetsugaku kenkyu, 15-171, 1930. 

Hisamatsu Shin'ichi BKE a — . "Kishin no kadai" Zee 2 
eR2R . Tetsugaku kenkyd, Nos. 354 and 355, 1946. 

Imazu Kogaku S32 LR d Peete kishin ron KE Se Ste , 
in Bukkyo daikei. AEX KE. Zz Tokyo: BukkyS daikei 
kankokai, 1918. * 

Ito Giken AFR SE - "Daijo kishin ron no kents" 

pe sey 9 teat , DaijS (He . 22:7-12, 1943. 

{= 

257 

sf 
It Kazuo 17 HE ARE "Kishin ron ni okeru shinnyo no 
rikai" SE(223b tts Ero 32%, Nippon bukkyo 
gakkai nempo, vol. 14, 1942. 

Kamada Shigeo She eee : Chugoku bukkyo shi kenkyu 

FERS STH, - Shunjisha, 1968. 

coo "Chugoku zen shiso keisei no kyogakuteki haikei-- 
i22 kishin ron o chushin toshite" Pa Ae 2. Be FD 

ae ae StcssSe Parrot - Toyo bunka 

eee kiyo, vol. 49, 1969. 

Kametani Shokkyo SSE. "Daijo kishin ron no sakusha 
ni tsuite" 44 AEE le RT - Chuo Bukkyod, 
4-6, 1920. EtG oD mh 

Kanakuru enshoS 2a) 22. mu Memyo no kenkyu Bre 2 Bie, 

Heirakuji shoten. 
aoe "MemyS no shin. & 294" Bunka, 18:3, 1954. 

Kashiwagi Hiroo KEAZ Fhe - "Butten kaisetsu koza, daijo 

kishin ron" (dea Gor Sh EE pe HE KERR. BukkyO bunka, 
3:1, 1971. 

‘ 

~—------ Daijo kishon ron IS Sat (Butten II of Sekai 
goten bungaku zenshu). Chikuba Shobo: Tokyo, 1965. 

------~ "Daijo kishin ron no igi" Ie SORES 9 2 ° 

Toyo gakujutsu kenkyu, 11:4, 1973. 

" =A. 
------- =, Kis in ae chushaku sho no keihu 22 = oe 

eo ZRE . Indogaku bukkyd kenkyi, 17:2, 1969. 

------~ fe cishin ron ni kansuru ichi kosatsu" 3243 3 = 
ian —€2% . MikkyoO bunka, vol. 52, 1961. 

------- spin ron ni pean shinjoju hosshin ni tsuite" 

A aim = STD Tak Pose (29 . Indogaku bukkyd 
kenkyt, 16:2, 1968. 

----- "Ko chushakusho fe) toshite mitaru payee ag ron no 
senku shiso" @2 = & SH LT R&S fase? RRR AB 
Indogaku bukkyo kenkya, I 11:2, 1963. 

~------ "Nyorai zO no enki shiso" #2 LORE KE FRIES AE : 
in Koza toyo shisd, vol. 5, Tokyo: TSdai shuppan, 1967. 

------- "Shomankyo to kishin ae n" ek So E(eae, in 

Shomankyo giso ronshu , ed. by Nippon 
Bukkyo Genryu Kenkyukai. en tee Lape yo shoten, 
1965. 

258 

Kono Houn SEIS | "Kishin ron Ro ariyashiki ni 

tsuite” S228 2 75% ape 2 tae. Mujintd, 22:7, 
1917. 

cso "Kishin ron no, shosht ni oyobosu eikyo" EUTAS 2 
RI RIT RHE. RokujS gakuho, 89, 90, 92, 96, 

1909. 
cahaeleaieaieadartand Bese on Shosetsu no ariyashiki to yuishikiron" 
28 ogelapas PENA x ree 2S - Osaki gakuhs, 
23, reer 

------- “Kishin ron to yuishiki ron to no soi" Eee 

SS v9 AGZE - Misshu gakuhd, 12, 1914. 

Kono Shigeo 2° SF #26 . "Daijo kishin ron ni okeru 
shujoshin ni tsuite" deen Bl ats “EH rcs (20VT 
Indogaku bukkyo kenkyu, oS 2," 1973. 

Kimura Takataro AME REG - "Bukkyo kishon no hihyo ni 
tsuki _PuKeyOto ni ni _kotafu" (5RGe(2 9 tee S¥ ic 95 
Me 12 3. . ShikyS, 31, 1894. 

= oe ak AS BGR "DaijO kishin ron o yomu" 
Beit ie - Tetsugaku zasshi, 17:184, 185, 

------- "Kishin ron no kunshu setsu" $223 Bo Ba, . 
Shukyo zasshi, 9:3,5, 1905. 

Kobayashi Jitsugen MAKE . "Kishin ron ni oker 
nyoraiz0 no kaku, fukaku no mondai" B24E 3S ie BES 

a BRS z. Ae 2 pos - Indogaku bukky5 "kenkya, 
12:2, 1964. 

Kumabe Jimyo ie aize RyoOyaku taishd daij6 kishin ron 
K = Len Hozokan, 1950. 

mR eZ wes 6 ORT? 

-----~- Daijo kishin ron seigi ete (= so4=5 . HOzokan, 
7 jbaidS Kishin KIEE(EBSRS 

tsuiteno wudagai" SEK2 IS EF iz HY T OSE 
Tetsugaku zasshi, 

Maedo Eun Hasse . " ee kishin ron no chosha ni 
\ 
17-180, 1902. 

------- "Kishin ron no g or eS. eae Odo no dan to iko hon ,tono 

hikaku" 32/2852 9 EEX BAT & te LD wae . 
Rokujo gakuho, To%" ee 

Makida Tairyo AS ate sae, - "Chukoku rea ae ni okeru gikys 
kenkya josetsu--donko shutsuto ikyorul o megutte” 

eat (SSMS SSRIS FR — Beye yt eae eee AGT 

Tohogakuho, 35, 1954. 

259 

Matsumoto Bunzaburo KEAREEB - Bukkyoshi no kenkyt 
seo ZAG, 1928. 

eet aateteatae "Kishin ron ni tsuite" SEE 36 (2 Kee - Geibun, 
i-3, 1910. 

------- "Kishin ron Gogo" Fe/s 2B/S Be, - Geibun, 1-5, 1910. 

ors * — " jay AS: 
iia Kishin ron no yakusha to sono chiso REE SO seo 
fo SEF, . Geibun, 1-8, 1910. 

Matsunami Seiren we Sak : BE . ukkyo ni okeru shin to gyo 
“oy ha Sa = 
NEL iz Hed Eu 4F - Heirakuji shoten, 1967 

alee "Kishin ron no kan ni tsuite" RE(S BS 7S jz poeTt 
Bukkyo ronso, 6, 1958. 

------- "Kishin ron --shis6 no taikei to nendai" BASS: EAE? 
ARE 34E 0 . Nihon bukkyo gakkai nempo, No. 22, 
March 1956, pp. 143-160. 

------- "Yugagyo-ha no soO_to shite no memyo” Bare LF RD 
Ae (LTD EE . Taisho daigaku kenkyu kiyo, 39, Feb. 
1954, pp. 193-224. 

Miyamoto Shdson & Ae - Chudo shisd oyobi sono 

hattatsu @$ 949 ‘gn Ho: 
Kyoto: Hozokan,~1944, ~ Be 

---~-~~ "Kompon fumbetsu no kenkyt" AEA SH ? BYE, ‘ 
MT, pp. 353-498. 

Mochizuki Shinkd ee: se - Bukkyo kyoten sciritsu 
shiron ABES EE tp Wea” 
------- "Daij6 kishin ron chlUshakusho" KR 2 BRE 

Bussho kenkyu, 16-25, 1916-1917. 

- oo -_ . . _ \ ro 
+------ Daijo kishin ron no kenkyu KIS ALA aan 
Tokyo: Kanao bunendo, 1922. S12 ot? ZEEE, 

_ he = =, 
~------ "Daijo kishin ron kowa" SRE 2 Bt. Shukyokai, 
2:9-12; 3:2-3, 5-6, 12; 4:2-5, 1906. 

caleba "Daijo kishin ron no sakusha ni kansuru gigi” _ 
x 34 : ° 
Se4E25 IKE (= FF rs) Ee oe se. . Shukyo kai, 14:1, 1918. 

------- "Daijo kishin ron shina sanjutsu ko" Ie iy 

MAREE . Busshyo kenkyi, No. 49, 1919. Shikyo 
kai, 15-1, 19109. 

260 

------- "Daijo kishin ron shina sanjutsu mondai ni tsuite" 
RRS ae Rel 2 t= Fuze - Toa no Hikari, 
15-8,9, 1920. 

-o--e- "Gijikyo to gimokyo" SESE v 16, FRE - Bussho 
kenkyu, 32-35, 1917. 

------- "Junka_no kishin r eee chos uki to Tansen no kyori 

sho" f= 1279 SOAS ae Sa a ex D O32 yy . Busshod 

kenkyu, 8, Aer 

sshataienieaten "Kishin ron choéshuki kaidai" = BRE oe S22 Ere | 
Bussho kenkyt, 11, 1915. cl 

anne "Kishin ron no sakusha ni tsuite” $2(=? 2 NEB FEN 
Shisui zasshi, 6:1, 1902. ets ti 

------- ishin Sans iy Amida butsu setsu ni tsuite” 
se en BS CrBe% eget. JSG gaku, 13, 
938. 
------- te/t% ishin ro és so Bea g Bs oO tono ruito oyobi kankei" 
x BRE ZR RAR BukkyO gaku zasshi, 
~ 5, 1920. 

------ KOjutsu daijé kishin ron Sede te Ae SAS BS 
Fujisanbo hyakuka bunko, 1938. 

------- "Matsumoto Hakase no Bees rom Seeae 
setsu ng _hihyo Oo yomu" KZ KEAS (oak sae 2D 
ae & Be ts - Shukyo ae (nes Aa SP APNE AE “19026. 

------- Mitabi kishin ron shina sanjutsu o ron 2u" 

SRY Se (Pee ba BRE tet . Bukkyogaku zasshi, 
1:;2-3, 1920. Tetsugaku zaceni, 35:401~402, 1920. 

------- "Namboku Odo no chi ron gakuha no shucng + LY 
kishin ron RSC BSED BESET 9 SBE Yee Za 
Taisho daigaku gakuhc, 28, 1938. 

Murakami Senshod Ate - Bukkyo yuishin ron AEE SS 
Sogensha, 1943. ¢ 

------- Daijo kishin ron kowa KERSES POSES Hyogo 
shuppan, 1919. 

------- Daijo kishin ron kogi Seasws , 1912. 

-a+--+- _paijo kishin ron ni ,kansuru shiteki kenkyu" 
KFBetw Al }> FESR, . Tetsugaku zasshi, 34:392, 
394, 1919. 

261 

-----~. " et ron ni taiseru shiteki kenkyu" 
ZEAE 

Re i 2 $d $69 are, - Tetsugaku zasshi, 
35:397, 1920. 

an "Daijo kishin ron ron bun" KREBS x 
Tetsugaku zasshi, 392, 394, 397, 1919-1920. 

------- "Daijo kishin ron to kegon kyo" AERA BB x 
Bye $% - Tetsugaku zasshi, 36:417, 1921. 

------- "Daijo ron" RRS - Tetsugaku zasshi, 36:408-409, 
416, 1921. 

-------Kishin ron tatsui REE 2S3= =, - Tokyo: Kanao 
bunendo, 1891. Also in part two of Bukkyd kowa shu, 
Tetsugaku shoin, 1902. 

Nagao Gadjin EAE A - "Chukantetsugaku no konpon-teki 
tachiba" gai Po ARACH Ute 
Tetsugaku kenkyt, 366, 368, 376-371, 1947-48, 122 p. 
Nagashi Dogen A Lg - "Eiyaku Kishin ron o hyozu" 
~---~-- "Eiyaku no Daijo kishin ron" ~2e 2 KHER =E6 
Shimyo yoka, 158, 1901. “Tr : 
Nakagawa Zenkyo Fy SBS . "Ariya shiki to ruden to 
gammetsu to" Para Sp vase SHEL coe TK C , Bukkyogaku 

kaiho, vol. 3. 

ARE , Koyasan daigaku shuopanbu, 1956. 

~----~- DaijO kishin ron--heika, koi A# (226 — FEL 
oon ---- "Daijo kishin ron ni arawaretaru bussho” 
Keese /T24 1- Bt. by 6 , MikyO kenkyt, 73, 1940. 
WON ES z z MIKYO KENKYU 

Nakayama Enji Ply st - Bukkyo ni okeru toki no kenkyt 
(BFS (> FSF BFg aq Kyoto: Koky6-shoin, 19437 

----- "Daijo kishin ron ni okeru mumyo enki no kotsujen 
nenki ni tsuite" KITS = F417d HEIR Fee BHKS RE 
in Bukkyo ni okeru toki no kenkyu 

= 

Thee , Hyakukaen, 1943. 

Nibu Segawa fh HE Se | - "Roku memyo no shutsugen to 
kishin ron no sOji isetsu o hyoshite genki_no _ 
kachi ni oyobu'}#e:% 9 BAB ye Aes zH 2 Re Sze E ExT 

“= 

262 

Ninagawa Tatsuo BE yi tex. Kishin tetsugaku eye ie 
(pt. 1 of Bukkyo zensho, ed. by Shukyo kenkyukai) . 
Tokyo: Kanami bunendt, 1905. 

~~c--7-"Kishin tetsugaku to Stiron tetsugaku tono kankei* 
eBSEF xc BIS Sro RUZ . Chiryo himpo, 45, 
1904. 

Oda Tokuno EX ce {SGe. DaijO kishin ron giki kdgi 
KR 6 ese TBE 

Ogawa Jitsugen Asi| 2x - "Kishin ron kaishaku no hensen-- 
Kegon kyOgaku tenkai no_kontei toshite" 22(22@ Bae 2 

RE BREOS EER] ARIRe UT =. Indogaku bukkyo 
kenkyu, 13:2, 1965. | 

Okamoto Soko A %,.. "HO to jiyu ni tsuite--daijso 
kishin ron" S$ ~ 96 (t o«7 KEE 2243 2 
Indogaku bukkyo kenkyu, 6:2, 1958. 

~------ "Hokai no hitotsu no keitai: kishin ron no shinnyo 
kan ni tsuite" sR Roe —-7? DWE. — EE 9 Bm SLi t 
Komazawa daigaku bungakubu kenkyukiyo, 19, 1961. 

------- "Shinnyo gainen no kenkyit: Daijo kishin ron o ge 
chushin to shite, sono ichi danpen" 2¢ceARR? BFE; 
RRR (BSE Poe 79 ~— eT Hokkaido 

| ee 

Okubo Rydjun KE cane - ~Kongo beiron,to daijo 
kishin ron tono kankei" & All S87 Sep & KR 2 tg 
Gis%# , Tendai gakuhd, 1961. 

Ono Gemmyo \2p Z*> . Bussho kaisetsu daijiten 
Ws CASKET vol. 2, pp. 219-227; vol. 7, pp. 281- 
97. 

Ono HOdd KEP Fee - "“Tendai to kishinron" Fv SEE SS 
Shukyo kai, 10:2-3, 5-6, 1914. 

Ota Hisaki Ke K #2, . "Shindai sanzo Shoyaku ronden ni 
mirareru nyoraizo" & =sh fr EK PSH ALK 
42% gH’. Indogaku bukkyo kenkyt, 14:1, 1965. 

Oyama Kojun KALE c= - "Mumyo to gaku" 4 oH v. 4 
Mikkyo bunka, 32, 1956. 

263 

hain "Shujo ni tsuite" De, 24k. Nihon bukkyod 
. gakkai nempo, 20, 1955. 
eo ---- “Shaku makaen ron shingi mondai" <z Bm tt 
GSR =] =| SB , in Hikada kydju koki kinen rombunshi, 
1964, 

Rokuho Kydj6 ASB "Daije kishin ron ni okeru shin 
shometsu ron" K3ERZ(S te t= FETS tt ASK BS 
Shuky6 kenkyt, 142, 1954. 

Sahaku Kyokuga TEAGTB FE - Kando soho daijo kishin ron 
giki ce eae) ARE (tip H BE: - BV.) 

a 
Sakaino Koyo +2, 2? Be. »Daijd kishi 2 op Es to £8 ktu 
nishu no kankei" AR Ee EUS et KE m Be) (2 
Shinbukkyo, 4:10, 1903. 

~------ Shina bukkyo shi kowa LIP SICH . Tokyo: 
Kyoritsusha, 1927, vol. l, pp. 355f. 

Sasaki Kentoku tEtk ES "Kushana-jidai ni okeru 
bukkyoO no ichi RE tokuni Ashubagosha Eo sono 
shuhen ni tsuite" 7ixT SA (= 7513 (BAX -— ES, He 
Tian I— ix ~ Fo F542 Otani daigaku kenkyu nempo, 10, 
1957, pp. 177-230. 

ee Tendai enkiron tenkai shi ares EF 
Nagada bunshodso, 1953. seo RR AR 

Sekiguchi Shindai Rug g aK - Tendai shikan n:. kenkyu 
Ke sk ERg BE, . Tokyo: Iwanami | shoten, 1969. 

------- Tendai sho shikan no kenkyi ES AEE, 9 BT gE, . 
Risosha, 1954. 

Shimaji Daito Eek. "DaijO kishin ron koyo" 

REE See oy AS Rokujo gakuhd, 7, 1902. 

~------ Kokuyaku daijo kishin ron Bek KEES ap 

vol. 5 of Ronshufu, kekuyaku daizokys BRE. Beewe) 
Tokyo: Taito shuppan, 1932 

Shimaji Mokurai Be, i. "Kotsujen nenki no kaishaku" 
RG, Eke 9 RR - Sanpo soshi, 156, 1897. 

Suzuki Shogo $$ 92. "Kishin ron ni okeru mumyo no igi" 

$2/5 Sap te ats =) aR s - Indogaku bukkyo kenkyu, 
io, 1953.) FR Z% + Indogaku 

264 

Suzuki Shuchu EKER & - Genshi kegon tetsugaku no kenkyu 
ROLE Ceo - Tokyo: Daito shuppansha, 1934. 
------- "Kishin ron no seiritsu ni kansuru shiryo ni 

tsuite" 2S 3S > Pelt RTS SF = BENZ 
Shukyo kenkyu (new series), 5:1-2, 1928. 

aeaeienteteaten "Kishin ron no seiritsu ni kansuru zairyo" 

SUES oo RE RIS Aft - Bukkyo kenkyi, 1, 3, 
1928. 

- = ~ = 1. shee 
Takamine Ryoshu OTS #+ . Kegon shisoshi # BAe 
Kyoto: Kokyo-shoin, 1942, 

aienienadentanies Hannya to nembutsu, fugen gyogan bon ronko 
TRE « EB, RRC BASe tes5060~C«*«CXWKYyottto: Nagata 
bunshodo, 1950. 

------- "Kegon-kKyo ni okeru fugen-gyogan-bon no chii" 
BG GE i Sone SRA Ro tke , Ryukoku 
daigaku Ronshu, 336, 1949, pp. 1-22. 

~------ Kegor to zen tono tstro eee ES tq 38 SE 
Nara: Nanto bukkyo kenkyt-kai, 1956. 

----+--- "Kishin ron kenkyt no keika" SEU ISTE 2 FSS 
in Kegon shis6 shi 
Kyoto: Hyakukaen, 1942. 

Takemura sngno (FP - Daij6 kishin ron kodoku | 
SBA ap case - Kyoto: Hyakukaen, 1959. 

~~----- Kishin ron nyumon $2/234 5.99. Kyoto: Hyakukaen, 
Toepeees Fon nyumon 32/3 3 rP4 

—- - Ate - . . Las 
Tamura Horo HAZ EE - "Bukkyo tetsugaku daikei--daijo 
kd 2 tt BS — a : 
sishin ron" “pax wis KH — KASS te + Riso, 388, 

Tanaka Junsho Wiebe. "Kishin ron_shosetsu no shinnyo" 
224s PATEL? Be - Nihon bukkyo gakkai nempo, 8., 
1936. . 

Tokiwa Daijo eH KS - "Daijo kishin ron indo sanjutsu 

hiken" (3@ 22 (2 6 tpjPsee FG. Tetsugaku zasshi, 
35: 398-999. 1920. LIES — 

-----= ->"Daijo kishin ron no shingi mondai" KIRE(S ESP 
84% A] SH . Tetsugaki zasshi, 35:395, 1920. 

265 

------- -Mitabi daijo ki eee.E ee indo Sanjutsu o ronzu" 
= Fy Pee a Ee & a5" Toa no hikari, 
15:10-12, 1920; meee | zasshi, 35:404-405, 1920. 

------- Shina bukkyo no kenkyt A re) ae vol. 2, 
1941, pp. 25-128. SHB RIK BF 

------- Shina kegonshu dentd ron" SPB BR AAR 
Toyo gakuhé, III, Dec. 1932, pp. 1-96. 

------- "Zoku kegonshti dent6 ron" 4s 2 Fake 

(Cont'd). ToyS gakuhd, V, Dec. 1934. 

- - = 
Tomoki Yoko & KS EE . "Shoshu no kyori oyobi kydhan 
ni okeru kishin ron no_chii" ZR o7 FG@ A FO 

Acid Es teote(k . Osaki gakuhd, 4:30, 1906, 1913. 

Tsujioka Ryojin +A RFE. "Guiki no shdésd chowa shis6 
ni tsuite (tokuni Daijs kishin ron_retsubd so o 
chushin soshite) " 2 AEKS alte BAS lc RET 
C4H1- fe E(Z2S FH BS HG gare - Eisan gakuho, 
vol. 12, 1936. 

Ueda Yoshifumi -@ BX o shisdshi kenkyu: Indo 

no Daijo oe, (ae Ee SPER ! PHoR Zeer 
- Kyoto: Nagata ih 1951. 

~------ "MOnen ron" = oR , included in Ui ganreki kinen 
ronsht Pie 22 26 & , pp. 99-110. 

Ui Hakuju Fes - BukkyoO shiso kenkyu ARK, BAS BE, 
Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1943. 

-o+---- Daijo kishin ron KREG - Tokyo: Iwanami 
bunko, 193€. Also in vol. 2 of UL Fakuju chosaku 

senshu PH ae Ai e - Tokyo: Taitd shuppan, 1966. 

------- Indo Daijo Bukkyo chushin shisdshi CPE L RE MBEL 
its BAS - Tokyo, 1934. 

----<-- Indo tetsugaku kenkyu Ere tr SE, 6 vols. 
Tokyo: K6jisha shobo, 1930. 

------- "Kishin ron no hihyo" $22 BO TLS Bukkyo 
hanron, (Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1962), pp. 448-512. 

------- Shina Bukkydshi RAPER SE . Tokyo: Iwanami 
shoten, 1936. 
EGE 

------- "Shintai sanzo den no kenkyu" i = Fe 125 9 ZT 3 
indo tetsugaku kenkyi, vol. 6, pt. 1, 1965. 

266 

i) —_ . a Ls _— _ *“ 9 & 
Uji RyGei B28 J . Kanwa rydyaku Daijd kishin ron 

spomshaku i¥Fe ByZE RH Fee SHR: «%HOrinkan, 

-~----- "Shoshi suiha yokyd ron" $E2 *KipPe qo aap 
Rokujo gakuho, 169, 1915. * ai “F 

Wada Ryuzo Fe B Fext - "Shinkyu rydyaku kishin ron oyobi 
shochuso ni tsuite" FHlG SR SAS 2S A Beez 
Fee « Mujintd, 14:12, 1909. 

Wakiya Kiken Hh &43R2R . "Kishin ron so shutsusakusha 
toshiteno Don'en to Donsen" 22/2 ae Ei MAGE x Lt®D 
mit < PSE ~. RokujS gakuhd, 128, 1912. 

eee "Kishin ron wa hatashite enkiron nariya” AeKz BNE 

Piz FkS2 BB Rye - RokujO gakuho, 74, 1907. 

------- "Kishin sanso no hikaku kenkyt" 2=(2=fF.9 
Keates. RokujG gakuhd, 40, 41, 1905. 

------- "Tendai yori mitaru kishin ron" #exKy RRS 
A2(E3 - RokujO gakuhd, 42, 1905. 

Watanabe Shoko Fig wey - "Gendaigo yaku daijo kishin 

on FB AEE ER K€. See . Zaike bukkyo, 1:4, 

(mmm 

pp. 245-253. 

Seo "Shinnyo suien no shiso ni tsuite" Bde BERKO 
SAG iz pure. - Indogaku bukkyo kenkyu, 2:1, 1953. 

Yamaguchi Susumu ¢c\o0@% ~. Bukkyd ni okeru mu to u tono 
tairon {4$£ie sf 473 Hee 
Kyoto: Kobundd, 1941. 

------- Hannya shisd shi #i¢ BABY. Kyoto: HGzékan, 1951. 

++ ao 
------- "Kegon-kyg yuishin-ge no indo-teki kunko" Fz 
WEP SPECS Dy ZS . Otani gakuho, 28:3-4, 
June 1949, pp. 1-30. 

Yokaida Kenji #$ +H 234 . "Kimura takataro shi no kishin 
ron tetsugaku no hyoron o yomu" KBR? 
= a + 3s = y . 
Set SF 9 EkE5 € seh Shukyd, 29, 1894 

267 

Yo Rensho eee . eee no jibaku to Bukkyo no jibaku" 

BR2E §(@E+8 , in Tsukamoto Hakase soju 
kinen B yo shigaku ronshu KA ae 4a 0.5. TL (EES SE 
Yoshitani Kakuju Sez - "Moso humbetsu no shiki ika" 

E48, AB oes eof . Tetsugaku zasshi, 4:30, 1890. 

Yoshitsu Nobuhide = PR yg "JOeiji eon no kishin ron 
so ni tsuite" 5PEoy 533 D F245 HEF 12 2“ T 
indogaku bukkyo kenkyt, 21:1, 1972. 

Yuki Reimon SESH. D Daijo kishin ron pe £2 AS 
(vol. 5 of Gendai bukkyd kéza — BUR ERE epee , ed. 
by Shoten Koso), Kakusen, 1955 

268 

IiI. WESTERN SOURCES 

Banerjee, Anukul Chandra. "Pratityasamutpada." IHQ, 32 
(June-Sept. 1956), pp. 261-264. 

Bendall, C. and de la Vallée Poussin, L. "Bodhisattva- 
bhumi. A text book of the Yog&cara school" (An English 
summary with notes and illustrative extracts from 
other Buddhistic works). Muséon (New Series), VI 
(1905), pp. 38-52, VII (1906), pp. 213-230, XII (1911), 
pp. 155-191. 

Bennett. A. A. G. "MahayanaSraddhotpada (The awakening 
of faith in the Mahdydna)." Maha bodhi, 81 (No. l, 
Jan. 1973), pp. 21-27. 

------ "Translations of Sanskrit Buddhist literature in 
Chinese previous to the 5th century C.E." Maha bodhi, 
65 (1957), pp. 77-82. . 

Bhattacharya, V. “Evolution of Vijhanavada." JHQO, X (No. 
1), pp. 1-11. 

------- The Yogacarabhimi of Acarya Asanga, Part 1. 
Published by the University of Calcutta, 1957. 

Chatterjee, H. "An introduction to Yog&@cBra school." 
Maha bodhi, 64 (1956), p. ll. 

Cook, Francis H. Hua-yen Buddhism: The Jewel Net of Indra. 

. Se SO — — 

University Park, Philadelphia: The Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1977. 

Demiéville, Paul. "Sur l'authenticité du Ta tch'eng k'i 

Sin louen." BMFJ, Tome II (No. 2, 1923}, Biblic- 
graphie Bouddhigue, 11 (No. 122). 

-~----- "La Yogacarabhumi de Sangharaska." BEFEO, XLIV 
(No. 2, 1954), pp. 340-436. 

Doan-van-An, "On the middle way in Yogacara Buddhism." 
JIBS, 11 (Jan. 1963), pp. 44-49. 

Dutt, Nalinaksha. "The doctrine of Kaya in Hinayana and 
Mahayana." IHO, V (No. 3), pp. 518-546. 

—------"The place of the aryasatyas and the pratityasamut- 
pada in Hinayana and Mahayana." ABORI, XI (Pt. II), 
pp. 101-127. — 

269 

------ “Tathagatagarbha." IHQ, XXXIII (No. 1, 1957), 
pp. 26-39. 

Frauwallner, E. "Amalvijnanam and alayavijnanam. Ein 
Beitrag zur Erkenntnislehre des Buddhismus." BIPA. 
pp. 148-159. 

Goddard, Dwight. The principle and practice of Mahayana 
Buddhism. An Interpretation or Professor Suzuki's 

—_— EO 

Gokhale, V.V. "A note on Ratnagotravibhaga." YK, 
pp. 90-91. 

Hakeda, Yoshito S. The Awakening of Faith, attributed 
to ASvaghosa, translated with commentary. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1967. 

Keel, Hee Sung, Chinul, the founder of Korean Sd6n (Zen) 

tradition. (Ph.D. Thesis) Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University, April 1977. 

Johnston, E.H. and Chowdhury, T. "The Ratnagotravibhaga 
MahayanottaratantraSastra." JBORS, 36 (1950), 
Appendix, i-xvi, pp. 1-129. 

Lai, Whalen Wai-lun. The Awakening of Faith in Mahayana 

a ee eee eee 

Lamotte, Etienne. La Somme du Grand Véhicule d'Asanga 
(Mahayanasamghraha). Louvain: Bureau du Muséon, 
1938-39. 

Lessing, F.D. "The Thirteen Visions of a Yogacarya. A 
preliminary study." Ethnos (Nos. 3-4, 1950), 
pp. 108-130. 

ct ee ee 

aaa Un systéme de philosophie bouddhique: Matériaux 
pour l'étude du systeme Vijnaptimatra. Paris: 

Champion, 1932. 

Liebenthal, Walter. "New Light on the Mahayana Sraddhotpada 
Sastra." T'oung Pao, XLVI (Leiden, 1958), pp. 155-216. 

270 

----- >- "The Oldest Commentary of the Mahayana Sraddhotpada 
Sastra." Bukkyo Bunka KenkyU: Nos. 6-7, 1958. 

Link, A.E. "Shyvh Daw-an's preface to Sangharaska's 
Yogacarabhumisutra and the problem of Buddho-Taoist 
terminology in Early Chinese Buddhism." JAOS, 77 
(No. 1, 1957), pp. 1-14. 

Masson-Oursel, Paul. "Tathagatagarbha et Alayavijhana." 
JA, CCX (1927), pp. 295-302. 

Masuda, Jiryo. Der individualistische Idealismus der 

Cn mere NN 

Leipzig), 1926. 

Nakamura, Hajime. "The influence of Confucian ethics on 
the Chinese translations of Buddhist sutras." Sino- 
Indian Studies, 5: Nos. 3-4, 1957. 

Obermiller, E. "The doctrine of Prajnadparamita as exposed 
in the Abhisamayadlamkara of Maitreya." Acta 
Orientalia, XI (1932), pp. 1-181, 334-354. 

Poussin, B. de la Vallée. Review: "MahayanaSraddhotpada, 
texte chinois de Paramartha," by H. Ui. BB, IX-XxX: 
No. 212. 

Prasad, Jwala. "Discussion of the Buddhist Doctrines of 

Momentariness and Subjective Idealism in the 
Nyayasutras." JRAS: Jan. 1930. 

ee ney 

—_— rrr 

Ruegg, David S. "On the Knowability and Expressibility 
of Absolute Realitv in Buddhism." JIBS, XX (No. l, 
1971), pp. 489-495. 

-----~- La Théorie de tathagatagarbha et dugotra. Paris, 
1969. 

Schayera, Stanislawa. "Die Erlosungslehre der Yogacaras 
nach dem Sutralankara des Asanga." Zeitschrift fur 
Indologie und Iranistik, Vol. 1 (Leipzig, 1923), 
pp. 99-123. 

271 

—------- "Das mahayanistische Absolutum nach der 
Lehre der Madhyamikas." OLZ, (1935), pp. 401-415. 

Stcherbatsky, Th. et Obermiller, E., ed. and trans. 
Abhisamaydlankara-prajnhavaramitaupadeSa-Sastra. BB, 
XXIII (1929). 

Stcherbatsky, Th. "The Dharmas of the Buddhist and the 
"Gunas' of the Samkhyas." IHQ, X (No. 4), pp. 
737~760. 

Suzuki (Mrs.), Beatrice Erskine Lane. "An outline of 
the Avatamsaka Sutra." EB, VL, pp. 279. 

Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro. Acvaghosha'! s Discourse on che 

Chicago: Open Court "Publishing Company, sod 

alee Die buddhistische Psychologie bei A¢vaghosha. 
Exposé aus A¢vaghosha's Mahayana graddhotvadacastra. 

—_—_— eS CO eS 
BWr, Jg. II (1908-1911), pp. 36-46, 161-164. 

hate "The Lankavatara Sltra, as a Mahayana text in 
special relation to the teaching of Zen Buddhism." 
EB, IV, (Oct. 1927-March 1928), pp. 199-298. 

--- "Notes on the Avatamsaka Sutra." EB, I (1921-1922), 
pp. 233-236. 

meres "Philosophy of the Yogacara. The Madhyamika and 
the Yogacara." Muséon, (New Series), V (1904), 
pp. 370-386. 

rer V—_—- 

inportant texts of Mahayana Buddhism, in which all 

its principle tenets are. presented, including the — 
teaching of Zen. London: George Routledge, 1930. 

Tamaki, Koshiro. "The development of thought of Tatha- 
gatagarbha from India to China." IBK, 9 (Jan. 1961), 
pp. 386-378 (pagination follows that of Japanese text). 

Thurman, Robert A.F., trans. The Holy Teaching of 
Vimalakirti. University Park, Philadelphia: The 
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1976. 

Tucci, G. "Notes on Lankavatara." IHQ, IV (No. 3, 1928). 
Unno, Taitetsu. "The Buddhata theory of Fatsang." 

International Conference of Orientalists in Japan. 
Transactions no. 8 (1963), pp. 34-41. 

272 

Wai Tao. "Awakening of Faith," included as a section 
in A Buddhist Bible, ed. by Dwight Goddard. Beacon 
Press, 1938. 

Wayman, Alex. "A Report on the Sravaka-Bhimi and its 
Author (Asanga)." JBRS, XLII (Nos. 3-4, 1956), 
pp. 316-329. 

------- "The Rules of Debate according to Asanga." JAOS, 
78 (1958), pp. 29-40. — 

—_——eee ee ——— ee ee 
. 

Weinstein, Stanley. "The Concept of Alayavijhana in pre- 
Tang Chinese Buddhism." BukkyO ShisO Ronshu, Tokyo, 
1964, pp. 35-40. TO 

Yamada, James S. "The Tathagata-garbha and the collective 
unconscious: a two-fingered approach to Zen." IBK, 
3 (whole No. 6, March 1955), pp. 765-76&0. 

Yung Hsi. Buddhism and the Chan School of China. Trans. 

Ce ee EE 

Allahabad, 1956. 

iV. REFERENCE WORKS CITED 

Chang Sapeshik baa =8 , Tae han-han sajon 
tkeow, : , 1965. - 
NEBLY Seoul: Sungmunsa 

Chih-sheng 47 # , K'ai-yiian shih-chiao lu BRIER 
(T. 2154, vol. 55). 

Dainihon k6tei shukusatsu daizoékyos, *K HA KK ET 
Al KSR FES - Tokyo: Kdkyo shoin, 1880-1885. 

Dainihon zokuzokyo #% @ #& 4 ‘2% . Kyoto: 25kyd 
shoin, 1905-1912. f S 

Fa-ching 3& #£, Chung-ching mu-lu <= Qe (7. 2145, 
vol. 55). —— 

Fei Ch'ang-fang # =F , Li-tai san-pao chi FER = F¥e 
(T. 2034, vol. 49). 

Giles, Herbert A., A Chinese-English Dictionary, Taipei: 
Ch'eng-wen Publishing Company, 1967. 

_—_——_—_———— eee 

Iryén — # , Samguk yusa = Hits (T. 2039, vol. 49). 

Ishida, ed., NarachdS genzai issaikydso mokuroku, TOyS 

bunko, 1930. 68 "AR oA sae ~an SEH GSS, 

Kakhun 'g 3, Haedong kosting chén ae Se (2. (T. 2065, 
vol. 50). 

i] LZ» bse ; 
Kim Yong-t'ae et al. KE = , Han'guk pulgyosa ae 
WE Seoul: Chinsudang, 1970. TE 

Koryo taejanggyong = Kae $= , Photo-reprint, 
Seoul: Dongguk University, 1976. 

Mizuno Kogen 7KE-P347%, et al., Shin butten kaidai jiten 
5 6A AE 25 fcc , Tokyo: 1955-1960. 

och eae Shinks BASES _, Bukkyd daijiten bey 
*K cme 

, TOKYO: 1960-1963. 

Mok Chéng-bae fz =] #E et al. , WOnhyo chénjip HE L€ 
Seoul: Pulgyohak ton'inhoe, 1973. & 

273 

f£ 

Morohashi Tetsuji Fae His HOR , Daikanwaijiten WIE 42 
, Tokys 1955-1960. 

Motoi Nobuo A StS AE ,. "Shiragi Gangyd no denki ni 
tsuite" 2 BE 2 z 22 i= pez p 
Otani gakuho, XLI, No. 1 (1961), pp. ‘33-52, 

Nanjio Bunyiu, A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the 

rrr eee ee 

Buddhist Tripitaka, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1883. 

Nukariya Kaiten LATER ARR , Chosen zenkyOdshi RBA E ; 

Tokyo: Shunjtsha, 1930. 

Ono Gemm AN BF ALF, Bussho Kaisetsu daijiten #2 
Bese jee, Tokyo: Dait6o shuppan sha, 1931- 1936. 

seng-yu 5B , Ch'u san-tsang~chi chi Ase , (T. 2146, 
vol. 55. 

Showa hobo sOmokuroku CASS 4B. 8S r Tokyo: Daizo 
~ shuppan kabushiki kaisha, i929. (This comprises the 
last three volumes of the Taishd Tripitaka.) 

Soothill, W. E., and Hodous, Lewis, A Dictionary of Chinese 
Buddhist Terms, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 
& Co., 1937. 

Taisho shinshi daizokys KE 3 tE K ox ae FE =, ‘Tokyo: 
- *‘Daizé shu: shuppan kabushiki kaisha, 1924-1934, 

Takahashi Toru ats = 3 , Richo bukkyo 7S oF BA 

Tokyo: Hobunkan™ 1929. 

Tsan-ning gs 
vol. 50). 

~ teh 

, Sung Kao-seng chuan eure (T. 2061, 

Yi Nung-hwa 7B BE Fz , Choson pulgyo t! ec ongsa BF fe 
Ke $ , Seoul: Sinmunkwan, 19187 — 

Jich'én = = = Shinpyon chejong Kyojang Ch'ongnok 
K 2 , Shinpyon chejong Ch tongnok 
fe 

Be Se & ee $67 Se (T. 2184, vol. 55). 

Yanagida Seiz By BE , Shoki Zenshu shisho no 
kenkyi Sor Se ASR ESO GE ’ 
Kyoto: H6zdk nt ‘oy ae wO