LEIBNIZ 

THE MONADOLOGY, Etc. 

LA TTA 

*f71U.ISHKR TO THB UMT VSKSII-Y OK OXKORU 

IvONDOM, KIJI IH UU 

LEIBNIZ 

THE MONADOLOGY 

AND 

OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS 

TRANSLATED 

/r/7W INTRODUCriOH AND NOTES 

HV 

ROBERT LATTA, M.A., D.Phil. (Edin.) 

LECTURER IN LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS AT THE 
UNIVERSITY OF ST. ANDREWS 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1898 

Ojcforb 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

BY HOHACR HABT, M.A. 
rniNTBR TO THB UNlVERSirV 

PREFACE 

In this country Leibniz has received less attention 
than any other of the great philosophers. Mr. Merz 
has given, in a small volume, a general outline of 
Leibniz's thought and work, Professor Sorley has 
written for the Encydopaedia Britannica a remark- 
ably clear, but brief, account of his philosophy, and 
there are Amencan translations of the N<mveaux 
Esdciis and of some of his philosophical papers. That 
is very nearly the whole of English writing about 
him. Yet few philosophical systems stand so much 
in need of exposition as that of Leibniz. His theories 
have to be extracted from seven large volumes of 
correspondence, criticism, magazine articles, and other 
discursive writings, and it is only in recent years that 
this material has been made fully available by the 
publication of Gerhardt’s edition. No complete and 
detailed account o| Leibniz's philosophy hasr hitherto 
been* published in English, and accordingly I have 
written a very full Introduction to this book, with 
illustrative foot-notes, consisting mainly of transla- 
tions from 'Leibniz himself. 

The* endeavour of the book is to make the 
Mimadoloyy clear to students. I cannot agree with 
IHUmann in treating it as of little importance. 

A 3 

vi PREFACE 

Leibniz himself expressly intended it to be a com-^ 
pact and ordered statement of the views he had 
expounded in many scattered papers and in his 
somewhat desultory Thdodicie, the only book he 
published. There is evidence of this in his coire- 
spondence and in the fact that he annotated the 
Monadology with references to passages in the 
ThMic^e. My original intention was to publish 
a translation of these passages along with the 
Monadology, but on re-consideration it seemed better 
to translate several short papers illustrating dilBEerent 
parts of Leibniz’s system and explaining its growth. 
Thus the Monadology, as being the centre of the 
lx)ok, is printed first of the translations (although 
in date it is last), while the other writings follow in 
chronological order. The only disadvantage of this 
arrangement is that it places the Pri ncijiles of Nature 
and of Qrace^ which is most akin to the Monadology, 
farthest away from it. 

If I might venture to suggest to the student the 
way in which the book should be read, I would 
recommend him first to read Part I of the Intro- 
duction, then the Monadology (without the notes), 
afterwards Parts II and III of the Introduction, 
the Monadology again (with the notes), the other 
translations, and finally Part IV of the Introduction, 
in which I have endeavoured to * place ’ the philosophy 
of Leibniz in relation to the systems which came 
before and after his. 

My indebtedness to authors is so great and varied 
that 1 cannot acknowledge it in detail; but I may 
mehtion as specially helpful to me the works of 
Boutroux, Dillmann, Nourisson, Nolen, and Stein. 
Hy thanks are due to Professor Jones, of Glasgow, 

PREFACE 

vii 

Vho read the Introduction in manuscript, for mucli 
valuable su^estion and critioiBni; and I am more 
than grateful to Professor Ritchie, of St. Andrews, 
who read the whole hook, lx)th in manuscript and in 
proof, and to whom it owes numerous improvements 
as well in fonii as in matter. 

I have adopted the spelling ' Leibniz ’ in place of 
the traditional * Leibnitz.’ because the former was 
invariably used by Leibniz in signing his own name. 

It ought perhaps alsc> to l)e mentioned that Parts 
II and III of the Intro<luction were accepted by the 
University of Edinburgh as a thesis for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy. 

ROBERT LAITA. 

Universitv St. Andrews, 
Jun^f T&qa 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I'AUK 

Preface v 

Introduction : 

Part I. Life and Works of Leibniz . . . . i 

„ 11 . General Principles of the Philosophy of 

Leibniz 21 

,, 111 . Detailed Statement of the Philosophy of 

Leibniz ....... 74 

A. Leibnizes Mathematics in relathiii to his 

Philosophy . . . . 74 

B. Matter ....... 

C. Organism ...... 

D. Self-Cousoiousness ..... 

Theory of Knowledge .... 
Ethics 

,, IV. Historical and Critical Estimate of the Phi- 
losophy of Leibniz .... 
Appendix A. Explanation of the Pre-established 

Hannony 

„ B. Formation of the Idea of Space 

„ C. Meaning of Cause 

D. Leibnizes Logic ..... 

,, K Kant on his relation to Leibniz 

The Monadoloqy 215 

Appendix F. Leibniz and Bayle on the multiplicity 

in the Monad 272 

„ G, Proof of the Existence of God . 274 

On the Notions op Bight and Justice . 281 

5 lull 

X 

CONTENTS 

New System of the nature of Substances and of 

THE Communication between them . . . 397 

ExPIiANATION op THE NeW SYSTEM .... 319 

Appendix H. On the Elcmente of Extension . 339 

Third Explanation op the New System . . 331 

On the Ultimate Origination op Things . 337 

Appendix I. Growth of Leibniz’s Theories regarding 

Force and Motion .... 351 

New Essays on the Human Understanding — Intro- 
duction 355 

Principles of Nature and of Grace . 405 

Index 435 

ABBREVIATIONS 

£. God, Ouil, LeibniHi opera philoaophioa quae extant leUina^ gaUicaj ger- 
manica omnia, ed. J. E. Erdmann. Berlin, 1840. 

G. Die philosophiechen Schrijten von G. W, Leibniz, heraiisgegebon von 
C. J. Qerhardt. Berlin, 1875-90. 

G. Math. Leibnizens maHiematiecM Scfiriflen, hemuagogeben von C. J. 
Gerhordt. Berlin and Hallo, 1850-63. 

Dutena. 0 , G. Leihnitii opera omnia, nunc primum coUecta, studio 
Ludovici Butens. Geneva, 1768. 

Klopp. Die Werke -vm Leilmiz, herausgogeben von Onno Klopp. 
Hanover, 1864-77. 

Foucher de Careil. (Euvrce do Leibniz, imblim pour la^ premise fois 
d^apris lee manuscrita origimux, par A. Fouchor de Careil. Paris, 
i859“7S- 

Mollat. HechtephilomphiKhea aus Leibnisene ungedruckten Schri/Un, von 
Dr. Georg Mollat. Leipzig, 1885. 

INTRODUCTION 

PART L 

THE LIFE AND WORKS OF LEIBNIZ. 

His Boyhood. 

On June 21, 1646, two years before the close of 
the Thirty Years* War, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was 
born at Leipzig. His family was of Bohemian origin ; 
but his ancestors for seveml generations had lived in 
Saxony and Prussia, and liis father was a Professor of 
Philosophy in the University of Leipzig. Leibniz was 
only six years of age when his father died ; and, though 
in his early -years he had the training of a })ious mother, 
slie also passed away before he had completed his Univer*> 
sity studies. The boys of Leipzig in Leibniz/s time 
i^pear to have been brought up on * the picture-book of 
Comenius and the little Catechism * (Luther’s) ; but the 
soul of Leibniz already sought stronger meat, and having 
found in the house an illustrated copy of Livy, of which 
he could not thoroughly understand a single 4 iue, he 
managed to get a tolerable idea of its contents, supple- 
menting his scanty Latin by a study of the pictures and ' 
some judicious guessing. As an indirect result of this 
precocity, his father’s library was thrown open to him, 
and he wandered at will from volume to volume, finding 
(as was ever ehaiaoteristio of him) some good in all*. 

* * It la characfeeriatie of sm to hold oppoaiUoa cWtSsrf^am) at of 

2 

INTRODUCTION 

Providence or Fortune seemed to say to him, ToBe, lege; 
and it is significant for the philosophy to come that he 
turned first to the Ancients, to Cicero, Quintilian, Seneca, 
Pliny, Herodotus, Xenophon, Plato, the historians of the 
Boman Empire, and the Fathers of the Church. Of these 
he tells us that ^he understood at first nothing, then 
gradually something, and finally enough ’ ; but uncon* 
sciously his mind was coloured by their style and thought, 
^as men walking in the sun have their faces browned 
without knowing it,’ and under their inspiration he made 
it the rule of his life ever to seek clearness in speaking 
and a useful purpose in acting {in verbis claritas, in rebus 
usus). Thus at fourteen years of age he was counted by 
liis fellows a prodigy of learning and ability, and already 
his reading of Logic and intense determination towards 
clearness of thought and speech had led him to ideas 
which were afterwards developed into the suggestion of 
a logical Calculus and an ^Alphabet of Concepts’ as 
means to the discovery of truth K 

University Life, 

At fifteen years of age Leibniz became a student at the 
University of Leipzig, and about the same time he became 

little ftceount, exposition {DarUgen) as of muoh account, and when 
a new book comes into my hands 1 look for what I can learn 
from it, not for what I can ciitieize in it/ Schreiben an 0 . Wagner 
(1696) (E. 435 b ; G. vii. 536). 

* * Before 1 readied the school-class in which Logic was taught, 
I was deep in the historians and poets ; for I had begun to read 
the historians almost as soon as 1 was able to read at all, and in 
verse 1 found great pleasure and ease ; but as soon as 1 began to 
learn Logic 1 found myself greatly excited by the division and 
order of thoughts which I perceived therein. 1 immediately began 
to notice, so far as a boy of thirteen could, that there must a 
great deal in it. I took the gn^atest pleasure in the Predicaments * 
(i. e. the Categories) * which came before me as a muster-rdl of lUl 
the things in the world, and 1 turned to Logics of all sorts to 
^nd the best and most detailed fotm of this list. 1 often asked 
myself and my schoolfellows to which PredioBment and also to 
which sub*elass this or that thing might belong.’ Sdireiben an 
Q, Wagner (£. 4001 i G. vli. 5x6}. 

Lm AKD WORKS 

3 

acquainted with the works of some of the modern philo- 
sopher% beginning with Bacon*a De Augmeniis Scientiaruni. 
At this time also, as he himself tells us, he read with 
interest the works of Cardan and Gampanella and the 
suggestions of a better philosophy in Kepler, Galileo, and 
Descartes. But he was no ^ reading-machine, all wound 
up and going/ He thought for himself : he read in order 
to ^ weigh and consider.’ And thus in after-years he re- 
fills how, when he was fifteen years of age, he walked 
alone in a wood near Leipzig, called the Rosenthal, to 
consider whether or not he should retain in his philo- 
sophy the ^ Substantial Forms ’ of the Scholastics 
Although his favourite teacher at Leipzig was Jacob 
Thomasius, a Professor of Philosophy, deeply versed in 
ancient and scholastic learning, the private reading of 
Leibniz at first prevailed in his thought and he turned 
from the older philosophies to ‘ mechanism ’ and mathe- 
matics. The * Substantial Forms’ were for the time set 
aside, to reappear, transmuted, in later years. His 
scholastic studies, however, bore fruit in the earliest of 
his published writings, a graduation thesis with the 
significant title De principio individui, in which he de- 
fended the Nominalist position. Intending to devote him- 
self to tlie profession of law, he went for a year (in 1663) 
to Jena, where the mathematician, Erhard Weigel, was 
lecturing on * the Law of Nature,’ or what we should now 
call Jurisprudence in general. Doubtless the influence 
of Weigel tended to confirm Leibniz’s mathematical 
bent, and he still continued his study of histoi;y. In 
1666 the University (ff Leipzig, ostensibly on the ground 
of his youth, refused to give him the Doctorate in Law; 
but his thesis, De casibus perplexis in jure, was immediatdy 
accepted by the University of Altdorf (near NOmberg), 
where he declined the ofier of a professorship. Thus 
ended hk connexion with Leipzig. 

^ Mtn 4 U, Bmioini (X7X4) (B. Tosa ; G. Hi 606). 

4 

IWTROPUCnON 

Boineburg a/nd the Elector of Maine. 

In Ntirnberg, at that time the capital of a email 
republic, which had suffered less than many other 
German States from the Thirty Years* War, Leibniz spent 
a year, in the course of which his extensive curiosity led 
him to become a member of a secret society of the 
Rosicrucians, who were trying to find the philosopher's 
stone. Fontenelle tells us that Leibniz’s method df 
gaining admission to the society was to collect from 
books on alchemy all the most obscure phrases he could 
find and to make of them an unintelligible letter, which 
he produced as evidence of his fitness for membership. 
The society was so impressed that it immediately ap- 
pointed him to be its secretary. The chief gain to Leibniz 
appears to have been that through this society he became 
acquainted with Baron von Boineburg, ‘one of the most 
celebrated diplomatists of his age,’ who had formerly 
been minister to the Elector and Archbishop of Mainz, 
the most powerful man in the Empire. With Bpineburg 
Leibniz went to Frankfort, where he wrote and pub- 
lished a paper on legal education, which was the means 
of introducing him to the archbishop, in whose service 
he remained for some time. This was the beginning of 
his career as a diplomatist. The long war had left 
Germany in ruins, and, ere there was time to rebuild, 
the whole empire was threatened by the immense power 
of Louis XIV, who was dreaming of world- wide sway. 
The Elector of Mainz, says Leibniz, ‘had seen the miseries 
of Germany, whose ruins were still <smoking : he was one 
of those who had laboured most to bring back rest to the 
land, from which life seemed almost to have gone. The 
country was (as one might hardly say) “ peopled ” with 
little children, and if war were to break out again (as 
miglit be expected when Sweden was irritated and Fjiance 
threatening) there was every reason to fear that this seed 
of a new population ^uld be destroyed and a great part 

LIFB AND WOBKS 

5 

of poor G^rixiimy left almost without inhabitant The 
treaty of Westphalia had secured peace and some measure 
of poUtieal unity, but it pointed also to an ecclesiastical 
reunion, yet to be realized, which to men like the Elector 
of Mainz and Boineburg seemed the best means of re> 
storing power and happiness to the country. Negotiations 
for the reunion of Boman Catholics and Protestants had 
already been begun, and thus early in his diplomatic 
career Leibniz took part in the work of conciliation 
which in various ways he continued throughout his life. 
At the suggestion of Boineburg he made a special study 
of the doctrine of transubstantiation, with the result 
(expressed in a letter to Arnauld in 1671) that he found 
it impossible to reconcile the Cartesian view of material 
substance as pure extension either with the Boman 
Catholic or with the Lutheran doctrine. He accord- 
ingly formed the purpose of discovering a theory of 
substance which should, satisfy both, and should thus 
become a philosophical basis for the reconciliation of the 
Churches. 

Paris and London, 

Presently events occurred which led him away from 
Mainz and gave him new opportunities of study and of 
intercourse with learned men. Leibniz and his friends 
felt strongly the necessity of drawing into safe channels 
the military ambitions of Louis XIV, and accordingly 
Leibniz prepared a most elaborate work in which he 
suggested to the King of France the advantages that 
would arise from a •conquest of Egypt, and tried to con- 
vince him that it was more worthy of a Christian king 
to fight the unchristian Turks than to harass a poor 
little people like the Dutch*. This book was never 

* From a letter of Leibniz, quoted by Foucher de Oareil, vol. iv. 
Introduetion, p. zz. 

* Thie de CkmqySte de tm/ple wee published by Foucher de 
Ceteil, vob v. It shows a most remarkable knowledge regarding 
the at^ of the eountiy and ite posaibilitiea, and so dever are the 

6 

INnK>l>TTOTION 

actually presented to King Xiouis, but Xjeibniz in 167^ 
went by invitation to Paris to explain bis project* His 
advice was not taken ; but he remained in Paris for 
four years, during which he devoted himself to the study 
of the higher mathematics ' and to the discussion of the 
Cartesian philosophy. He had already corresponded with 
Arnauld, and he now met also Huygens and Male- 
branche. At this time, says Lieibniz himself^ ‘law and 
history were my forte But intercourse with Huygens 
and the study of the mathematical works of Pascal intro- 
duced him to the problems of modem mathematics. 
Huygens, he tells us ‘had no taste for metaphysics,’ 
but Jjeibniz learned from him mathematical methods 
and principles which influenced the growth of his philo- 
sophy, and which set him on the way to the discovery of 
the Differential Calculus. At this time also Leibniz in- 
vented a calculating machine, 'sui>erior to that of Pascal, 
which could only add and subtract, while his own machine 
could also multiply, divide, and extract roots. And in 
other ways the residence of Leibniz in Paris greatly 
afiTected his life-work. For instance, it probably led to ' 
his writing so much in French. He had already, in his 
essay on the philosophical style of Nizolius (1670), advo- 
cated the use of the German language for philosophical 
and other works. But in the time of Louis XIV Paris 
was the intellectual centre of Europe, and to write ^ for" 
the world was to write in French. While, therefore, 

plans which it suggests that Napoleon was at one time supposed 
to have borrowed its ideas for his campaign. Though this has 
been shown to be a mistake, the ooinoidenO& between the suggested 
expe<Ution of Louis XIV and the actual expedition of Napoleon is 
sumcientlj' noteworthy. 

^ * The merit of an author in mathematics cannot bo disputed, as 
it can in other aubjeots. This is the reason why 1 remained some 
time in France, in order to perfect myself in mathematics, and 
1 imvp my time to these sciences not on their own account, bat in 
orddKp'^o make them contribute to the advancement of piety.* I^eUnt 
au Due Jeam .FY^Mrio (undated) (Klopp, iv. 450). 

> Lettre d 2a Comieate Oe KiFniemsegg (1716) (Butane, iii. 456). 

^ £. 70a b ; G. iii. 607. 

LIFE AlTD WORKS 

i 

Leibnis lias rightly been called ‘ the father of German 
philosophy/ he is only io a very small extent a German 
author. 

The four years’ residence of Leibniz in Paris was 
broken by a brief visit to England in the early months 
of 1673. Leibniz had already sought the favour of Eng- 
lish learning by dedicating one of his publications to the 
Boyal Society, and he had also been greatly interested in 
the philosophy of Hobbes, with which to a great extent \ 
he found himself in agreement, especially as regards 
questions of physios, although he was strongly opposed 
to his political theoriea In 1670 he wrote a letter 
to Hobbes, to which he received no answer, and after- 
wards he began another letter, but left it unfinished. It 
has recently been maintained that, up to the year 1670, 
Leibniz was ^ more , deeply affected by Hobbes than by 
any other of the leading spirits of the new time When 
Leibniz visited London, Hobbes was still living there, 
but he was eighty-five years of age, and some years 
earlier Leibniz had heard from his countryman Olden- 
burg, who was secretary of the Boyal Society, that 
Hobbes was in his dotage. Accordingly it is not sur- 
prising that they did not meet. Apart from Oldenburg, 
the man with whom Leibniz seems to have had most 
intercourse during this visit to London was Bobert Boyle, 
the famous physicist ; but there is no reason to suppose 
that Leibniz gained much from his stay in England, 
except an additional stimulus to the study of the higher 
mathematics, which he carried on more systematically 
after his return to Paris. As a fitting conclusion of his 
Parisian period came the discovery of the Differential 
Calculus, which was practically accomplished by Leibniz 

^ See TOnnies in PhUos, Uomtah^y vol. xxiii. pp. 557'573- 
Leibniz's Latter to Hobbes (1670) (G. L 85): constantly maintain 

among my ftiends, and, with the help of God, 1 will always publicly 
maintain also, tiiat I Imow no writw who has philosophized more 
accurately, more clearly, and more elegant^ than you, not even 
escepting a man of auoh excellent genius as Peacartes himaelt* 

8 

IHTItODUOnOK 

in 1676. There can be no doubt that Newton, was in 
poseesedon of a similar method as early as 1665. He at 
first made known only some of the results of the m^Jiod, 
and not the method itself. Hence an attempt has been 
made to show that Leibniz got hints of the method 
during his first visit to England^ and that he was thus 
more or less a plagiarist of Newton. But there is nothing 
to confirm this, and a full consideration makes it much 
more likely that each discovered the method indepen- 
dently. Leibniz published his account of the method in 
1684 : Newton’s was first published in 1693. To Newton 
belongs the glory of priority, whatever that may be 
worth ; while the form which Leibniz gave to the Cal- 
culus, the names and the signs which he used, have come 
to be universally employed in preference to those of 
Newton ^ 

Visit to Spinoza, 

Shortly before Leibniz went to London, Boineburg 
died ; and the visit to London was unexpectedly brought 
to an end in March, 1673, by the death of the Archbishop 
of Mainz. Leibniz was now without an official position, 
and during the next few years he made various unsuc- 
cessful attempts to obtain a diplomatic appointment. At 
last, in 1676, he somewhat reluctantly accepted the post 
of librarian to the Duke of Brunswick at Hanover, which 
was to be his home during the remainder of his life. 
During the earlier years of his residence in Paris, Leibniz 
had given much attention to the philosophy of Descartes 
and the Cartesians, with the result that he became more 
and more convinced of its insufficiency ^ In his en- 

^ See Merz, Leibnia (Blackwood's Philosopbioal Classics), ch. iii, 
and V. Of. Ouhrauer’s MbnOs, i. 170 sqq. 

• ^few years after (in 1679) IiBibnia writes to PhUipp : 'As to 
the philosopihy of Descartes I have no hesitation in sajing abso- 
lutely that it leads to atheism* (G. iv. aSz). And in the same 
yw he writes to Jfalebranohe that, while in many reapeets he 
admires Deseartes, he is * oOnvinoed that hia medhanics is iftdl o£ 

IaIIFB Aim WORKS 

9 

deavoitr after a more eatisfactoiy metaphysio he after- 
wards made a considerable study of Plato^ and in 1676 
he translated the I^aedo and the Iheaetetus, Towards 
the end of 1675 Leibniz became acquainted with the 
young Bohemian nobleman, Tschimhausen, Spinoza’s 
acute critic and correspondent, who was^ at that time in 
Psrisy and who had earlier in the same year written 
some of the remai'kabla letters on account of which his 
name will always be associated with that of Spinoza \ 
Leibniz had already (in 1671) written to Spinoza from 
Prwkfort about a question of optics ; but now Tschim- 
bausen seems to have aroused in him the hope that 
a solution of the difficulties of Cartesianism might be 
found in the unpublished system of Spinoza. In 
November, 1675, a medical friend of Spinoza in Amster- 
dam (G. H. Schuller) wrote to him : / Von Tschirnhausen 
further mentions that ho has found at Paris a man called 
Leibniz, remarkably learned and most skilled in various 
sciences, as also free from the vulgar prejudices of 
theology. With him he has formed an intimate acquain- 
tance, founded on the fact that Leibniz labours with him 
to pursue the perfection of the intellect, and, in fact, 
reckons nothing better or more useful. Von Tschirnhausen 
says that he is most practised in ethics, and speaks with- 
out any impulse derived from the passions, hut by the 
solo dictate of reason. Ho adds that he is most skilled in 
physics, and also in metaphysical studies concerning God 
and the souL Finally, he concludes that he is most 
woithy of having communicated to him th^ master’s 
writings, if you wfll first give your permission, for he 
believesr that the author will thence gain a great ad- 
vantage, as he promises to show at Iwgth, if the master 
be BO pleased. But if not, do not doubt in the least that 

ertone^ his {ihysikM is toe hasty, his geometry is too limited, and 
ilia metaphysics has all these u^ta combined ' (G. i. 3^8). 

• Letters, 53 sqq. Van Vloten and Land, toI. ii. p. 004 ; Brader, 
vol. a. p. gex (Ij^ters, 6z sqq.). 

.V ^ .i 

lO 

INTRODUCTION 

he will honourably keep them concealed as he has 
promised, as in fact he has not made the slightest men- 
tion of tliem. Leibniz also highly values the Theohgko- 
Political Treatise^ on the subject of which he once wrote 
the master a letter, if he is not mistaken V Spinoza, in 
reply, recollects having scmie correspondence with Leibniz, 
but Leibniz was at that time a counsellor at Frankfort, 
and Spinoza would like to know, before entrusting his 
writings to him, what he is doing in France, and he 
would also like to have Tschimhausen’s opinion of 
Leibniz, after a longer and more intimate acquaintance* 
Spinoza’s shyness had probably no other effect than to 
whet the curiosity of Leibniz, and accordingly, when he 
left Paris in October, 1676, he went for a week to 
London (where he met for the first time Newton’s friend 
Collins) and then crossed to Amsterdam, where he stayed 
four weeks with Schuller, eagerly reading and criticizing 
every writing of Spinoza’s which Schuller could give 
him.’ At last, in November, Leibniz obtained an inter- 
view with Spinoza at the Hague, where he seems to have 
spent some time. They had many conversations together 
regai*ding philosophical matters, of which Leibniz has 
left hardly any record except the remark that ^Spinoza 
did not quite clearly see the defects of Descartes’ 
laws of motion : he was surprised when 1 began to show 
him that they were inconsistent with the equality of 
cause and effect^.’ The persistence of Leibniz ultimately 
induced Spinoza to show him the MS. of the Ethics 
(or at least a portion of it), and he seems eveii to 
have had permission to make a copy of the leading 
definitions, axioms, and propositions ^ What at this time 
most dissatisfied Leibniz was Spinoza’s treatment of 
Final Causes* His recent study of Plato had impressed 

e 

^ Letter 70, Van Vloten and Land, toI. ii. p. 935I 

* Foucher de Oareil, Jiiflaaiion in^dite de Spinoe^ p. Iziv. 

^ Spinoza died in following year, and soon aftOTWards the 
Ethics was published. 

LIFK AND WOBKS 

II 

Leibnjg with the value of teleological considerations, and 
he was already seeking in that direction an escape from 
the imperfections of the mechanical view of things. But 
his general hostility to Spinoza’s' system did not show 
itself rmtil ten years later, when he had settled the 
essential points of his own doctrine of substance. At 
this time Leibniz was still seeking light in every 
quarter. 

Residence in Hanover, Correspondmcc and Growth of 
his System. 

Leibniz arrived at Hanover in the last days of 1676. 
Efforts had already been made to convert him to the 
Roman Catholic faith, and he had begun a correspondence 
with Pellisson (a distinguished convert from Protes- 
tantism) in the hope of finding some means of Church 
reunion. This correspondence led to others, of which the 
most important was one with Bossuet. But, though 
Leibniz was more or less occupied with these discussions 
throughout the rest of his life, nothing practical came of 
them, Bossuet’s attitude in the discussion was only too 
well expressed in his exclamation regarding Leibniz : 
Utinam ex nostris esset! ‘Would that he were one of 
us I ’ And Leibniz was too much of a scientific inquirer 
to unite two opposed religious communions. He might 
draw up a statement of dogma to which both sides could 
assent \ but inevitably it would express the real belief of 
neither. The endeavour to convert Leibniz was not given 
up for a very long time, and a brief visit of hi$ to Rome 
in 1689 seems to have caused a flutter of excitement. 
He wa» offered the librarianship of the Vatican and other 
posts with a vista of preferment ; but conversion was so 
fiir from his mind that we hear of him bringing from 
the Catacombs a piece of glass, reddened with the blood 
of maHyrs, in order to submit it to chemical analysis ! 

^ He actually attempti^ this, in what has been grandiloquently 
oaUed the Syetana TMUtgicum^ written in z686. 

12 

INTRODUCTION 

It was during the early years of his residence in 
Hanover that Leibniz worked out the leading ideas of 
his system. Disappointed in his hope of finding in 
Spinoza a saviour from the errors of Descarte^, and being 
the rather confirmed, by Spinoza’s conclusions, in his 
conviction of the insufficiency of any merely mechanical 
interpretation of things, he turned with renewed interest 
to Plato', with the result that towards 1680 he had 
rcaehed the conception of substance as essentially active 
force. It is possible also that, in spite of his general 
dissatisfaction with Spinoza’s position, some of Spinoza's 
ideas (such as that of the c onatu s or self-prese rvin g 
tendency of things) may have contributed to the develop- 
ment of his new view of substance. One further step 
was needed to complete the theory, namely, the recogni- 
tion that the force constituting a substance is not a 
universal world-principle, but something individual — 
that there are substances which are forces. To this position 
he seems to have attained about 1684 or a little later, 
through a return to the consideration of Aristotle and the 
Peripatetic Schools^ whose views he had set aside in his 
boyhood, nearly twenty-five years before. The main ideas 
of his pliilosophy (such as his conception of ^simple 
substance’ and his pre-established harmony) were first 
stated in the correspondence with Amauld, which took 
place between 1686 and 1690. This correspondence, 
however, was not published as a whole until 1846 ; and 
the learned world was first made aware that Leibniz had 
worked ofit a philosophical system of his own by two 
papers which he published in 1695-^006 (the Specimen 
Djfmmicum) in the Leipzig Acta EmsdUofum^ and the 
oihmr (the SysUme Nouveau) in the French Journal jEiea 
Samnts,, Leibziiz usee the term^^ monad’ for the first 
tim^in 1697. 

^ ' Of all the ancient pAiiloeophers 1 find Plato the most satis- 
faotoiy in regard to me^phyBlca* 2 Mrt d Jf. Bowryaet (17x4) (£. 
7^3 a f U. iii. 568). 

LIFE AEI> WOBJkB 

^3 

The * Nouveatuc JEssaia * and the ' Thdodiode.' 

Having thus definitely fixed his philosophical system \ 
and having published its leading principles, Leibniz 
gradually expounded it in detail, for the most part by 
means of correspondence and criticism. Hitherto he 
had given most attention to ontological or purely meta- 
physical problems. But now he began to consider more 
carefully the theory of knowledge and the psychological 
questions that are connected with it. Locke’s Essa^ was 
published in 1690, and a few years afterwards Leibniz 
read it, writing (as was his custom) notes and comments 
as he read. Some of these criticisms were in 1697 
to Locke, who treated them with contempt, and made no 
reply ^ In 1703 Leibniz wrote the Nouveaux Essais sur 
VEntendement humainf a long dialogue, in which the views 
of Locke and of himself are set in contrast throughout 
a discussion dealing with tlie subjects of Locke’s Essay 
chapter by chapter. This book was evidently intended 
to call forth a rejoinder from Locke. But before it was 
ready for publication Locke died (in 1704) ; and Leibniz, 
saying that he ^ gi*eatly disliked publishing refutations of 
dead authors,’ and that he now ^preferred to publish his 
thoughts independently of another person’s/ allowed the 
Nouveaux Essais to remain in manuscript, so that the 
book was first published by Baspe in 1765, nearly fifty 
years after Leibniz’s death. 

After writing some other papers on psychological and 

* In 1697 he writes to Thomas Burnet of Kemilay : * I have 
changed and changech again, according as new light came to me ; 
and It if| only about twelve years since 1 found what satisilos me, and 
arrived at demonstrations regarding matters which did not soetu 
eaMhle of demonstration.' (d. iii. 205.) 

• Leibniz (in 1714) says that he was not surprised at Locke’s 
disdain. ‘The difference between our principlos was somewhat 
too great, and what I maintained seemed to him to be paradox/ 
Be adds that Locke ‘had subtlety and dexterity, and he had 
a kind of superficial metaphysics which he knew how to make the 
most of; but he did not know the metiiod of mUthematiciaas.* 

d iiemowl (£. 7og b; G. iU. 6ia). 

IIITRODUOTION 

14 

epistemological subjects, Leibniz, in 1710, published his 
Theodic6e, the one great work of his which was printed 
in his lifetime. It was written, not continuously, but at 
intervals, in a very diffuse and discursive style, and ita 
purpose was to develop the principles of its author’s 
philosophy in maintaining, against the arguments of 
Pierre Bayle, the harmony of faith and reason, and to 
Vindicate the ways of God to man.’ The writing of 
the TModicee was suggested to Leibniz as the result of 
conversations with Queen Sophia Charlotte of Prussia, 
who also induced him to write various other philo- 
sophical papers, and who encouraged him in his plans 
for the founding of an Academy at Berlin. Besides the 
exposition of his system which he gives in such elaborate 
works as the Nouveautx Essais and the Thdodieee, Leibniz 
met the objections of critics and suggested new applications 
of his principles in the course of a varied coirespondence. 
On questions of mathematics and physics in their con- 
nexion with metaphysics, he corresponded with John 
Bornouilli for more than twenty years (from 1694 to 
1716), and for ten years (1706-1716) he discussed with 
Des Bosses the possibility of combining his philosophy 
of substance with the presuppositions of the doctrine 
of transubstantiation. Further, among many other epi- 
stolary discussions, mention may be made of Leibniz’s 
correspondence, duiing the last two years of his life, 
with Bourguet on the chief doctrines of his philosophy, 
with special reference to biological questions, and with 
Clarke on space and time and the Divine attributes. 

c 

Founding of Academies. Closing Years. 

The amazing intellectual activity of Leibniz found 
ej^pression in many other writings. During the greater 
part^f his residence at Hanover he worked at a history 
of the house of Brunswick, in connexion with which he 
travelled much and ransacked the libraries of Germany 
and Italy. He suggested the development of mining in 

LIFE AEB WORKS 

15 

the Harz Mountains, and in connexion with this he 
studied and wrote on geological subjects and on the 
currency. But, above all, the interest of Leibniz in these 
later years lay in the endeavour to extend science and 
civilization throughout Europe. With this end in view, 
he, who (according to Frederick the Great) was an 
Academy in himself, succeeded after much effort in 
obtaining the foundation of an Academy at Berlin, of 
which he himself was appointed the first president 
(1700). Afterwards he made long-continued but un- 
successful attempts to induce the King of Poland, the 
Czar, and the Emperor to found similar Academies at 
Dresden, Sjt. Petersburg, and Vienna. He had inter- 
views with Peter the Great, whom he expected to 
become ‘the Solon of Russia,’ and he lived for some 
time in Vienna, where he tried to bring about an alliance 
between the Czar and the Emperor. Charles VI favoured 
his projects for the founding of learned societies, and he 
was also strongly supported by Prince Eugene of Savoy, 
for whom in 1714 he wrote the Mmadologie (or, as 
Gerhardt maintains, the Pnncipes de la Nature et de la 
Grace). But Europe wjis full of wars and rumours of 
wars, and the peaceful plans of Leibniz were set aside. 
The Berlin Academy had a struggling existence, and no 
other was founded until long after Leibniz’s death. 

The happiest years of the life of Leibniz were now 
over. The Duke of Brunswick^ died in 1698, and 
Leibniz seems gradually to have lost favour with his son 
and successor, our George L After the desith of his 
friends, ‘the two Elel^tresses,’ Sophia and Sophia Charlotte 
(the mother and the sister of George 1 ), Leibniz’s position 
became intolm'able. George 1 succeeded to the English 
crown in 1714, and his prejudices against Leibniz, shown 
in his displeasure on account of the latter’s residence in 
Vienna, were encouraged by some of Newton’s friends, 

* Saceeasor of the duke who had originally appointed Leibnii to 
the librarianBhip at Banover, 

l6 INTBODUCmON 

whom he met in England. L^bnLs thought ot leaving 
Hanover ; but in later years his health had been some* 
what broken, and on November 14, 1716, he died during 
an attack of gout. His secretary, Eckhart, invited all 
the people of the Court to bis funeral, but not one of 
them came, and Eckhart alone followed his master’s body 
to the grave. An acquaintance of Leibniz, John Ker of 
Kersland', who had come to Hanover on the very day 
of Leibniz’s death, says that he was buried ^ more like 
a robber than, what he really was, the ornament of his 
country.’ No minister of religion was present ; for 
Leibniz was parcus deorum cultor et infrequenSy and his 
absence from church was counted to him for irreligion, 
so that from priests and people he got the nickname 
Lovenix (the Low German for Glaubet nichts, believer in 
nothing). The Berlin Academy and the Eoyal Society 
of London took no notice of his death ; but a year 
afterwards Fontenelle commemorated it in a fine oration, 
delivered before the Pansian Academy. 

Personal Characteristics. 

As to the personal characteristics of Leibniz, Eckhart 
tells us that he was of middle height, with a somewhat 
large head, dark-brown hair, and small but veiy sliarp 
eyes. He was near-sighted, but had no difficulty in 
reading, and himself wrote a very small hand. His lungs 
were not strong, and he had a thin but clear voice, with 
a difficulty in pronouncing gutturals. He was broad- 
shouldered and always walked with bfis head bent for* 
ward, so that he looked like a man trith a humped back. 
In figure he was slim rather than stout, and his legs 

^ A leader of the Scottish Cameronians, He lived on political 
intrigue, and when hid resources in. England were failing him he 
presented to the hmpcror, throu^ Leihn^ a project for privateeiv 
ing buccaneering against the Spanl^s in the Pa^e. la 
tlie MiHcal Memoir containing Kcr'a propoaols there is a curiotis 
medley of religious considerations and the h6pe ol gain. Cf. Foaeher 
de Oareil, iv. a^9 eqq. 

LIFE AND WORNS 

i7 

were crooked. His household arraoigements (if they can 
be called ^arrangements’) were very irregular. He had 
no fixed hours for meals, but, when a convenient oppor- 
tunity came in the course of his studies, he sent out for 
something to eat. He once made a proposal of marriage 
(when he was fifty years of age), but the lady took time to 
consider, and (Fontenelle says) ^this gave Leibniz also 
time to consider, and he never maiTied/ He slept little, 
but well; he often spent the night in his chair, and 
sometimes he would' remain in it for several days at a 
time. This enabled him to do a great deal of work ; but 
it led to illness, for which, disliking physicians, he em- 
ployed remedies more ^heroic’ than wise. He enjoyed 
intercourse with all sorts and conditions of men, believing 
that he could alvrays learn something ev<en from the 
most ignorant. ^ Cum Socrate semper ud discendum paratus 
sum.* * He spoke well of everybody,’ says Eckhart, ‘and 
made the best of everything ’ (er kehrte alles zum Besien), 
He often congratulates himself on being self-taught 
{avTodidaicros), and thus able to avoid acquiescence in super- 
ficial, ready-made knowledge and to strike out paths of 
his own. For he is ever (he tells us) ‘ eager to penetrate 
into all things more deeply than is usually done and to 
find something new.’ * 

‘ When,’ says Diderot, ‘ one considers oneself imd 
compares one’s talents with those of a Leibniz, one is 
tempted to throw books away and seek some hidden 
comer of the world where one may die in peace. This 
man’s mind was a foe of disorders the most entangled 
things fell into ordel’ when they entered it. He com- 
bined two great qualities which are almost incompatible 
with one another — the spirit of discovery and that of 
method ; and the most determined and varied study, 
througli which he accumulated knowledge of the most 
widely differing kinds, weakened neither the one quality 
nor the other. In the fullest meaning theae words can 
bear, he wae a philosopher and a mathematician 

* <Euvku (An^zat’s e<L), vol. xv. p. 44a 

c 

l8 INTRODUCTION 

The Works ofLeibnis. 

Many of the most important philosophical works of 
Leibniz were not published till after his death. Large 
quantities of manuscript were preserved in the Boyal 
Library at Hanover, and successive editors have con- 
tinually drawn upon it for publication. The chief editions 
of the philosophical works are that of Erdmann (1840) 
and that of Gerhardt (1875-90), the latter being the 
most complete. In 1866 Janet published an edition in 
French, containing the principal works as they are given 
in Erdmann, with the addition of the correspondence 
between Leibniz and Arnauld, which had not been pub- 
lished when Erdmann’s edition appeared. The mathe- 
matical works were published by Gerhardt in seven 
volumes (1850-63). Of the historical and political works 
Onno Klopp published ten volumes (1864-77), Foucher 
de Careil also published in seven volumes (1859-75) 
some of Leibniz’s political works, along with his corre- 
spondence on the reunion of Christendom and his writings 
in connexion with the founding of academies. In addition 
to these may be mentioned the old edition of Dutens in 
six volumes (1768), which contains some things not in- 
cluded in any of the others, and the booklet of Mqllat 
(1885), containing some papers of Leibniz on ethics and 
jurisprudence. 

The following are the principal philosophical works of 
Leibniz, with the dates at which they were written or 
published. The letters J. S. indicate those which appeared 
in the Journal des Savants, and the letters A. E. those 
which appeared in the Acta Eruditoruwu Those marked 
with an asterisk were published in Leibniz’s lifetime. 

Cmeapondmce toith Fhilifp and oihera ngarding the PhiUacphy 0/ ]k$carte$, 
j 679^80. (In French.) G. iv, 381 sqq. 

*Medifationes de Cognitione, Veritate et Jdeis, A. £. 1684. G. iv. 433 ; JQ. 79. 
Coftespondenee AmaiUldt 1686-90. (In French.) G. ii. i. Fab- 
iished by Grotofend, 18461. 

LIFB AND WORKS I9 

^Extrait (fuiM Lettre h Jf. Bayle. PubliBhed in the NcuveUea de la 
S^pMigw dee Lettres^ 1687. O, iii. 51 ; E, 104* 

J)e Vera Methods PhUoaophiae et Theologiae^ 169a G. vii. 393 ; E. 109. 

*iSi VEsemce du Oorpa constate dans Vitendue^ J, S. 1691 and 1693. 
O. iT. 464 ; E. z 19 . 

AnimadveraioTiea in partem generalem Principiorum Cartesianorumj itgia* 
Published by Guhrauer, 1844. G. iv. 350. Mentioned by 
Leibniz in a letter to Bemouilli, 1697. 

*Z>0 NotionUma Juris et JustitiaCy pi'eface to Codex Juris Oetitium Diplo- 
maticus, published in 1693. E. zz8. 

*jDe Primae Philosophiae Emendatione et de Notions SubniantiaXt A. E. 1694. 
G. iv. 468 ; E. I9I. 

*Sy 8 teme Nouveau de la Nature et de la Communication des Suhstancesy 
J. S. 1695. G. iv. 471 ; E. 124. Also three Aclaircissements du 
Nouveau Syathne, J. S. 1696. 

Schreiben an Gabriel Wagner vom Nuteen der Vemunftkunst Oder Logik, 
16961 Published by Guhrauer, 1838. G. vii. 514 ; E. 418. 

De Rerum Originatione radicali, 1697. G. vii. 300; E. 147. Published 
by Erdmann, 1840. 

*De ipsa Naiura, site de Vi insita Aclionibusque Creaturarumy A. E. 1698. 
G. iv. 504 ; E. 154. 

Various papers (without titles) on Cartesianism, written between 
170© and 170a. G. iv, 393 sqq. ; E. 177. 

CSmid 4 ratims sur la DoctYine d*un Esprit Vniversel uniquoy 1709. G. vi. 
529 ; E. 178, Published by Erdmann, 1840. 

Sur ce qui passe les Sens et la Motive (Letter to Queen Sophia Charlotte 
of Prussia), 1702. G. vi. 488. 

Nouveaux Essais sur VEntendement humainy 1704. G. v. 41 ; E. 194. 
Published by Baspe, 1765. 

^Consid^aticna sur les Prineipes de Vie et sur les Natures plastiques (Histoire 
des Ouvrages des Savants, 1705). G. vi. 539 ; E. 429. 

Ad rev* Fairem des Bosses Epistolae 71, 1706-16. G. ii. 991 ; £. 434, Ac. 
E. gives 99 only. Dutens gives 70. 

De liodo disHnguendi Phaenomena reoUia ab imaginariis, G. vii. 319; 
E-443. 

Animadversiones ad Joh. G, iVachteri Librum de recondita Hebraeorum philo- 
saphiay c. 1708 (including the * Refutation of Spinoza ’). Pub- 
lished by Foucher de Gareil, 1854. 

Oommentatio de Anima Brutorum, 1710. G. vii. 328 ; E. 463. Published 
by Kortholt, 1735. 

* Essais de^ThMic^ sur la BonU de DieUy la Liberie de V Homme el V Origins 
du Mol, 1710. G. vi. I ; £. 468. 

Von der GliteksAigkeity 1710 (?). G. vil.^ 86 ; E. 671. Published by 
Guhrauer, 1838. 

20 

INTRODUCTION 

Principea de la Nature et de la Ordee, fimd 4 » m RaiMn, 17x4. G. vL 598 7 
E. 714. First published in VEurope Savcmte, Nolr. 17x8. 

Xa Monadologie, X714. G. vi. 607 ; E. 705. Germ, transt KOhler 
(Jena), 1790. liSt. trans. A. £. X79X. Original French in £. 
1840. 

C()rre.y)ondence with Nicholas Remond^ 1713-16. (In French.) G. iii. 
599; £. 701, &;o. 

Correspondence with Bourguetf 1709-16. (In French.) G. iii. 539; 
E. 718, &o. 

Corre^ondence with Clarke y 17x5-16. (In French.) G. vii. 347 ; 
E. 746. 

PART 11. 

GENEBAX PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNIZ. 

Statement of Leibnie^s Problem : How can that which is 
continuous consist of indivisible Elements? 

In the preface to his ThdodMe^ Leibniz declares that 
* there are two famous labyrinths, in which our reason 
often goes astray : the one relates to the great question 
of liberty and necessity^ especially in regard to the 
production and origin of eml ; the other consists in the 
discussion of continuity and of the indivisible points which 
appear to be its elements, and this question involves the 
considoration of the infinite. The former of these perplexes 
almost all the human race, the latter claims the attention 
of philosophers alone.' Accordingly, while a right under- 
standing of the principle of continuity is of the utmost 
speculative importance, the practical value of a true 
knowledge of necessity is equally great. Thus, Leibniz 
makes his Th4odicee an investigation of the meaning of 
liberty and necessity, while in others of his writings he 
offers a solution of tlft problem which he deseribegf as the 
special peiplexity of philosophers. 

It is this latter problem with which we are* here mainly 
coneemed. The philosophical work of Leibniz was an 
endeavour to reconcile the notion of substance as con- 
tinuous with the contrary notion of substance as consisting 
of indivisible dements* The opposition of these two notions 
‘ E. 470 s; Q, ri. ap. 

22 

INTRODUCTION 

seemed to him to arise from an inadequate conception of 
substance, and the task he set himself wfts that of 
deepening the current notion of substance, or, as he him- 
self would have put it, finding a better hypothesis than 
that which had satisfied his Cartesian predecessors. 

Stated in another way the problem is : How are we to 
interpret the relation of whole and parts so that the 
continuity or complete unity of the whole shall not be in 
conflict with the definiteness or real diversity of the 
parts ? To say that the whole is continuous or really one 
seems to mean that, if it is divisible at all, it is infinitely 
divisible. If it were not infinitely divisible, it would 
consist of insoluble ultimate elements, and would thus be 
discontinuous. Accordingly, if the whole be really con- 
tinuous there seem to be no fixed boundaries or lines of 
division within it, that is to say, no real, but only 
arbitrary parts \ 

On the other hand, if the whole consists of real parts 
and not merely possible subdivisions, these parts must 
be definite, bounded, separate from one another, and 
consequently the whole which they constitute must be, 
not a real continuous unity, but a mere collection or 
arbitrary unity. Nevertheless, we cannot hold either that 
the whole is real and the parts unreal, or that the parts 
are real and the whole unreal. 

Quantitative or extensive Notion of Substance held by Des- 
cartes and Spinoea, on the one hand, and by the Atomists 
on the Gthevu 

The philosophy of Spinoza, with^its cardinal principle 
that ‘Determination is negation,’ practically amounted 
to an assertion of the unity and continuity of the whole 
at the expense of the reality of the parts. According to 

^ instance, the spectrum is continuous. There is no limit 
to the number of varieties of colour that may be discriminated in 
the rainbow : the usual division into seven colours is an arbitrary 
arrangement made by observers. It probably originated in a sug- 
gested analogy with the musical scale. 

OEKERAL PRINCIPLES 

23 

Spinoza, ^substance’ is Hhat which is in itself and is 
conceive through itself; in other words, that, the 
conception of which does not need the conception of 
another thing from which it must be formed That 
is to say, substance is the unconditioned, or that which 
is not conditioned or determined by anything other 
than itself. There is ambiguity in the statement. It 
may mean either that substance is self-conditioned or 
that it is absolutely unconditioned, to the exclusion of all 
determination. In the one case substance would be a 
real system of reciprocal determinations ; in the other, it 
would be unbroken being, to which every determination 
is foreign. The latter is the dominant aspect of substance 
in the philosophy of Spinoza. That aspect alone is con- 
sistent with the principle that 'Determination is negation.’ 
Consequently his position amounts to saying that sub- 
stance can have no real parts. For the very meaning .of 
a part implies that it must be determined or conditioned 
by other parts 

In contrary opposition to this, there is the theory of 
atoms and the void, which Leibniz tells us at one time 
charmed his imagination ^ To affirm the real existence 
of indivisible material atoms is to deny the infinite 
divisibility of matter. Accordingly, if the atoms con- 
stitute the ultimate reality of the world, its unity is 
destroyed, its continuity becomes an illusion. However 
numerous the atoms may be, they can together constitute 
no true unity, 'but only a collection or heaping up of 
parts ad infinitum^. Atomism thus endeavours to establish 
the reality of the p^s at the expense of the whole. 

It is necessary, then, to lay bare the presuppositions 
of th^e contrary theories in order to find the elements of 
truth in each and to reconcile them in a more compre- 
hensive view. The doctrine of Spinoza is the consistent 

^ Wiica^ Part i. def. 3, Hale White’s Tr. 
' Ibid. Part i. prop. la aad 13. 

* Jfew ayatam, § 3. 

* Loc, cU. 

INTRODUCrrON 

24 

logieal development of the principles involved in the 
position of Descartes \ In this connexion it is Descartes’s 
special theories that Leibnis has mostly in view, although 
his arguments are equally applicable to the more thorough 
metaphyric of Spinoza. * Spinoza,’ he tells us, * has done 
nothing but cultivate certain seeds of the philosophy of 
M. Descartes Descartes endeavoured to reach absolute 
metaphysical certainty by a method which was after- 
wards more clearly and fully applied by Spinoza, who 
defined it in his great principle that ^ Determination is 
negation.’ The essence of Descartes’s method of doubt 
is the endeavour to attain certainty by stripping from 
experience (as it is given in common consciousness) all 
specific qualities or determinations, on the ground that 
no contradiction in terms is involved in regarding each of 
these qualities by itself as non-existent or other than it 
is. The result of the method is to give, as the residual 
ultimate certainty, nothing but the instrument by which 
the process of stripping has been carried out, viz. the 

' ^Cartesianae disciplinae inteniperaniia Spinoecie doctrinam paarit; in 
hoc sententia totum reperire $st Leihnitium* (Lemoine, Quid sit materia 
apud Leihfiitiumj p. 52). ' The philosophy of l>escartes . . . seems to 
lead straight to the opinions of Spinoza, who dared to say what 
Descartes carefully avoided.’ (G. iv. 346^) 

“ Lettre d VAhbe Nicaiss (1697) (E, 139 n ; G. ii. 563). Leibniz, 
especially in his earlier days, I'ecognized that his philosophy had 
much in common with that of Spinoza, although, as time went on, 
it became more and more evident to him that they were funda- 
mentally at variance. Thus, in an early letter (February, 1678), we 
find Leibniz writing : ^ I find in it ’ [the Ethics] * plenty of fine 
thoughts agreeing with mine, as is known to some of my friends 
who are also friends of Spinoza. But there ai'e also paradoxes 
which seem to me unreal and not even plausible. As, for example, 
that there is only one. substance, namely God ; that created things 
are modes or accidents of God ; that our mind has no wider outlo^ 
[nihil amplius ptrcipsre] after this life; that God Himself thinks 
indeed, but nevertheless neither understands nor wills ; that all 
things happen by a certain necessity of fate ; that God acts not for 
an end but by a cei’tain necessity of nature, which is verbally to 
retain, but really to give up, providence and immortality. I regard 
this book as a dangerous one for people who will give themsolvea 
the trouble to go deeply into it, for others do not care to under- 
stand it.’ Archiv/Ur Qeichichts d, PhiUaopHis, vqI. iii, p. 75. 

GENfflEtAL PRINCIPLES 

25 

thinking Ego, without any specific thought If we 
challenge the reality of thii instrument, we do so by 
means of the instrument itself, and so involve ourselves 
in self-eontradietion. The thinking Ego cannot be thought 
non-existent : to think its non-existence would be a con- 
iradietion in terms. Spinoza’s advanee upon this was 
merely to pass from Descartes’s practical method of 
attaining truth (namely, the discarding of specific deter- 
minations) to the general metaphysical principle which 
the method implied, the principle, namely, that the 
essence or reality of a thing is that which remains after 
<the differences in its states and qualities have been 
thought away, or that which is common to all its forms 
and manifestations, and consequently that the ultimate 
reality or substance is that which is free from all specific 
determinations, that which includes or is common to 
everything because it is not (specially) anything. 

Now when we rigorously apply this principle, that the 
reality of substance is that which remains after all 
specific or differential qualities have been removed, we 
are left with nothing but quantity — either, as in the case 
of Spinoza, quantity of substance in general ' ; or, as 
in the case of Descartes, quantity of a specific substance, 
that is to say quantity of one quality. Thus Descartes’s 
position is that in addition to the one true and perfect 
substance, God, whose existence is externally uncon- 
ditioned, there are two created substances, whose exis- 
tence is not conditioned by anything finite, but by infinite 

^ It is true that Spinoza regards substance as indivisible, in the 
sense that it has no real pa^; and this may seem inconsistent 
with the contention that Spinoza’s substance is merely quantita- 
* tiw^. But the contradiction is Spinoza’s : it is a fragment of the 
great fisisure of inconsistency that traverses his whole system, 
namely, the confounding of a substance possessing infinite attri- 
butes with a substance whose reality is reached by the exclusion 
of all specific determinations. If we hold strictly to the second of 
them Tiewsr of substance, then substance can be said to be in* 
divisible only on the ground that there is nothing to divide. Cf. 
Spinoza, JEthiot, Fart i. prop. 12 and 13, with lyadattM de IfdeUcdus 
JSmSndatione, 108, iu lii. 

26 INTRODUCmON 

substance alone. These are bodily substance and think- 
ing substance. They are mutually opposite : the one is 
what the other is not. Neither is conditioned by the 
other nor dependent upon it. The essential attribute 
of bodily substance is extension, that of thinking sub. 
stance is thought. All the specific qualities of created 
things are reducible to one or other of these as a common 
quality ; and consequently the essence or reality of 
created substance comes to be either extension without 
specific contents or thought without a specific object. 
In other words, bodily substance is quantity of one 
determination, namely extension ; while thinking subr 
stance is quantity of one other determination, namely 
thought. Thus the presupposition of the Cartesian 
systems is a purely quantitative relation of whole and 
parts \ 

The same presupposition in another form underlies 
the Atomist philosophy. The atoms are material par- 
ticles, and the whole consists of their aggregation. If 
the theory is self-consistent they must be regarded as 

* Cf. Doscartes, Principia, Part ii. § 8 : * Quantity and number 
differ only in thought [ratione] from that which has quantity and 
is numbered/ § 1 1 ^ ^ It will be easy to discern that it is the same 
extension which oonstitutos the nature of body as of space, and 
that those two things are mutually diverse only as the nature of 
the genus and species differs from that of the individual, provided 
we reflect on the idea we have of any body, taking a stone for 
example, and reject all that is not essential to the nature of body. 
In the first place, then, hardness may be rejected, because if the 
atone were liquefied or reduced to powder it would no lon^r 
possess hardness, and yet would not cease to be a body ; colour also 
may be thrown out of account, because we have frequently seen 
stones so transparent as to have no colour ; again, we may reject 
weight, because we have the case of fire, which, though very light, 
is still a body ; and finally, we may reject cold, heat, and all the 
other qualities of this sort, either because they are not considered 
as in the stone, or because, with the cliange of these qualities, the 
stone is not supposed to have lost the nature of body. After this 
examination we shall find that nothing remains in the idea of 
body, ej;oept that it is something extended in length, breadthf and 
dei^h^ 4ina this something is comprised in our idea of space, not 
only of that which is fiill of body, but even of what is called void 
space* (Teitch*s Tr.). Cf. iVfncipta, Part i. §§ 51-53, 63-65. 

OEKVBAL PBIKCIPLES 

27 

homogeneous, and the specific qualities of things must 
arise from the variety of their combinations. They could 
not all really exist and be different from one another 
without some of them being complex. And in any case 
the very essence of the theory is that the whole should 
be taken as a sum or totality, a quantity of parts. 

Leibnizes nofhqumtitative or intensive Notion of Substance^ 
developed through criticism of Cartesian ondAtomist vietvs 
regarding material Substance. 

Accordingly, the essence of Leibniz’s argument is 
that a quantitative conception of the relation of whole 
and parts affords an inadequate theory of substance. 
The common element in the contrary positions of the 
Cartesians and the Atomists is the explicit or implicit 
reduction of qualitative to quantitative differences \ And 
it appears to Leibniz that the solution of the dilemma 
is to be found in the opposite hypothesis, namely, that 
the essence of substance is non-quantitative, and that 
the relation of whole and parts must be conceived as 
intensive rather than extensive. Thus a * simple sub- 
stance ’ has no parts, i. e. no quantitative elements \ 
and yet it must comprehend a manifold in unity ^ ; that 
is to say, it must be real, it must be something, it must 
lie qualitative, specifically determined. 

While the general principle of Leibniz’s argument 
may be stated in this way, he actually develops it through 
criticism of Descartes’s theory of material substance. To 
regard matter as ultimately pure extension is to make 
it essentially a sdbstance with nothing more than a 
shadow of quality. An extended nothing is meaningless. 
An extended something must have quality. And to call 

' The mechanical view of things * has two forms : Carteaianiam 
and Atomism. . . . The one, which makes matter continuous, may 
be called ff^omeirical mechanism ; the other, which makes it dis- 
continuous, may be called <mthmeHcal mechanism.' E. Boutroux, 
La Uonadologis d» LsOmits, kc., p. 36, 

* Monadckgy, f z. * Ibid. { la. 

28 INTBODUOnON 

that quality extension itself is merely to cover up the 
difficulty^ with a name : an extended exteninon is much 
the same as a shaded shadow of nothing. my 

opinion corporeal substance consists in something quite 
other than being extended and occupying a place : we 
must, in fact, ask ourselves what it is that occupies the 
place'.’ ^ Those who hold that the extended is itself 
a substance transpose the order of the words as well as 
of the thoughts. Besides extension there must be an 
object which is extended, that is to say a substance 
which can be repeated or continued. For extension 
means nothing but a repetition or a continued multi- 
plicity of that which is spread out, a plurality, continuity, 
and coexistence of parts ; and consequently it [extension] 
is not sufficient to explain the very nature of extended 
or repeated substance, the notion of which is anterior 
to that of its repetition 

Again, it cannot be said that pure extension has any 
real parts. There can be no real unit of mere extension 
It would be an erroneous conception to regard mathe* 
matical surfaces as made up of real lines, and these lines 
as made up of real points. The line is the limit of the 
surface, and the point is the limit of the line. A mathe- 

^ Episiolaad Sc?iulenburgium (1698) (G. Math. vii. 942^. 

* Exhait d'wne letire (1693) (E. iT4b ; G, iv. 467). Of. Lotze, 3 ftcro- 
eoamus, bk. iii. oh. 4^ § 2 vEng. Trans, vol. i. p. 356). Gf. also Examsa 
dea princtpea du R. ]\ McUebranche (c. 1711) (E, 691 a; G. Ti. 580) : 
*Art 8 te» But do you not think that the destruction of extension, 
which carries with it that of body, proves that body consists only 
in extension ? Philarete, It proves only that extension enters into 
the essence or nature of body ; but not that it constitutes its whole 
essence. Similarly, magnitude enters into tfie essence of extension^ 
but is not equivalent to it ; for number, timOf motion have also 
mamitude, and yet they are not extension.' Also (E. 699 b ; G. vi. 
584) : ' Extension is nothing but an abstraction and requires some- 
thing which is extended. ... It presupposes some quality, some 
attribute, some nature in the thing, which quality extends or 
difihses itself along with the thing, continues itself.’ 

‘ ' Yut are right in saying that all magnitudes [grandmra] may 
be divided ad ir^itum. None of them is so small that we cannot 
conceive in it an infinity of divisions which will never be exhausted.' 
Lettre d Foueher (169a) (E. X15 a ; G. i. 403). 

OEl^BAL PBINGIPLES 

29 

matical point may, then, be regarded as indivisible, but 
only because there is nothing in it to divide. It cannot 
be a real unit^ for there is nothing to determine its unity. 
We should have to conceive it as the unit of that whose 
sole characteristic is to consist of units, to be a quantity. 
For such is, strictly speaking, the nature of Descartes’s 
^extension.’ Thus, as Leibniz puts it, ^mathematical 
points are exact ’ [i. e. indivisible] ; ^ but they are only 
modalities that is to say abstractions and not real 
existences \ 

Now, while Leibniz regards the parts of Cartesian 
extension as thus indivisible without being real, he 
maintains on the other hand that the parts to which 
Atomism reduces material substance are real only if 
they are not indivisible. Their claim to be indivisible 
rests upon the supposition that they are infinitely hard. 
But hardness is a relative term. There is no absolute 
hardness, as there is no, absolute motion or rest. And 
thus infinite hardness is a selfcontradictory conception. 
^By an atom,’ says Leibniz, understand a corpuscle, 

* New Systemy §11. 

* Of. Epiatola ad BenuMdlium (1698) (G. Math. iii. 535 ) : * Indeed 

many years ago 1 proved that a number or sum of all numbers 
involves a oontradicticn, if it be taken as one whole. And the 
same is true of an absolutely greatest number and an absolutely 
least number or an absolutely smallest fraction. . • . Now, just as 
there is no (given) numerical element or smallest part of unity or 
least among numbers, so there is no (given) least line or lineal 
element ; for a line, as a unity, can be cut into parts or fractions. . . . 
Suppose that in a line there are actually \y A; 

that all the terms of this series actually exist. Yoi:^ infer from 
this that there is also an absolutely infinite tenn, but 1 think 
nothing else follows ^m it than that there actualfy exists any 
asaignable finite fraction, however small. . . . And indeed I conceive 
points, not as elements of a line, but as limits, or negations of 
Ihrther progress, or as ends [iermin%\ of a line:' Of. IMtre d Feucher 
(1693) (£. X18 a ; G. i. 4x6). * As to indivisible points in the sense 
of the mere eximmities of a time or a line, we cannot conceive in 
them new extremitieB, nor parts, whether actual or potential. 
Thus points are neither large nor small, and no leap is needed to 
tMas theim Yet the continuous, though it has everywhere such 
Indivisible points, is not compost of them.' Ct jExpkmatkn qf tk 4 
New x, note. 

INTRODUCTION 

30 

mentally divisible indeed^ but which actually neither is 
nor has been divided. Not that it cannot be actually 
divided ; for such atoms do not occur^ since they would 
demand perfect hardness. But it suffices for my defini- 
tion that there should be corpuscles^ whose particles have 
never been separated, from the foundation of the world 
to the present day*,' Every material atom must be at 
least ideally divisible^ if it be real * The atoms of matter 
. . . are still composed of parts, since the invincible 
attachment of one part to another (if one could rationally 
conceive or suppose it) would in no way destroy their 
diversity 

llotv the Relation of Whole and Parts is to be conceived. 

The real and indivisible Unit of Substance [Monad], 

^ Perception ' and * Appetition.* 

Leibniz’s problem thus takes the form of an attempt 
to find a unit of substance which shall avoid the imper- 
fections of both the Gaiiesian and Atomist theory. This 
unit must be at once real and indivisible. Its reality 
must be of such a kind that it does not conflict with its 
indivisibility, and it must be indivisible in a sense which 
is consistent with the continuity of tlie whole. The basis 
of its reality cannot be quantity, for no quantity is 
indivisible. And its indivisibility cannot be exclusive 
particularity in space or time, for indivisible points in 
space or time may form an aggregate but cannot become 
a continuum. The unit of substance must then be inten- 
sive rather than extensive, and the continuity of the 
whole must be not a mere empty homogeneity, but a 

^ Epistdia ad Bemouliium (1697) (G. Math. iii. 443). 

* New System, §11. Cf. ZeUre a IfartaoeAvr (1710) (G. iii. 507) : 

* Nothing is large or small, except by comparison, so that such 
II particle as an atom is as considerable in itself, and in relation to 
others proportionately less (and consequently, in the sight of GM), 
as our visibie^syetem is considerable in relation to it. Atoms are 
the effect of the weakness of our imagination, whicdi likes to rest 
and to hasten to an end in subdividing or analyzing. It is not so 
in natures, which comes from infinity and goes to iiffinity.* 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

31 

continuity through infinite degrees of intension. The 
word intension/ however, does not help uS much. It 
must be more precisely defined. 

The antinomy between whole and parts, which was 
the issue of the quantitative or extensive view of sub- 
stance, had its roots in the conception of whole and parts 
as inevitably exclusive of one another, the whole being 
regarded as prior to the parts or the parts as prior to the 
whole. That is to say, either, as in the view of Spinoza, 
the parts are to be deduced, in a purely analytic way, 
from the whole as self-evidently given, or, as in the 
Atomist doctrine, the whole is a secondary construction, 
of a purely synthetic kind, from the primary parts. In 
contrast with this the intensive doctrine of substance 
which regards determination as primary or essential 
amounts to a declaration that whole and part are in- 
separable. All specific determinations, states, or func- 
tions are determinations, states, or functions of the whole, 
not in the sense that they are ultimately reducible to one 
vague determination which is common to everything, but 
in the sense that the whole is expressed, symbolized, and 
therefore in some way included in each, however specific, 
individual, limited it may be. Thus the parts are not 
determined or characterized without reference to the 
whole, and the whole is not a mere vague aggregate of 
independent parts. In some sense each part must con- 
tain the whole within itself, each unit must include an 
infinite manifold. The whole stands not merely in a 
mechanical, but in a dynamic relation to the part. The 
whole is not merely other than the part, but in some 
way passes into it and expresses itself through it. That, 
in general, is the conception of substance as essentially 
intensive rather than extensive. 

Th^re is here an approach to the modem conception of 
organism as more adequate to the expression of substance 
than are merely mechanical conceptioos K But the special 

^ Leibniz does hold that all real substancee are oi*ganio (of. p. 108). 

INTRODUCTION 

32 

angle at which Leibniz regards his problem prevents htm^ 
from developing this. His early imaginative liking for 
^ atoms and the void/ when first he ^ freed himself fiom 
the yoke of Aristotle V i^he love of historical system and 
of well-grounded hypothesis which set his whole intel- 
lectual character in revolt against Spinoza’s abstract unity 
and his purely a priori deductions, probably also the 
influence of his Scholastic training with its suggestions 
of an infinite multiplicity of * substantial forms’ — all 
resulted in a tendency to emphasize rather the elements 
of reality than its wholeness. That there can be no real 
whole without real units, is Leibniz’s guiding thought 
and accordingly his question does not primarily take the 
form : ^ What must be the nature of a whole which 
expresses itself in each of its parts ? ’ It rather is : 

*' What must be the nature of a part or unit which can in 
some way contain or express the whole within itself? * 

Now the part cannot contain the whole within itself 
actually and fully, in all its realized completeness ; for 
thus the distinction between whole and pai^ would 
vanish. The part must, therefoi'e, contain the whole 
potentially and ideally or by means of representation. 

The relation of whole and parts is not to be conceived 
as one of greater and less, of thing containing and things 

But iho notion of organism, as he uses it, is much more vague than 
it has since become. AccoHing to Leibniz anything is an organism 
if it haH a ‘ ' or principle of unity, that is to say, if it is other 

than a mere aggregate of independent elements. 

* Nitw Syniem^ $ 3. 

• Cf. Lettn a Arnauld (1687) (U. ii. 97): ‘Every machine pre- 
auppoaea some substance in the pieces froifi which it is made, and 
there ia no manifold without real units. In short, 1 take as 
axiomatic th^s identical proposition, in which the difference is 
entirely a matter of accent, namely, that what is not really one 
[un] being is not really a [un] being. It has always been thought 
that unity [run] and being are reciprocal things. ** Being ** is one 
thing, beings" is another; but the plural presupposes the 
singular, amt where there is not one being there will still lees be 
several beings.^ < Being and unity are eanvertible terms d 
unnm eonvedmUnry EpUi, ad dee Boaeee (1706) (£. 433 b ; G. ii« 304), 
The phrase is used by Nicholas of Cuaa, ilfdocto tgnoranha (1440), ii. 7, 

GENBItAL PBlNClPj^ES 33 

oantained, but rather as a relation of symbolized and 
leymbols^ sign and thing fidgnified. That is to say, the 
t»art must be a representation of <the whole from some 
particular point of view, a symbol or expression of the 
whole, and the part must contain the whole in such 
a way that the whole might be unfolded entirely from 
within it K 

Thus the part must have a certain spontaneity or power 
of acting from within itself, and in virtue of this Leibniz 
describes the individual substance as essentially a ^ force ’ 
rather than a quantity. This intensive essence or force 
in the part (or individual substance) appears in two ways. 
As representative or S3mibolic of the whole, the part, in 
Leibniz’s terminology, has ^Perception,’ while, in so far 
as in the part the potential whole tends to realize itself, 
the part is said >to have * Appetition.’ Both of these 
characteristics must belong to it, for, if it had perception 
alone, the part would merely represent one aspect of the 
whole, like an unchanging picture. It is in virtue of its 
appetitioii that the part is able to realize the life of the 
whole, to unfold spontaneously from within itself all the 
variations of that which it represents^. 

This new atom or unit of substance (the ‘simple 
substance’ in his own phrase) Leibniz calls a Monad \ 

‘ Although, as a matter of fact, it never is bo unfolded. iVoc- 
dicatum tnest subjecio ; but, in the case of any actual thing, to develop 
the predicate out of the subject would involve an infinite analysis. 
We here touch a fundamental inconsistency in Leibniz’s thought. 

* Ct De Antma BrtUorum, la (£. 464 b ; G. vii. 330) : * Not only is 
the variety of the object represented in that which has pereeption f 
but there is also variation in the representation itself,^since that 
which is to be representdfi variea.* 

* Of. I^ptsttda ad Em C. Wagnemm (1710) (E. 466 a; G. vii. 599) : 

. • ifohads, and, so to speak, metaphysioal atoms, without parts.' 

Also iUghgue aux E^/lexions ds BayU (170a) (E. z86 b ; G. iv. 56Z) : 

ISsct, I regard souls, or rather Monads, as atoms of sybotance, 
sinoe, in my opinion, there die no atoms maiUer in nature and the 
a ma ll eat portion of matte, baa still parts.* See also New 8 ysUm^ 

3 and zx. Leibniz says that he applies the term * Monad ' to the 
■kn^e substanee, beoauae it is %m%m per ss. De ipaa natwra (1696) 
iE. 1 Ji; 8 a ; G. iv. 5x1). But ^Monads are not to be confounded with 
atoms. Atoms (as people imat^e tern) have shapes; Monads no 

D 

INTEODUOnOW 

34 

The word is almost as old as European philosophy, and 
has varied greatly in meaning and application. Shortly 
before the time of Leibniz the term was used by Oiordano 
Bruno, whose Monads were ultimate spherical points, 
i'egarded as possessing both spiritual and material charac- 
teristics. There are some pai*ts of the philosophy of 
Bruno with which the doctrine of Leibniz has affinity, 
as, for instance, Bruno’s contention that there is nothing, 
however little or valueless, that does not contain in it 
life or souL But Leibniz repeatedly attacks the doctrine 
of a world-soul, which is Bruno’s central conception. 
Thus, in adopting the term * Monad,’ Leibniz may be said 
to have token from Bruno little more than the name 
The Monad, then, has perception, but not necessarily 
in the sense of consciousness. For consciousness is not 
the essence of perception, but merely on additional 
determination belonging to ceriain kinds or degrees of 
perception. Conscious perception is called by Leibniz 
* Apperception.’ But the essence of perception in general 
is that in it wo have a unity variously modified or a unity 
which appears in a multiplicity of relations. have 
many ideas [ Yorstellungefi]^ wealth of thoughts is in me ; 
and yot I remain, in spite of this variety, one*.’ But 
it is not necessarily because I am conscious of many 
thoughts or many objects that I ‘perceive’ and thus 
exhibit a multiplicity in unity. All representation is 

more have a shape than souls have. They are not parts of bodies, 
but presuppositions of them.* Epistola ad Bieriingium (G. 

vii. 503). 

‘ Professor Ludwig Stein, in his LeibniM und Spinoza^ has shown 
that tlio term * Monad ' was actually suggested to Leibniz, not by 
the writings of Bruno, but by Leibniz's contemporary, Francois 
Mercure Van Helmont (1618-1699), with whom he had much 
intercourse and considerable correspondence. 1} povds to the Greek 
meant simplr the unit in arithmetic. ' Leibniz himself attributes 
the term to ^thagoras. In the sense of a numerical unit it occurs 
in Plai% (PhiWiuSf 15 B ; Phaedo, 10$ 0 , loi £). But Leibniz's chief 
forerunner in the use of the term was Bruno. It is also used by 
Kieholas of Casa. ^ , 

* Hegel, (TsscMcMt der PhUm^^, iiL 412. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

35 

perception Similarly, the Monad baa appetition, but 
not necessarily in tbe sense of conscious desire or will. 
As the essence of perception is multiplicity in unity, so 
the essence of appetition is change within the identity 
or permanence of a simple substance. Appetition is ^ the 
action of the internal principle which produces change 
or passage from one pei'ception to another^.’ As the 
Monads alone are real, every change in nature must be 
change within a Monad. This change, as we have seen, 
must be the unfolding of the whole which the Monad 
potentially contains or represents. That is to say, it 
must be the passing from one perception (or state of 
representation, whether conscious or unconscious) to 
another. And thus, wherever there is change there is 
appetition. It is simply another name for the spon- 
taneity of the Monad, its power of unfolding its whole 
nature and experience from within itself. The Monad 
as perceptive is thus a universal within, rather than 
exclusive of, the particular, while as appetitive it is 
dynamic and not static 

‘ Cf. p. 135. Also Epistola ad R, C. Wagrufrum (1710) (E. 466 s ; 
G. vii. 539); ‘This correlatioD of the internal and cncternal, or 
representation of the external in the internal, of the compound in 
the aiinple, of multiplicity in unity, really constitutes perception.* 
In a letter to Arnauld (1687) (G. ii. zia) Leibniz says that ‘ex- 
pression is a genus of which natural perception, animal feeling, 
and intellectual knowledge are species. In natural perception 
and feeling, it is enough that what is divisible and material, and 
is actually dispersed among several beings, be expressed or repre- 
sented in a single indivisible being or in substance which has 
a genuine unity.* 

■ Monaddlogy^ i ^ * ■ 

* * We could not say in what the perception of plants consists, 
and even that of animals is not well conceived by us. Yet, 
according to the general sense I give to these words, in order that 
there may be a perception, it is enough that there should be 
a variety in unity ; and in ord^ that there may bo appetition it is 
enough that there should be a tendency to new perceptions.* 
Lettre a Bcwgutt (1715) (E. 73a b ; G. iiL 581). ‘ The soul has 

peineptions and appetitions, and its nature consists in these. 
And as in body there are understood to be dirriTvwia and figure of 
Mine kind, although we do not know what are the figures of 
imperoeptible bodies; so in the soul there are ondersto^ to be 

D 2 

nmiomjOTioN 

36 

As the Monads are purely intensive centres or units, 
each must be absolutely exclusive of all others. Not 
being quantitative, they are simple, in the sense of 
having no parts and thus no one Monad can include 
another. Further, no Monad can really influence another 
or produce any change in it« For that would mean 
a transference of quality from one to the other. But 
as the quality of a substance, being its very essence, is 
inseparable from it, such a transference is impossible*. 
The Monads are also real ultimate elements, because, 
being entirely non* quantitative, they cannot have been 
formed out of any combination of simpler elements, nor 
is it possible in any way to dissolve them, as they are 
without parts*. The point which is at once real and 
Indivisible has thus '(Leibniz tliinks) been found in the 
Monad, as contrasted, on the one hand, with the mathe- 
matical point of Descartes, which is indivisible only 
when it ceases to be real, and, on the other hand, with 
the physical point of the Atomists, which, if it is real, 
must always be divisible *, 

The Identity of Indiscemihles and the Law of Continuity, 

The indivisible having thus been established, there 
remains the question of continuity and the infinite. As 
we liave seen, a quantitative contirmum cannot have 
indivisible parts. But, as the actual indivisible elements 
of reality are essentially perceptive, real continuity must 
also be a continuity of perception. As each Monad is 
a pai't or element of the universe, in the sense that each 
represents it or reflects it as in « a mirror from some 
pai*ticular angle, in some special aspect, the whole must 

perception and nppetition, although we do not distinctly know 
the imperceptible elements of the^onfused perceptions, by which 
the imperceptible elements of bodies axe expressed.* JBipiaMa ad 
, Bieriin&ium (1711) (E. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 

^ MoncMcgy, ft x. * Ibid. § 7. 

’ Ibid. 3-6. 

* Aa to the contrast between lieibnus^s view of subaUnce and 
that of Locke, aeo Locke's Meaar, Freaer's ed., voL i. pp. 399 sq^. 

GSmSEAL PRINCIPLES 

37 

be the infinite totality of MonadS) r^reeenting the 
universe from every possible point of view. And thus> 
while the Monads are entirely separate from one another, 
each must represent the universe in a way which differs 
to the least possible extent from the representation given 
by some other. No two Monads (and a fartiori no two 
things^ which are all aggregates of Monadsj can be exactly 
the same : no thing can have a merely numerical differ- 
ence from another. The Monads are essentially non- 
quantitative, and number by itself is merely a measure 
ef quantity. The Monads differ from one another in 
quality or intension alone, so that two Monads not 
differing in quality are impossible. This is the doctrine 
of Leibniz which is usuaUy called the ‘ Identity of Indis- 
cemibles^’ It is simply his law of continuity in a 
negative form. The number of Monads must be in- 
finite otherwise the universe would not be represented 
from every possible point of view, and would thus be 
imperfect But if the number of Monads is infinite, and 
if every Monad differs in quality from every other, then 
the Monads must be such that they might be considered 
us a series, each term or member of which differs from 
the next by an infinitely small degree of quality, i. e. by 
a degree of quality less than any wliich can be assigned. 

Leibniz explains his principle of continuity in a letter 
quoted by his biographer, Guhrauer\ ^1 think, then,’ 

‘ 'There are do two indisoemible indivJduala A clever gentle- 
man of my acquaintance, talking with me in presenoe of Mm^. the 
Electren, in the garden of Herrenhauaen, was of opinion that he 
could quite well find two Jeaves entirely alike. Mme, the Electress 
would not believe it, and he spent a long time vainly seeking them. 
Two drepe of water or of milk, looked at throu|Eh a microscope, will 
be fbimd dleoemible. This is an argument agamst atoms, to which, 
no less than to the void, the principles of true metaphysic are 
oppoeed ... To suppose two indiaeemible things is to suppose the 
same thing under two names.* Lettre d Clarke, 4 and 6 

S 755 k, 756 a ; G. vii. 37a). Gf. Ncuveaux Essm, bk. ii. ch. 27, f 3 
077 b ; G. V. ai4)« 

* I>a IB^Ia-Beymood compares the infinite aeries of Monads to 
the ordinates of a eurve, wldeh grow firom nothing to infinity. 

* G. von LeibeUU, eine BiOf^pMe^ vol. i,, Anmerkungen, p. 3a. 

INTBODTIOnON 

38 

he says, * that I have good reasons for believing that all 
the different classes of beings, the totality of which forms 
the universe, are, in the ideas of God, who knows 
distinctly their essential gradations, merely like so many 
ordinates of one and the same curve, the relations of 
which do not allow of others being put between any two 
of them, because that would indicate disorder and imper- 
fection. Accordingly men are linked with animals, these 
with plants, and these again with fossils, which in their 
turn are connected with those bodies which sense and 
imagination represent to us as completely dead and inor- 
ganic [in/ormes]. But the law of continuity requires that, 
when the essential determinations of any being ajiproximate to 
those of another^ alt the properties of the former must gradually 
approximate to those of the latter. Therefore all the orders 
of natural beings must necessarily form only one chain, 
in which the different classes, like so many links, are so 
closely connected with one another that it is impossible 
for sense or imagination to determine exactly the point 
whore any one of them begins or ends ; all the species 
which border upon or which occupy, so to speak, dis- 
putable territory [regions inflexion et de rehroussement^^ 
being necessarily ambiguous and endowed with charac- 
teristics which may equally be ascribed to neighbouring 
species. Thus, for instance, tho existence of zoophytes, 
or, as Buddeus ® calls them, Plant-animals^ does not imply 
monstrosity, but it is indeed agreeable to the order of 
nature that they should exist. And so strongly do I hold 

The Academy of Berlin declai'ed this letter to bo spurious ; but 
there seems no good reason to doubt its genuineness. All they 
proved was that tho letter had not been addressed to the person to 
whom it was said to have been addressed. See also /tt^roduceton, 
Part iii, p. 83 note, and New Essays, Introduction, p. 376. Cf. Locke, 
Essay, bk. iii. ch. 6, ( la, Fraser’s ed., vol. i. p. 67; cf. note on 
p. 380. 

^ Literally, places whore the curve or chain turns back upon 
itself. 

* Probably Johannes Franciscus Biiddaeus (1667-1799), Profi^ssor 
of Philosophy at Halle, and afterwards of Theology at Jena. 
published many books, mostly on moral philosophy. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

39 

to the principle of continuity that not only should I not 
be astonished to learn that there had been found beings 
which, as regards several properties — for instance, those 
of feeding or multiplying themselves — might pass for 
vegetables as well as for animals, and which upset the 
common rules, founded upon the supposition of a complete 
and absolute separation of the different orders of beings 
which together fill the universe : I say, 1 should be so 
little astonished at it that I am even convinced that there 
must be such beings, and that natural history will perhaps 
some day come to know them, when it has further studied 
that infinity of living beings whose smallness conceals 
them from ordinary observation, and which lie hid in the 
bowels of the earth and in the depths of the waters^ . . 

The pre-established Harmony between Substances. 

There is, then, in the system of the Monads a perfectly 
continuous and infinite gradation of intension, that is to 
say, of perception or representation, combined with appo- 
tition or spontaneous change. And thus the universe is 
at once continuous and not only infinitely divisible, but 
infinitely divided, consisting of an infinity of real ele- 
ments But we still havo to consider how the principle 
of continuity, as thus interpreted, is consistent with the 
changes which take place in real things. In the system 
of Monads the principle of continuity corresponds to the 

^ *M. Malpighi, founding upon very conHidorable analogies in 
anatomy, is much inclined to think that plants may bo included 
in the same genus as animals, and that they are imperfect animals.' 
Lettre h Amauld (1687) (G. ii. laa). • 

* Cf. Lettre a Foucher (1693) (G. i. 416): *I hold by the actual 
to such an extent that, in place of admitting that nature 
abhors it, as is commonly said, 1 maintain that nature afTocts it 
everywhere, so as the letter to indicate the perfections of its 
Author. Thus I think that there is no part of matter which is 
not, I do not say merely divisible, but actually divided ; and 
consequently^ the smallest particle must be regarded as a world 
filled with an infinity of different creatures.* Also T^ittre a Arnaulti 
(1686) (G. ii. 77) ; ' Not only is the continuous infinitely divisible ; 
but every part of matter is actually divided into other parts,* See 
Mmadotogyf § 65 note. 

iimtoDucnoN 

40 

Woid’ in the older Atomism. Each is the necessary 
correlative of the indivisible and impenetrable elements. 
The conception of continuity, however, by implying 
a plernmf escapes the contradictions that are involved 
in the idea of a void. But it has still to be shown how 
change is possible within a plenum^ or how change can 
take place without disturbing the continuity of the 
infinite series of Monads. Any change within a plemm 
affects eveiy part of it. This is the principle involved 
in the scientific point of view regarding the universe, 
which became current with the rise of modem philosophy. 
Everything in the world acts and reacts upon everything 
else. However separate things may be, no change can 
take place in any one without affecting every other. The 
influence may in some cases be imperceptible, infinitely 
small ; but it exists. If, however, the universe be a 
quantitative plenumy it is impossible to understand how 
any cliange could originate within it. It must receive its 
motion from outside, and must thus be regarded as finite, 
which again is inconsistent with its reality as a plemm. 
Leibniz overcomes this difficulty by regarding the uni- 
verse, not as an infinite mass occupying all that there is 
to occupy, but as a continuity or infinite gradation of 
qualitative differences, each containing within itself the 
principle of its own changes. He substitutes for an 
extensive plenum of moss an intensive continuum of force 
or life. 

But if the universe consists of an infinity of Monads, 
each independent of the rest, impenetrable and unaffected 
by them, and each containing withih itself the principle 
of all its changes, how is it possible for a change to take 
place in any one of them without destroying the con- 
tinuity of the series'? Each Monad contains within 

^ How the perfect independonoe of Uie Monads is tojbe reconciled 
with the continuity of their aeries is a question which Leibniz does 
not answer. For him the ideal unity of the Monads (as ea<di repre* 
senting the same universe) does not make their mutual indepen- 
dence any the less complete. To give up the independence of ite 

OENSBAL PRINCIPLES 

41 

itself a representation of the whole universe from one 
particular point of view, which dilSFers to an infinitely 
small degree firom the representations contained in some 
other Monad. If^ then, any change, however slight, 
takes place in the perception or representation of one 
Monad, the continuity of the series will be broken and 
we shall have two indiscernible Monads. But it is of 
the* very essence of the Monads to be ‘living mirrors,’ 
‘forces’ (as distinct from masses), centres of appetition, 
spontaneously unfolding a sequence of perceptions. Ac- 
cordingly this change within the Monad does take place : 
it is essentia^ to its nature. The continuous order or 
system of the Monads must therefore be destroyed, unless 
we can say that any change within one Monad produces, 
or is invariably accompanied by, oon*elative changes in 
other Monads, of such a kind that the equilibrium of the 
whole system is maintained. In other words, there must 
be something of the nature of mutual influence, action 
and reaction, between the various elements in the system. 
If the system were a plenum of moss, this interaction 
would be intelligible without further explanation. But, 
as the Monads form a qualitative continuum of such a 
kind that no part can really act upon another, a further 
h3rpothesis is required, to complete the theory. 

This hypotliesis is Leibniz’s system of the pre-estab- 
lished harmony between substances. Though no* true 
substance can really act upon another, everything in the 
universe takes place as if this mutual interaction were 
real. Substances form a system, not of physical relations, 
but of harmony or nfutual compatibility. In the creation 
of the world, the inner development of each Monad has 
been so prearranged that all its changes are accompanied 
by corresponding changes in others. The succession of 

Monads would for him have meant to fall into Spinoza's pantheism, 
while, on the other hand, to give up the continuity of their series 
would have meant having recourse to Atomism. And these he 
regarded as equally irrational alternatives. Of. this IntrodiMUon^ 
Part ir. p. x88. 

INTRODUCTION 

42 

changes in each Monad is different from that in every 
other, and yet all are in harmony, the perfections of one 
being accompanied by counterbalancing imperfections in 
others. One Monad influences another ideally \ that is to 
say, not ah extra, but through an inner pre-established 
conformity 

Relation of the System of pre-established Ilannmy to • 
Scholastic a/nd Occasionalist Theories. 

Like most of the other doctrines of Leibniz, this system 
of the pre-established harmony is a new hypothesis 
devised to remedy the imperfections of previous theories. 
The general problem which it is meant to solve appeared 
at first for Leibniz in a particular form, that of the rela- 
tions botwoon soul and body. The usual pre-Cartesian 
solution of this special problem was tlie theoiy of an 
inflnxtis physicus or actual passage of elements from the one 
substance to tho other. Dt^scartes’s complete separation 
of soul from body, of thinking substance from extended 
substance, was in total opposition to the earlier theory \ 

' Mnnadnhxjy^ § 5T- 

■ Cf. S'mreanx iC.ssuw, bk. iv. ch. 10, § 10 (E. 376 a; G. v. 421) : 

‘ Aa each of these souls eTtpreascs in its own way what takes place 
outside of it, and is unable to have any influence upon other par- 
ticular beings, or rather, as each must draw this expresHion entirely 
from within its own nature, each soul must necessarily have received 
this nature (or this internal ground of its expressions of what is 
external) from a Universal Cause, upon which these beings are all 
dependent, and wliioh makes each of tliem to be perfectly in agree- 
ment and in correlation with every other. Tliis implies the use of 
infinite knowledge and power and great ingenuity, especially with 
reference to the spontaneous agreement of a mechanism with the 
activities of the rational soul.’ Also Moncu^ilogy, §§ 51 sqq. and 81 ; 
New Syfttem, $§14 and 15. 

* Cf, Tk 6 odirXey Part i. § 59 (E. 519 b; G. vi. 135) : — ‘The scholastic 
philosophers b«)lievod that theriMs n reciprocal physical interaction 
between body and soul ; but since a thorough investigation has 
shown that thought and extended moss have no connexion with 
one another, and that they are created things which differ Mo 
gmere, several modern writers have recognized that there is no 
physical e|||pDmunication between soul and body, although there 
always remains tho metaphysical communication, which makes of 
soul and body one and the same agent, or what is called one 
person.’ 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

43 

The problem itself is left by him without any satisfactory 
solution ; but his followers made a definite attempt to 
solve it by the theory of 'Occasionalism/ in which they 
developed a suggestion that had been made by Descartes 
when he spoke of thinking and extended substance as 
alike dependent on nothing but the 'ordinary co-operation ’ 
(concokrs ordinaire) or ‘ assistanoo ’ of God. The Occa- 
sionalist theories varied to some extent, but in its most 
consistent form the hypothesis is that God is the sole 
real Cause, that finite substance has no power or activity 
of its own, and consequently that the changes which take 
place in soul and body are both directly produceil by 
God. Consequently on the occasion of the appearing 
of a phenomenon in the one substance God j^roduces 
a corresponding phenomenon in the other. The two 
phenomena are quite independent, except for the fact 
of their contemporaneous production by God, the one 
real Cause. 

Leibniz’s pre-established harmony has sometimes been 
regarded as merely another variety of Occasionalism, in 
spite of his frequent criticisms of the Occasionalist theory. 
And he has been accused of borrowing (without acknow- 
ledgement) from the Occasionalist Geulincx the well- 
known illustration of the two clocks wliich he uses 
in explaining his pre-established harmony. But Dr. 
Edmund Pdeiderer has clearly shown ' that Leibniz, who 

^ Leibniz und Gmlincx mil hesonderer Beziehung auf ihr beiderscitiges 
UhrengUicJmm (Tiibingon, 1884). Zeller comes to the same con- 
clusion. llie illustration appears in a note to Geulincx's Ethka, 
Tract i. cap. ii. $ 9 , noje 19 ; Land’s ed., vol. iii. p. an. Cf. Third 
EaydatuUion of the New System, note 3. The notes are not in the first 
edition of the Ethica, and they do not seem to have been known to 
Leibniz. He received the illustration from Poacher, who probably 
arrived at it independently, not knowing that it was ustid by 
Geulincx. Cf. E. 130 a ; G. iv. 488. 

L. Stein holds that Leibniz was unaware of the source of the 
illustration, and may have coiisidored it superfluous to ossign any 
special source for it, inasmuch as it was a universally wsad simile, 
characteristic of the Cartesian school (a Sckulbeispkl), With other 
references the iUustration is used both by Descartes and by 
Oordemoy* See Atchiv/Hr Geschichte d. FhUottjphky i. 59. 

INTRODUCTION 

44 

never mentions Geulincx in his writings, must have been 
quite unaware of Geulincx’s use of the illustration. And 
in any case there is this essential difference between the 
Occasionalist theory and that of pre-established harmony, 
that the former regards finite things as empty of all 
activity except that which is immediately communicated 
to them by God, while the latter is founded on the 
conception of finite things as in reality forces, Monads 
with spontaneous activity \ Thus, the Occasionalist 
theory is open to the criticism which Leibniz repeatedly 
brings against it, namely, that it involves the supposition 
of perpetual miracle, or, in other words, that, if it be true, 
the connexion between soul and body must be a purely 
arbitrary one, there being nothing in the nature of either 
which can serve as a reason why this phenomenon of soul 
should accompany that phenomenon of body and not some 
other. The Monads, on the other hand, have at least this 
in common, that it is of the essence of each to represent 
the same world from a particular point of view, and that 
each unfolds the series of its perceptions or representa- 
tions in an intelligible order. The whole is potentially 
present and seeks its realization in each of the ports. 
Consequently, the pre-established harmony is not arbi- 
trary, but rational ; no Deus ex macMna is invoked. Thus 
it is impossible to regard Leibniz’s theory as the com- 
pletion of the Occasionalist doctrine, unless in the sense 

^ * When 1 Hpeak of the force and action of created beings, I mean 
that each created being is pregnant with its future state, and that 
it naturally follows a certain course, if nothing hinders it ; and 
that the Monads, which are the true and only substances, cannot 
be naturally hindered in their inner determinations, since they 
include the representation of everything external [to them]. But, 
nevertheless, I do not say that the future state of the created being 
follows from its present state without the co-operation [conecurs] of 
God, and I am rather of opinion that preservation is a continual 
creation with an orderly change. Thus Father Malebranohe might 
perhaps apnrove the pre-established harmony without giving m 
his own hy^theais, to the effect that God is the sole Agent [odSttr ] ; 
though it is true that otherwise it [his hypothesis] does not appear 
to me well founded.’ Letin d JBctupuif ^1714) (£. 79a a ; G. lii. 566). 

GENERAL PBINCH^LES 

45 

that it is an hypothesis which seeks to reconcile the 
contrary views of Scholastics and Oartesians \ 

The scholastic theory of an influamphysicus connected 
soul and body in a way which ultimately confounded 
them, making it impossible to draw any clear line 
between them. The Cartesian or Oocasionalist view, on 
the other hand, separated them so absolutely that nothing 
but a purely arbitrary connexion could be supposed — a 
connexion external to the nature of both. The Scholastics 
seemed to Leibniz to be right in holding that the con- 
nexion is a real one, grounded in the nature of the 
substances ; the Cartesians seemed right in maintaining 
that the substances are mutually exclusive. And the 
antinomy is solved for Leibniz by the supposition of a 
mutual ^ ideal influence,’ a relationship of perception or 
representation, between independent self-active Monads, 
the harmony of whose inner developments has been 
established before their creation K 

Leibniz's Ulustrafions of the pre-established Harmony — 
the Clocks and the Choirs, 

The simile of the clocks, by means of which Leibniz 
illustrates his theory in relation to the Scholastic and 
Cartesian views, is given in the Third JSjplanation of his 
New System, Two clocks may be made to keep perfect 
time with one another in three different ways. They 
may be actually connected together, for instance by 
a piece of wood, in such a way that there is a mutual 
transference of vibrations between them, resulting in a 
perfect agreement of the motions of the pendulums Or, 

^ Of. H. C. W. Sigwart, Die Leibnizsehe L^re von d&r prdstaUirtm 
Harmonic in ihrem Zusammenhange mit /Hiheren Phdoeophemen hetraclUei 
(Tilbingen, iSaa), pp. 107 sqq. 

* For an applieation of the doctrine of pre-established harmony 
to a partioul^ case, see Appendix A, p soo. 

” This was suggested to Leibniz by an experiment of Huygens, 
who hung two pendulums on a bar of wood, and found that, though 
they were set swinging out of time with one another, the vibra- 
tions which each gave to the bar of wood caused them ultimately 
to swing in harmony. Gf. nn^ird ExpUinatianof the New Syetemf p. gga. 

46 INTRODUCTION 

in the second place, they may be supposed to be kept 
in time with one another from moment to moment by 
a skilled workman. Or, finally, they may have been so 
perfectly constructed that they keep time of themselves, 
without any mutual influence or assistance. If we com- 
pare soul and body to the two clocks, the first of these 
ways of connexion corresponds to the doctrine of an 
influxus phifskuSy the second to the Occasionalist view, and 
the third to the pre-established harmony. 

It is, however, misleading to suppose, as has too often 
been done, that this is Leibniz’s favourite simile for 
explaining his system of pre-established harmony \ He 
uses the illustration, not so much to explain his own 
theory as to make clear the relation in which it stands to 
previous hypotheses. He accepts for the moment the 
limited problem which these hypotheses endeavour to 
solve. But his own 2)roblom is larger and his own hyi>o- 
thesis is therefore more comprehensive than those of his 
predecessors. Body, for Leibniz, is nothing but a collection 
of Monads (or phenomena of Monads), and consequently 
the question of the connexion between soul and body is 
only a confused and imperfect form of the question as 
to the relation between any one Monad and another. The 
larger problem thus deals with the relations of body to 
body and soul to soul as well as the relations of soul and 
body, with which alone the earlier theories were concern^. 

Leibniz would maintain that, as substances (Monads) 
are not physical but metaphysical, it is impossible for us 
to realize the true relations between them by conceptions 
of sense or imagination. These relatidns are metaphysical 
or ideal, and are therefore only intellectually apprehended. 

^ Tho somewhat misleading prominence which has been given 
to this illustration is to be attributed to Wolff and his school, who 
represented the metaphysics of Leibniz in a very imperfect way. 
Too many historians and teachers have been content with a Wolffian 
Leibniz ; for this there was doubtless some excuseJin the 

imperfection of the editions of his writings. For instance, the 
Cbrrtfspondfsncs with Amauldf in which the illustration of the choirs 
occurs, was first completely published by Groteffind in 1846. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

47 

But he elsewhete uses a simile for the pre-established 
harmony more adequate than that of the two clocks, 
when he compares the Monads to completely independent 
bands of musicians playing in perfect harmony. *In 
short, to use an illustration, I will say that this con- 
comitance, which I maintain, is comparable to several 
different bands of musicians or choirs, playing their parts 
separately, and so placed that they do not see or even 
hear one another, which can nevertheless keep perfectly 
together by each following their own notes, in such a way 
that he who hears them all finds in them a harmony 
tliat is wonderful and much more surprising than if there 
had been any connexion between them. It would oven 
be possible that some one, being beside one of two such 
choirs, should by means of the one judge what the other 
is doing, and should even acquire such a habit of doing 
this (particularly if we suppose that he could hear his 
own without seeing it, and see the other without hearing 
it) that, with the help of his imagination, he should no 
longer think of tlie choir beside which he is, but of the 
other, or should take his own merely for an echo of the 
other V The analogy must not be pressed to an 
extreme ; but the simile is much better than that of the 
clocks. The clocks are too much alike to represent the 
Monads, and the harmony of their movement is too empty 
andt almost meaningless. But in the case of the bands 
there is a real harmony formed out of the complementary 
movements of several self-acting units, and there is also 
the spontaneous development from the written notes of 
the score to the system of sounds which they* signify. 
This development from the written signs to the sounds 
signified might be said to correspond to the passage from 
unconscious to conscious perception in the Monads 
An unconscious perception is, for Leibniz, a symbol of 
the corresponding conscious perception. 

We have now considered the three chief conceptions of 
* LeUre a Artiauld (16S7) (G. ii. 95). * Cf. G. ii. 74. 

nmioDtiOTioir 

48 

the metaphysic of Leibniz, and we hare seen bow tbqr 
arise as the solution of his problem in the form ^h||^ 
given to it by its historical setting. In the first 
intension, force, or life, in the form of perception ana}/ 
appetition, is the essence of real, individual substance. / 
In the second place, the principle of continuity or tbe 
identity of indiscernibles is the hypothesis by which 
Leibniz endeavours to explain the system or inter-relation 
of strictly individual substances. And, in the third place, 
the pre-established harmony is introduced to account for 
the possibility of change in elementary substances without 
prejudice to the whole. 

Clear and confused Ferception and Degrees of Appetition. 

Wo must now consider more fully the varieties of per- 
ception and appetition which constitute the differences 
amongst Monads. In regard to perception Leibniz adopts 
the Cartesian distinction among ideas, with considerable 
modifications. Descartes divided ideas into those which 
are obscure, those which are clear, and those which are 
distinct as well as clear. 'I coll that clear,* he says, 

‘ which is present and manifest to the attentive mind, as 
we say we see an object clearly when it is present to the 
eye looking on, and when it makes on the sense of sight 
an improsssion sufficiently strong and definite ; but I call 
that distinct which is clear and at the same tim^ so 
definitely distinguished from everything else that its 
essence is evident to him who properly considers it\’ 
And ^ all the things which we clearly and distinctly con- 
ceive are true^* Leibniz follows Dpscartes in regarding 
clearness and distinctness as the marks of perfection in 
ideas or perceptions ^ ; but he does not limit the dis- 

‘ JYincipia^ i. 45. * Miihod^ Part iv, 

* Leibniz, however, interprets dearness and distinctness some* 
what differently from Descartes. The distinction of one idea from 
all others is emphasized by Descartes, while Leibniz rather lays 
stress upon the internal distinctness of the idea, the distinctness 
of its elements. Cf. JfMfilsfioiMe OognUifme^ VeriiaU Idtis (1684) 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

49 

tinction between distinct and confused ideas to the ideas 
which we consciously possess, nor does he draw a shar}> 
fine between ideas which are perfectly clear and distinct, 
and ah others, which are confused or obscure. Confused 
perceptions are not for Leibniz, as for Descartes, more 
mistakes and illusions ; but they belong to the real order 
of things, which without them could not be what it is. 
And there is no question ^ as in Descartes, regarding the 
correspondence of perceptions to reality, clear and distinct 
ideas representing their ol>jocts with perfect truth, while 
obscure and confused ideas are *' of no avail in affording 
us the knowledge of anything out of ourselves, but serve 
rather to impede it \ * According to Leibniz all perceptions 
are more or less perfect representations of objects ; but 
they vary infinitely in their degrees of distinctness or 
confused ness. Confusedness is simply a low degree of 
distinctness : the more perfect any perception or repre- 
sentation is, the more distinct is it, while the loss perfect it 
is, the more is it confused. Thus the differences among the 
Monads consist entirely in the various degrees of perfec- 
tion or distinctness with which they perceive or represent 

(E. 79 n ; G. iv. 423) : * A notion ib obscuro whon it dot's not suffice 
for tho recognition of the thing ropreBciited, as for iiintaiico when 
I romembt^r some flower or animal formerly Htwn, but not so well 
AS to bo able to i*t)cognizc it when it nppt?ars and to distinguish it 
from some other near it, or when I think of Home scholoHtio term 
insufficiently explained, like tho “ entelechy *' of Aristotle, or 
** cause" in so far as the name is applied indifferently to material, 
formal, efficient, and iinal causes. . . . Thus htiowtodge is clu/ir 
when it enables us to recognize the thing represented, and clear 
knowledge again is either confused or distinct. It is confused 
when I cannot separately enumorate the marks which are sufficient 
for distinguishing the thing from others, although the tlffug really 
has such marks and essential elements, into which its notion may 
be analyzed. ... So we see painters and other artists knowing 
rightly what is well and what is badly done, but often unable to 
give a reason for their opinion and saying that the thing they 
dislike is lacking in something, th^y knwc not what. But a distinct 
notion is such anyone as the assayers have regarding gold, namely 
one acquired through marks and tests sufficient for the diHcerning 
of the thing from all other similar bodies.* For Locke’s views, cf. 
■Essay, bk. ii, bh. 99, f ( z sqq. (Fraser's ed., vol. i. p. 

* PrindpiOj Part iv. ( 903. 

s 

INTRODUCTION 

50 

the universe. But as each Monad actually represents 
the whole universe, however confusedly or imperfectly, 
and as each is essentially a force or living principle, 
proceeding, by its own spontaneous activity, from one 
perception to another, the distinct and the confused are 
not essentially separate from one another, but it is possible 
for the confused perception to unfold into distinctnesa 
Each Monad contains the whole more or less confusedly 
within itself \ and by its appetition may rise to a more 
perfect state. Each Monad contains as it were enfolded 
within itself all tliat it is to be. It is ^ big with the 
futui-e.’ It is like an exceedingly condensed algebraical 
statement which can be indefinitely expounded : some- 
W'hat like the symbol ir in the problem of determining 
the relation between the lengths of the diameter and 
circumference of a circle, with this very important differ- 
ence, that the Monad * reads itself off.' An omniscient 
Being could see the reality and history of the whole 
universe within the lowest Monad. 

Three Classes of created Monads — (i) unconscious^ 

(2) conscious, (3) sclfconscious. 

While there is thus a perfect continuity in the degrees 
of perfection with which the Monads represent the 
universe, Leibniz has roughly distinguished created 
Monads into three main classes — (i) unconscious or bare 
Monads (monades nues), (2) conscious Monads, and (3) 
rational or self-conscious Monada As we have seen, 
every Monad or simple substance has a certain degree of 
perfection or completeness, inasmuch as it ideally or 
potentially contains the whole within itself. Thus the 
Aristotelian name of Entelechies might bo given to all 
Monads, since they have each ^ a certain perfection ’ 
{txovai t 6 cWfXcr), and ‘a certain self-sufficiency (avrdpKtia) 
which makes them the sources of their internal actions, 

^ * The world is entirely in each of ita parts, but more distinctly 
in Bonio than in others.’ Leftre d la Princesae Scphie (1696) ^O. vii. 

544). 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

5 ^ 

and^ 80 to spoak, incorporeal automata That is to say, 
each is, in its own way, complete in itself as representing 
the universe 'and complete in itself as an active living 
being or force. On the other hand, every Monad might 
l^e called a ^soul/ inasmuch as it has both perception 
and appetition, in the general sense of these words 
which has been already explained. Nevertheless, in spite 
of this essential unity of nature in the Monads, it is 
possible to draw broad lines of division among them. 
Conscious sensation or feeling, accompanied by the 
simpler forms of memory, clearly marks off certain 
Monads from those which have merely unconscious or 
confused perception. To the former class the name 
‘ souls ’ may be specially applied, while for the latter the 
general name of Entelechies or Monads will suffice. And 
as there are still higher Monads which have self-conscious- 
ness and reason or thought proper, in addition to uncon- 
scious and conscious iK'rception and memory, we may 
call these ^ rational souls ' or ‘ spirits ’ (intelligences, 
esprits) The class of rational souls or spirits includes 
men and higher intelligences. The intermediate ‘ soul 
class is that of animals, and the class of Entelechies or 
bare Monads includes all real beings that have not 
reached the stage of consciousness. 

The differences of appetition in the three classes of 
created Monads (corresponding to the three grades of 
perception which characterize them) may be expressed 
as mere impulse, animal instinct or blind desire governed 
by mere feeling, and self-conscious desire or will. 

Each of the two Higher classes possesses, in'*addition 
to its own specific qualities, the characteristics of the 

^ Hcnadology^ $ i8. 

* Of. J)e Anima Srutorum (ijio), §§ lo and 13 (E. 464 b ; G. vii; 
330) : < Sense is perception which contains something distinct and 
is combined with attention and memory. . . . Besides the lowest 
degree of perception, which also occurs in those who are stunned, 
and the intermediate degree, which we call sense . . . there is a 
certain higher degree which we call tliought. Now thought is 
perception combined with reason.’ 

E 2 

INTRODUCTION 

inferior Monads. Thus both animals and men have 
unconscious as well as conscious perceptions, for ex- 
ample, when they fall into a faint or hav^ a profound 
and dreamless sleep \ In such a case they are not 
entirely destitute of perceptions, for the Monad is inde- 
structible (being indivisible) and it cannot exist without 
percoi)tion of some kind. The changes of the Monad 
are entirely from within, so that when the man or 
animal awakes out of a sleep or trance his conscious 
perceptions must have unfolded themselves out of imme- 
diately preceding perceptions of an unconscious kind®. 
Again, men share with the animals })oth sense-perception 
and the empirical sequence of memory and imagination, 
which bears a resemblance to the concatenation of rational 
thought, but may be sufficiently distinguished from it”. 
Indeed, in most of our actions and beliefs wo are empi- 
rics, as for instance when wo exj^ect the dawn, not 
because we know the cause of it, but because it has 
happened regularly in the past\ 

Self-consciousness in the Phihsopluf of Leibniz and in 
that of Descaties, 

The significance of this may be brought out by a 
reference to the i)osition of Descartes, which Leibniz 
probably had in view. According to Descartes, the 
rational soul is the mind and its reality comes only from 
its conscious certainty of itself. Thus without self-con- 
sciousness there is no mind or soul. Animals have no 
self-consciousness and therefore they have no souls — they 
are more machines. But animalsi have sensations and 
impulses, and consequently sensation and impulse are 
not functions of self-consciousness, acts of the soul, but 
are purely physical and mechanical processes, whether 
they occur in man or in the lower animals. It is in 

' ifo7UKlo2ogiir, i 90. ^ Ibid. 99 and 93. 

* Ibid. $§ 96 sqq. Gf. Kouveavx EsaaiB, bk. ii. oh. xi (£. 937 ; 
G. y. 199% and Frat^er'a ad. of Locke’s Fssay, yol. i. p, 908. 

* Mcnadolofnf, i 98. 

GENEKAL PRINCIPLES 

53 

fie}f*consciousness alone that we have immediate eelf- 
certainty, from which we may proceed outward to the 
certainty of other things. Thus for Descartes the lino 
between consciousness and unconsciousness on the one 
side and self-consciousness on the other must be very 
sharply drawn : the complete independence of self-con- 
sciousness is the root of the Cai*tesian dualism. 

Now, Leibniz desires to presei-ve the independence of 
self-consciousness or the self-certainty and self-sufficiency 
of the mind. The validity of thinking must not be made 
to depend on reference to a reality external to it ^ Bui, 
on the other hand, the mechanical dualism of Descailes 
must be avoided. The independence of self-consciousness 
is preserved through the conception of the Monads as 
a plurality of real, independent subshmces. Mind is not 
merely a modification of substance, an attribute (as 
Spinoza made it) ; it is an independent substance, in 
its various forms one or other of the infinite number. 
But, on the other hand, mind must not bo regarded as 
identical with self-consciousness alone : self-consciousness 
must not be taken as entirely exclusive of mere con- 
sciousness or of unconsciousness. Otherwise we have 
returned to the Cartesian dualism. There must some- 
how be an unconscious activity of mind, and the oppo- 
sition between mind and body becomes a difference, not 
of kind but of degree. 

^ Cf. Retnarqtifia sur le sentiinmt du P. Malehranche (1708) (E. 452 b ; 
vi. 378) : *The truth is that wo hoc all things in ourselves and 
in our souls, and that thi9 knowledge we have of the scail is very 
real and correct, provided we have given some attention to it. 
And Ihrther, it is through the knowledge whicli we have of the 
soul that w'e know being, substance, God Himsedf, and it is 
through reflexion upon our thoughts that we know extension and 
bodiea Yet It is true that God gives us all that is positive in this, 
and all the perfection involved in it, through an immediate and 
continual emanation, in virtue of the dependence of all croaicsl 
beings upon Him. In this way it is possible ta give a gw;d 
meaning to the phrase that God is the object of our souls and that 
we see all things in Him.' Cf. also Part iil. of this Introduction, 
p. 136. 

54 

INTRODUCTION 

Self-consciousness in the philosophy of Leibniz is, 
however, a very different thing from self-consciousness 
in the philosophy of Descartes. The latter arrives at 
the self-conscious Ego as the result of a rigorous analysis, 
whoso instrument is doubt \ It is an ultimate fact, the 
fact of a subject thinking, without regard to any specific 
o}>ject of its thought. Self-consciousness is the bare 
witness of consciousness to itself, its empty self-con- 
sistency. In the certainty of self-consciousness Descartes 
(justifiably or not) finds involved the certainty of God, 
the Perfect Being, and from this he proceeds to the 
certainty of the external world and to the principle that 
clear and <listinot ideas are characteristic of self-conscious- 
ness and are a sufficient warrant for the reality of their 
objects. For Leibniz, on the other hand, the I^o is 
not a pure subject, whose essence is immediate self-con- 
sciousness. No Monad can be a pure subject. ‘ Not only 
is it immediately clear to me that I thinks but it is quite 

* Leibuiz 8©€»ni8 wtraugoly to have roiHSC^d th© Higiiificanc© of , 
DoacurtoM'fl method of doubt, probably because his interoat lay 
more in Descartes’s doctrines than in his way of reaching them. 

‘ M. Descartes,’ ho says, * has acted like the quacks wlio, 

in order to attract people and get a sale for their remedies, set ux> 
open theatres in wlihdi they show farces*and other extraordinary, 
but not very necessary, things. Thus all that he says about the 
necessity of doubting everything and of treating doubtful things as 
fal^e has had no other use than to get him a hearing, to raise 
a commotion, to draw tlie crowd by its novelty, and even to get 
himself contradicted, that ho may be the more famous. But he 
has taken care to reserve for himself a way of rationally explaining 
his paradoxes.’ Fouchor do Oareil, Nouvelles Lelties et Opuscules in^ditR, 
p. I a. Leibniz elsewhere s^ieaks of Descartes’s Cotjito, ergo sum and 
liis method of doubt as * trappings to appeal to the people ’ (phaleras 
adpopulum)t and he pictures Descartes as“ throwing balls to plebeian 
minds to play with,’ so that Hhoy seem to have got something 
gi'eat, like boys with a nut or a besan* (G. iv. 337). We must, of 
course, remember how different is the problem of Descartes from 
that of Leibniz. Descartes lays special stress upon self-conscious- 
noss because he regards himself as having found a principle by 
means of which to distinguish absolutely the true from the false or 
doubtful. On the other hand, for Leibniz as for Spinoza, the 
problem of philosopliy is not primarily a problem of knowledge. 
Leibniz’s theory of knowledge follows from his answer to the 
question — * What in reaJitj is substance ? ’ 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

55 

as clear to me that I ham different thoughts ; that now 
I think of Af now of B, An Ego is one of an 

infinite number of substances, and its self-consciousness 
is thus not the ground of its existence, but a difference 
in degree of quality between it and others ^ The self- 
conscious Monad is merely one which has developed its 
i^epresentative or perceptive nature more fully than those 
which we describe as animal souls or bare Monads. In 
other words, we are * Egos * before we tliink of ourselves, 
realize ourselves, or reflect upon ourselves as Egos. We 
are * raised to the knowledge of ourselves and of God 

The difference between the self-conscious Monad and 
others consists in the greater clearness and distinctness 
of its perceptions and ideas. But, as clearness and dis- 
tinctness are relative terms (every Monad having percep- 
tions in some degree clear and distinct), the specific 
perceptions of a selt<3onscious being must bo further 
defined. Leibniz, as we have seen, cannot accept the 
Cartesian view which totally rejects confused and obscure 
ideas and makes clearness and distinctness the sole criteria 
of truths In addition to being clear and distinct, the 

* Ncuveaiix Essaia, bk, iv. ch. 2, § i (K. 341 a ; G. v. 348). Cf. G. 
iv. 327 : ' These two things 1 regard as mutually indeiKUiderit of 
uno another and as equally original/ AlBi> Lettre a Foucher (,1676) 
(G. i. 370) : ‘There are two absolute general truths, that is to say, 
genera] truths which speak of the actual existence of tilings : the 
one is that we think, the other that there is a great variety in our 
thouglits. From the first it follows that wo arts, from the second 
it follows that there is something otlier than ourselves, that is to 
say something other than that which thinks, something which is 
the cause of the variety in wltat appears to us. Now the one of 
these truths is as unquestionable, as independent as the other, and 
M. Descartes, having in* the order of his meditations taken account 
only of the first of them, has failed to roach the perfection ho wtt 
before himself/ 

® ‘To say, J thinks I am [exist] is not strictly to prove 

existenoe by thought, since to think and to he thinking are the 
same thing; and to say I am thinking is already to say I am* 
Nawmux Esaaia, bk. iv. oh. 7, § 7 (£. 36a a ; G. v. 391^. 

^ i£onadologyf § 29 . 

* Cf. MedUeUionea dt Oogniticfney Veriialt at Ideia (1684) (E. 80 b ; G. iv. 
425% translated in Appendix to Baynes's ed. of Port- Royal Logics 
*And 1 alsb see that the men of our time abuse that vaunted 

INTRODUCTION 

56 

ideas which are characteristic of a rational being must 
be analyzed, so that their grounds or premises may be 
as fully exhibited as possible. And thus the specific 
quality of a rational soul or self-conscious Monad is * the 
knowledge of necessary and eternal truths/ that is to 
say, of the ultimate grounds or premises of all knowledge. 
The self-conscious Monad represents or perceives the 
universe in an articulate way. It has carried the internal 
evolution or realization of the universe so far that its 
underlying principles have clearly revealed themselves. 
‘ It is by the knowledge of necessary truths and by their 
abstract expression | Icurs ahstractions^ that we are raised 
to acts of reflexion which make us think of what is called 
I,” and observe that this or that is within us : and thus, 
in thinking of ourselves, we think of being, of substance, 
of the simple and the compound, of the immaterial and 
of God Himself, conceiving that what is limited in us 
is in Him without limits. And these acts of reflexion 
furnish the chief objects of our reasonings 

This at once suggests Descartes, but Descartes with 
a difToreiice. For Leibniz, as for Descartes, the idea of 

priiiciplo : whatever I dearly ami distinctly perceive regarding anything^ 
that is true or {rightly) prcdiccdde [enuntiahile] of it For often things 
which are really obscure and confused seem clear and distinct to 
men judging hastily. The axiom, therefore, is useless, unless there 
be added such criteria of the clear and distinct as we have given, 
and unless there is ctTtuinty [amstet] regarding the truth of the 
ideas. For tho rest, the rules of common Logic, which are also 
used in Geometry, are not to bo despised as criteria of true state- 
ments, such rules, for instance, as that noiliing should be admitted 
as certain ynless it has boon proved by accurate observation 
[expirientia'] or by strict demonstration. But strict demonstration 
is that which keeps to the form prescribed tiy Logic, not necessarily 
always in syllogisms set out in oi*dor according to the custom of 
the schools . . . but at least in such a way that the conclusion of 
the argument follows from its very form. Any right calculation 
might be taken as an example of an argument of this kind, con- 
ceived in due form. Therefore no necessary premise must be left 
out, and all tlie premises must first have been either proved or 
assuined by way of hypothesis, in which case the conclusion also is 
hypothetical. Those who will diligently observe these things will 
easily guard themselves against deceptive ideas.' 

' Monadology^ | 30. 

GENERAI. PlUtKOIPLES 

57 

God or the most Perfect Being is involved in that of 
an imperfect self-conscious being. Yet Leibniz regards 
the idea of God as contained, not in the self-conscious 
being alone, but, in one way or another, in every real 
being. Thus it is of leas consequence for Leibniz than 
for Descartes that the idea of God is pre-supposed in tlie 
consciousness of self. That which is of most importance 
to Leibniz is that self-consciousness pre-supposes a know- 
ledge of necessary truths in genertiL Thus, for Leibniz, 
God is not merely the eternally necessary Being whoso 
very idea (or essence) involves existence and who is in 
that way the ground of existence to all other things : lie 
is also the greatest of beings, the highest of Monads 
{Monas monadum *), whose own existence is one among 
many necessaiy and eternal truths. * We must not 
imagine, as some do, that eternal truths, being dependent 
on God, • are arbitrary and depend on His will, as Des- 
cartes, and afterwards -Monsieur Poirei, appear to have 
lield *^.’ There are truths or facts which are dependent 
on the will of God, but these are not necessaiy and 
eternal. 

The Kinds of Truth according to Leibniz, Necessar'y and 
eternal Truths and contingent Truths. 

Accordingly as, on Leibniz’s view, the self-conscious 
being has not a primary and independent reality, based 
on a complete difference in kind between itself and other 
beings, so the special kind of knowledge (that of eternal 
and necessary truths) which belongs to a self-conscious 
being is not to be regarded as the only absolutWy certain 
truth, to the form of which all other real knowledge 
must be reduced. ‘ There are two kinds of trutlis, those 
of reasoning and those of The former are the 

eternal and necessaiy tznths, the latter are contingent. 

^ Giordano Bruno, as well as Xieibniz, speaks of God as Monas 
mofnadum. 

^ Mcnadoioffy, i 46. . 

* Ibid. § 33. 

INTRODUCTION 

58 

And the difference between them is that the truths of 
reasoning are either ultimate self-evident principles or 
truths which are reducible to such first principles by 
a process of strict logical analysis, while any attempt to 
analyze truths of fact into their ultimate grounds leads 
to an infinite process, and they must finally be referred 
to God as their ground cminenter^. 

Logical Principles of the Philosophy of Ldbniz. (a) 
Principle of Identity or Contradiction, 

With this division of human knowledge into two groat 
kinds we come in •sight of the guiding principles of 
Leibniz’s idiilosophy, its logical pre-suppositions as dis- 
tinct from its specific metaphysical doctrines. The logic 
underlying the pliilosophies of Descartes and Spinoza 
was a logic of abstract self-consistency In their view 
all real knowledge must be ultimately of one kind. All 
apparent knowledge that is not of that kind must be 
regarded as entirely unreal and illusor}^ This was neces- 
sarily involved in the position that there is no appeal 
beyond the witness of consciousness to itself. ^ The order 
and connexion of ideas is the same as the order and 
connexion of things And, as all tilings must be re- 
garded as ultimately referable to one ground or cause, so 
all ideas must ultimately be referable to one standard ; 
that is, must be linked together by one principle. The 
standai'd must be that of self-evidence or absence of self- 

' Cf. Mimadoloffi/f §§ 35-38. 

® Not that IJiis wn.s perfectly evident to themselves. Descartes, 
for instance, I'cgards liis method of doubf as superior to a logloal 
deduction, based on the principle of contradiction. ‘ Here, If 1 am 
not wrong,* says Eudoxus, ‘ you must be beginning to see that ho 
who can make a proper use of doubt will able to deduce h’om 
it very certain truths, nay rather, more coHain and more useful 
truths than those which we derive from the great principle we 
usually lay down as the basis or centre to which all other principles 
may^bo ^iferred, “it is impossible that one and ihe satne thing oan both he 
and not be,** * Recherche de la VMi par les lumi^es natureUes, (Suvres de 
Descartes (^Cousin), vol. xi. p. 366. 

^ Spinoza, JEtMcs, Part 11 Prop. 7. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

59 

contradiction in the ideas, which is simply another way 
of describing the immediate witness of consciousness to 
itselfl True ideas must be clear and distinct in order 
that it may be manifest that they are free from self- 
contradiction. All real knowledge must either be imme- 
diately recognizable as eternal and necessary truth, or 
must be deducible from such truth by a formally or 
mathematically conclusiye process. Thus the philosophies 
of Descartes and Spinoza wore ruled by the principle of 
contradiction, that A cannot both be A and not A, or 
that necessary truths are ^identical propositions, whoso 
opposite involves an express contradiction*.' In other 
words, they held that self-consciousness is self-consistent, 
that it never absolutely contradicts itself. 

Now this is, so far as it goes, a perfectly sound doctrine. 
Its fault is that it does not go far enough. Self-con- 
sciousness is mucli more than merely self-consistent. Its 
self-consistency is not immediate and on the surface. It 
is not a mere negative self-identity of parts, without 
regard to their specific content. To be self-consistent, 
according to the ))rinciple of contradiction, is for a thing 
to be itself, that is, to be *not anything else.' But a 
thing whose ultimate essence is to be ‘ not anything else ' 
is nothing. ‘ Nothing ' is immediately self-consistent 
quite as much as ‘ something*.' In other words, all real 
(not merely formal) self-consistency must be mediate, it 
must have grounds. It must spring from the specific 
nature of the self-consistent things And thus, os Leibniz 

contended, even axioms may require proof \ Their self- 

• • 

' Monadoloffyf § 35. Cf. ibid. $ 31. The principle of contra- 
diction is that ^ in virtue of which we judge false that which 
involvea a contradiction, and true that which is opposed or contra- 
dictory to the false.* 

• Cf. Locke’s EsmVf bk. iv. ch. 8, J 3 ; Fraser’s ed., voJ. ii. p. 293. 

* Cf. Nouveaux Esaaisy bk. iv, ch. 7, § 9 (E. 362 a ; O. v. 392) : * In 
the natural' [i.o, logical] * order, the statement that a thing is wliat 
it is, is prior to the statement that it is not another thing.’ 

^ Cf. NoaoMUMD EamiBy bk. i. ch. 3, i 24 (£. 222 a ; G. v. 98) : ^ It 
is one of jny great that it is go^ to work out proofs of 

6o 

INTR 0 DUC 3 TI 0 N 

evidence requires elucidation: the basis of it must be 
made manifest ^ Self-consciousness, then, is really self- 
consistent only in virtue of its being a definite system, 
a self-revealing process or development, which contains 
within itself the ground or reason of its self-consistency, 
and the ground or reason of existence. Accordingly, to 
treat it in philosophical investigation^as if it were merely 
superficially self-consistent, as if the law which expresses 
its whole nature were the law of contradiction, would be 
to arrive at an empty and abstract result. 

Leibniz, however, while recognizing the inadequacy of 
the principle of contradiction as thus interpreted, did not 
clearly enough perceive the reason for this inadequacy. 
Ho regarded the principle of contradiction, not as an 
imperfect interpretation of the one principle of all truth, 
to be made [)erfect by further definition, but as an in- 
dopendont principle, adequate to a certain kind of truth, 
yet requiring to be supplemented by another co-ordinate 
principle, which should be the standard of another kind 
of truth. If the principle of contradiction be the sole 
principle of knowledge, whatever is not self-contradictory 
is true ; and nothing is true unless it can be shown that 
it is not self-contradictory. But how are we to determine 
what is or is not self-contradictory ? According to the 
Cartesians this is to be done by analytically reducing the 
<loubtful statement to one or more self-evident propo- 
sitions, or, in other words, by showing that the state- 
ment is ultimately involved in one or more propositions, 
of such a kind that their predicate is manifestly contained 
in their subject ^ But Leibniz maintains that there are 

tho Bxioras tliemsolvcs.’ Cf. Fraser’s ed. of Locko's Sssay^ vol. ii. 
p. 967, noto. 

^ Cf. Houveaux EasaiSf bk. iv. ch. ii, $ 14 (E. 379 b ; G. v. 498) : 

* As to etorftal truths, it is to be noted that at bottom they are ail 
condit4pnal and say in effect : such a thing being suppos^, such 
another thing is.' 

” AcQOi*ding to Leibniz, all true propositions must be such that 
their predicate is really contained in their subject, although this 
may not be self-evident This is simply expressing in another 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

6l 

many statements to which it is impossible satisfactorily 
to apply this test. Their very nature is such that the 
process of analysis cannot in their cose be brought to an 
end, and consequently we remain unable to say whether 
they are really self-contradictory or not. At any rate, 
their self-contradiction, or the absence of it, cannot bo 
made self-evident. ^ For instance, the statement that 
‘I took a long walk yesterday' may be perfectly true, 
but by no amount of analysis is it possible for us to test 
its truth by reducing it to self-evident propositions. It is 
not necessarily but contingently true. Its truth is not 
directly grounded in the eternal nattiro of things, but is 
determined by a multitude of other truths, which ma}" 
each in their turn demand an infinite analysis’. Those 

form his view that * in the notion of each individual substance all 
its events are contained, alono^ with all their circunintiinces and 
the whole sequence of external things.’ L*ttfro au Prince JCrnest 
(16861 (G. ii. ra). ^Always in every true affirmative proposition, 
whether necessary or contingent, universal or singular, tbe notion 
of the predicate is in some way comprehended in tliat of the 
Bubjecrt, praedicatnm inest mhjecto; otherwiso I know not what truth 
is. But 1 require no more connexion lierc) than that whiidi exists 
apatie rei between the terms of a true proposition, and it is only in 
this sense that 1 say that, the notion of the individual subKiance 
includes all its events and all its churacteristios, even those that 
are commonly called extrinsic (that is to say, those which belong 
to it only in virtue of tlie general connexion of things and on 
account of its expressing the whole universe in its own way;. 
** For there must always bo some foundation for the connexion of 
the terms of a proposition, and this is to bo found in their notions.’* 
That is my great principle, us to which I think all philosophers 
should be at one, and of which one of the corollaries is tlie common 
axiom that nothing happens without it being possibh? to give a 
reason why things should have gone thus rather than otherwise, 
although this reason off^n inclines without necossitatitig, a {H^rfect 
indifference being a chimerical or incomplete supposition.’ LnUre 
a AmaulJ (r686) (G. ii. 56\ 

' Cf. Be Scimtia Unirersdli aeu CkdcuXo Philosophico (E. 83 b ; 0 . vii. 
aoo) ; ‘The difference between necessary and contingent truths is 
indeed the same as that between commensurable an<l incommen- 
surable numbers. For the reduction of comraensurablo numbers 
to a common measure is analogous to the demonstration of necessary 
truths, or their reduction to identical truths. But, as in the case 
of turd ratios the induction involves an infinite process and yet 
approaches a common measure so that a definite but unending 
aeriea is obtained, thus also contingent truths require an infinite 

62 

INTKODUCnON 

contingent truths, however (if they are to be truths at 
all, and not merely false or doubtful statements), must, 
have some ground or reason \ If the truth is such that 
it is impossible to find for it an absolute and eternal 
reason in the first principles of things, there must at 
least be some satisfactory or sufficient reason why it 
should be so and not otherwise. 

Logical Principles of the Philosophy of Leibniz, {h) Principle 
of Sufficient Beason. 

Thus Leibniz supplements the principle of contra- 
diction by the addition of the principle of sufficient 
reason. The name has a makeshift sound — as if one 
should say, ^ Wo must be content with a sufficient reason 
in cases where a perfect reason is not to be found.’ But 
in the philosophy of Leibniz it is much more than a 
makeshift. This principle is essential to his system and, 
indeed, giv^s it the greater part of its value. In the 
Momdologpy Leibniz defines this principle as that ‘in 
virtue of which we hold that no fact can be found real or 
existing, no statement true, unless there be a sufficient 
reason why it should be so and not otherwise, although 
these reasons very often cannot be known by us ’ As 
thus defined, the principle of sufficient reason might 
almost be regarded as including the principle of contra- 
diction, in^ismuch as the self-consistency of necessary 
truths is their sufficient reason. Self-consistency or 

annlyHiB. w)iich God alone can accomplish. Accordingly it is by 
Him alone that these truths are known a priori and with certainty. 
For, although the reason of any succeeding state might be found in 
that which precedes it, yet a reason for this preening state can 
again be given, and so we never come to the final reason in tlie 
series. But tills infinite process itself takes the place of a reason, 
liecause in its own special way it might from the beginning have 
been immediately understood outside of the series, in OM, the 
Author of things, on whom both antecedent and consequent states 
are dependent, even more than they are dependent upon one 
another.' 

‘ Monadohffp, §§ 36, 37. ^ 

* Ibid. § 3a. In the Th^odie^, ( 44 (E. 515 ; G. vi. lav), he calls 
it * Tktmnining [deoiding] JUtazm,* 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

63 

abseBce of self-contradiction is one test of the sufficiency 
of the reason. But, on the other hand, the principle of 
cofhhtidiction has an independent and, in some sense, 
superior position, for in the case of necessary truths the 
reason can always be given, that is, can be made explicit, 
while in tlie case of contingent truths we often can only 
say that there must be a sufficient reason, without know- 
ing fully what the reason is. 

The Possible and the Compossible. The best of all 
possible Worlds, 

The value and importance of the principle of sufficient 
reason become more manifest wlum we inquire further — 
‘In what does the sufficiency of the reason consist?* 
We have seen that the grounds of any contingent truth 
or fact are to bo sought in other contingent truths or 
facts, and that an attempt to analyze a contingent truth 
or fact into its grounds thus leads to an infinito process. 
Accordingly it seems to Leibniz that the final reason of 
contingent truths must be sought in something outside 
of the system of contingent things, viz. in an eternal and 
necessary Substance or God, who is their source. But 
this requires some further explanation. In the case of 
the principle of contradiction, what may V>e called the 
sufficiency of the reason consisted in the absence of 
self-contradiction in the thing or proposition. But to 
say that a thing is in itself free from contradiction is the 
same as to say that, by itself and without reference to 
other things, it is possible ^ Accordingly, to say that 
everything which is not self-contradictory is trfie or real 
is to say that everything possible is true or real. ‘ I call 
possible everything which is perfectly conceivable and 
which has consequently an essence, an idea, without 
considering whether the remainder of things allow's it to 
become existent But the opposite of every particular 

‘ Qf. MtditaHonls de Cognitiom^ &c. (1684) (£. 80 b ; G. iv. 425 ; 
Baynes, Port^M/Kyta Logic, 428). 

• Letire h Bourgiut (1714) (B. 720 a ; G. ili. 573)« 

lOTKODUCTION 

64 

event or contingent truth is possible in this sense : it does 
not necessarily imply a self-contradiction. The opposite 
of the axiom, ‘ Things that are equal to the same thing 
are equal to one another,’ is not possible, for it involves 
an immediate self-contradiction. The opposite of the 
truth, ‘ I am sitting here at this moment,’ is possible, for it 
does not involve a direct self-contradiction. Accordingly, 
the truth of contingent things is not grounded in their 
possibility \ It is not in virtue of their very essence or 
idea that they, and not their opposites, are true or real. 
Their suflficiont reason lies beyond themselves, in their 
relation to other things. In themselves, the contingent 
truths and their opposites are alike possible : considered 
in relation to other things, the truths alone are possible. 
For instance, if we consider the truth that ‘ I am sitting 
here at this moment,’ not in itself alone, but in relation 
to an inde|inite number of other truths regarding (say) 
my habits, character, work, the hour of the day, &c., we 
shall see that the trutli alone is possible, that in this 
connexion its opposite is impossible. The opposites of 
contingent truths, though not self-contradictory, are in 
contradiction with the general system. Each is possible, 
but they are not jointly possible, mutually compatible, 
or, in Leibniz’s phrase, ‘ compossible.’ Accordingly, 
‘ compossibility,’ or conformity with the actual systejn of 
things, is the true tost of reality, the suflficiont reason. 
Eveiything which is possible has an essence or meaning, 
but only that which is also compossible has existence 

^ DoHcartoa did not admit that eveiytl^in;? which ia possible is 
realized, hut assigned the choice among possible things to the mere 
will of Ood. But this is practically to make the choice arbitrary 
and consequently to moke the contingent (which is the result of 
choice) fortuitous. Spinoza, on the other band, by holding that 
oveiything possible is realized, made the contingent necessary. 
Leibniz, however, points out that Descartes in one passage 
iii. f7) says that * Matter must successively take all the forms of 
which it is capable, ' an approach to Spinoza’s view. Beponse auoc 
H^/leMons, &c. (1697) (E. X44 a ; O. iv. 340). * 

* ^ Xattra A (*7*4) (E- 7*9 h; G. iit 57a): ‘I do not 

fdUuit tliat, in order to know whether the romance of jitinua ia 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 65 

But^ while the ground of the individual thing’s reality 
is it» compossibility Avith the actual system of things, 
Leibniz does not admit that more compossibility witli 
any system whatever implies the existence of the com- 
possible essences. The principle of suflicient reason is 
not interpreted by him as a general refeience to system 
or as reference to a system which is held to bo the only 
one possible, to an all-inclusive system There art* 
several possible systems or universes, each of wliich 
consists of a collection of compossible elements. Indeed 
it must be supposed that there is an endless series of such 
possible univemes, of which one only has existt^nce as 
well as essence. But the principle of sutficieiit reason 

possible, it would be necessary to know its connexion with Die lost 
of the universe. That would be necessary in order to know 
whether it is ccnnposathh with it, and, coiiHoquently, wliether tliih 
romance has been, ih now, or sliall he [ realized ) in any <*orner ot 
the universe. For assuredly, without that, theio will he 110 place 
for it. And it is ver^' true that what does not exist, has never 
existed, and never shall exist, is not possible, if by possible we 
mean compossible, as I have just said. . . . But it is another 
question whether A**irata is absolutely possible. I say 
because it involves no contradiction. But, in order that it may 
actually exist, the rest of tiie uiiivorM 3 w'ould have to h(» quite 
other than it Is, and it is possible that it may be otherwise’ 
VAstrati was the first French pastoral romance, modelled on such 
works OB ttie Aminfa of Tasso or thc^ Pa^ur Ftfio of (jluarini. It was 
written by Honoro d’Ui'f <3 (1568-1625) and was published in parts 
between the years 1610 and 1619. It is a strange medley of his- 
torical and imaginary events and characters, and the Court society 
of Europe for a long time amused itself by trying to ‘ identify ' the 
characters of the story. It was translated into almost every European 
language, many * keys ' to it were written, plays were found(*d upon 
it, and it was read with inudi appreciation by such writers 
La Rochefoucauld, La Fontaine, and Rousseau, » 

* Hemar/ptes sur la ktiri de M. Amauld (1686) (O. ii. 45) : ‘If w< 
were to reject absolutely things which are in<‘rely possible, wt 
should do away with the contingent, for, if nothing is 
except what God has actually created, whatever God has created 
would be necessary — supposing Uiat God has resolved to <'Ti‘ate 
anything.* Nolen {La Criltque de Kant et la Metaphystque de Lnimiz^ 
p. 24) remarks that Hhe relation between the world of possibles 
and the world of existences remains one of the obscure points in 
the philosophy of Leibniz, The oorrespondence witli Arnauld . . . 
ahows that Leibniz was oonscious of the insufficioncy of his eMlana- 
tiomi ftnd of the diffieulty of the problem.* 

F 

66 

INTRODUCTION 

still requires that a cause or reason be assigned for the 
existence of the actual universe rather than any other 
among those which are possible. The existence of the 
actual universe is its creation by God, that is to say, its 
being not merely in the region of ideas, or essences, or 
possibilities, whicli is the pure understanding of God, 
but also in the H])here of final causes, in which the will 
of God operates \ In other words, the actual universe 
is the result of a free choice of God amongst all poasible 
universes. While the choice of God is free, being un- 
limited in its application, it is not an arbitrary choice, 
but a choice according to reason. God chooses as the 
actual universe that whose compossible elements admit 
of the greatest amount of perfection or reality, that is to 
say, the fullest and most complete essence. Thus the 
actual univei*se is ‘ tlie l>est of all possible worlds * — of 
all worlds which are really worlds or systems, that is, 
in Leibniz's language, of all worlds whose elements are 
compossible. God makes this choice because, being 
omnipotent, His choice is unlimited, He may create any 
possible world ; being omniscient, He contains all possible 
worlds in His understanding and perceives that which is 
best ; and, being perfect in goodness of will, He chooses 
the best. Thus the Divine Nature is ultimately the 
sufliciont reason of all particular things, since it is the 
ground both of the essence and of the existence of the 
actual universe *, which, in its turn, as a system of corn- 
possibles, is tho immediate ground of its individual ele- 
ments. 

Accordingly, the principle of cbntradiction and the 
principle of sufficient reason remain side by side in the 

^ Aocordlng to Leibniz, existence (or the creation which produces 
existenc^e) involves no change in the essence of a thing. Its essence 
is same, whether it bo in the actual world or merely in the 
region of the Divine ideas. Cf. Monaddlogy^ §$43 end 47, notes. 

^ Cf. Tftihdie^, $ 7 (£. 506 a ; O. vi. 107) : * His understanding is 
the source of essences, and His will is the origin of existences.* 
Also Momdeiogu, §§ 53^559 TModinee, $ soi (£. 565 b ; Q. vi. 936). 

OENERAIi FBINCIPLES 67 

phflosophy of Leibniz, each having its specific function, 
but neither reducible to the other, while no attempt is 
made to find a more comprehensive principle which may 
include both. There are certain eternal and necessary 
truths which are independent of the will of God, existing 
in His understanding alone, and those are subject to th<^ 
principle of contradiction ; but the reality of all indi- 
vidual substances and their changes is dependent on the 
will as well as the understanding of God, and they are 
all subject to the principle of sufficient reason. Each 
principle expresses a certain necessity ; but the necessity 
of the principle of contradiction differs in kind from 
that of the principle of sufficient reason, the former 
being an absolute, compelling, or metaphysical necessity, 
whose opposite is impossible, involving self-contradiction, 
while the latter is a relative, inclining, or moral neces- 
sity, whose opposite is not impossible, but incoinpossible, 
inconsistent not with itself but with the system of which 
it is a part, inconsistent not so much with the eternally 
true as with the best possible. 

Uie leading Characteristics of Leif)nie"s Philosophy as 
Results of the two great logical Principles* 

We are now in a position to see how the main features 
of the Metaphysics of Leibniz are determined by these 
great logical principles which underlie it \ The principle 
of contradiction, taken by itself, is a principle of exclu- 
sion. A is A (every re al thing is identical with itself) 
at all times, in all circumstances, throughout all 9hang€?s, 
in every variety of felations. Strictly speaking, then, 
A can never become B. A is always A, B is always B ; 
each is for ever exclusive of the other. ‘ Black is black, 
furieusemeni black; white is white, furicusement white,’ 
The principle of contradiction, as thus interpreted, is 

* VThat follows ia, of course, not an exposition of Leibniz's explicit 
doctrine, but an analytic investigation of the way in which his 
logical principles fix the main lines of his philosophy. 

68 

INTRODUCTION 

a principle of pure self-identity which asserts permanence 
to the exclusion of change or, in general, unity to the 
exclusion of diiFerence. In other words, it insists on 
the reality of Terms, making relations subordinate or 
fictitious. Consequently a philosophy whose dominant 
principle is that of contradiction, in this sense, must 
(consciously or unconsciously) treat whole and parts as 
exclusive of one another, asserting the reality of the one 
as against that of the other. For if the whole be real 
it iniiNt be simple, it must exclude as unreal all ndations 
or diflerences. Otherwise it will not bo purely self- 
idenlical, but may receive a variety of real predicates. 
And as it is simple it can have no real parts. Since A 
cannot bo not-A, and since not-A includes B, C, &c., 
it cannot be tnie that some A is B or C. Some A can 
only bo A without further distinction. On the other 
hand, if the ]jarts bo rtwil and purely self-identical, if the 
reality of each is self-centred and is determined without 
regard to its relations to the others, then there is no 
real wliole, but only a numerical collection of individuals 
which may oven bo contradictory of one another. The 
principle of contradiction, considered as meaning merely 
that the real is that which is not self-contradictory, yields 
either a whole, which has no real parts or determinations 
bec>tiUso it is equally indifferent to all possible determina- 
tions, or a bare collection of severally possible, but jointly 
* incompossible ’ parts. 

Now, it is the influence of the principle of contra- 
diction, thus abstractly interpreted, that leads Leibniz 
to the conception of real substaifce as simple, i. e. as 
without paiis, indecomposable. And it is the same 
principle that accounts for the infinite plurality of simple 
substances and their complete isolation from one another. 
For Leibniz, in order to give due value to the differences 
in the'^lmi verse, holds the principle of contradiction as 
ensuring reality to the parts, leaving the whole to be 
otherwise accounted for. And, on the other hand, the 

OENKIAL PRINCIPLES 

69 

mutual isolation of simple substances is but another 
name for their abstract self-identity. A can never become 
B, and, as A and B are simple, no part of A can ever 
become B, or a part of B. One Monad can never become 
another, and no quality of one Monad can ever beconie 
a quality of another. 

The principle of sufficient reason in combination with 
the principle of contradiction yields the idea of the 
Monad as itself the source of all the difterences it con- 
tains, the whole variety of its existence TJie principle 
of contradiction requires that real substance must con- 
tain its whole nature within itself in such a way that 
it may be analytically deduced. The notion of sul>stanc€> 
is self-explicative. Every true proposition must bo ana- 
lytic. Thus the Monad must be self-sufficient. But 
now the principle of sufficient reason is added to explain 
that the analysis is not necessarily cornpletc'd in every 
case, that, while substance must bo self-sufficient and solf- 
explicative, its self-sufficiency is not necessarily in every 
case fully realized, ^ Its self-identity is not static but 
dynamic : it is not immediately self-oxplaininp;, but pro- 
gressively solf-rovtialing. Many true propositions are not 
actually but potentially analytic. While the predicate 
of every true proposition must in some way bo contained 
in the subject, it does not follow that in each i)artj(ailar 
case the relation can bo made perfectly and self-evidently 
clear Tho predicate must have a sufficient ground or 
reason in tho subject, but not necessarily a self-evident 
one. The Monad must he conceived as sufficiently tho 
reason of its changes or varieties, though not self-evidently 
the reason of each. In other words, the various per- 
ceptions which are tho variety or change in the Monad, 
the manifold \muUitude] in the simple substance, have 

* The problem how the nimple substance can contain differences is 
the same as the problem how the principles of contradiction and 
sufficient reason can be treated as independent and co-ordinate. 
Of this Leibniz offers no clear solution. 

• Of, this Introduction, Part ii. p. 60, note a. ^ 

INTRODUCTION 

70 

reality even though they are not all perfectly clear and 
distinct* Thus Spinoza, under the guidance of the prin** 
ciple of contradiction, rejected merely empirical know* 
ledge, the contingent sequence of ideas that comes db 
ea^erientia vaga, as confused and therefore unreal and 
illusoiy, a work of imagination. On the other hand, 
Leibniz (for whom this empirical sequence is the series 
of perceptions in Monads that have not reached the self- 
conscious stage) attributes to this sequence a relative 
reality, inasmuch as it is potentially, though not actually, 
clear and distinct. 

Further, we see the influence of the principle of suffi- 
cient reason in the conception of the Momids as each 
representative of tlio whole universe from its particular 
point of view. The Monads are indeed Terms or absolute 
points, centres exclusive of one another; but they are 
not Terms exclusive of relations. It is a part of their 
essential reality to contain within themselves a multi- 
plicity of relations. The Monad may be likened to ‘a 
centre or point in which, quite sirnplp though it is, there 
exists an infinite number of angles, formed by the lines 
which moot .in it*.’ The principle of contradiction 
requires nothing but a pure simplicity in the individual 
substance ; any kind of simple substance would satisfy 
it. But the principle of sufficient reason imposes the 
further condition that tlio simple substance inust have 
1 ‘elations to other simi)le substances and to the whole, 
and that only those simple (solf-consistont) substances 
are rml which are also consistent with the real unity 
of the whole. For otherwise every real substance would 
have its ground or reason wholly in 6’e, and those things 
for which we must be content with a ground or reason 
in alio would be entirely illusory. Thus the combination 
of self-consistency with consistency in relation to the 

^ Princes (if Nature arid of Grace, § a. Cf Exirait du DUHonnaire^ 
Bayk, (1709) iv. 542) : * 0()4 has put in eaoh soul a eonemlra* 
tion qf the world,* 

GEKEBAL PRINCIPLES 

71 

whole is what Leibniz means by the character of the 
Monad as at once exclusively indmdual and represen- 
tative or perceptive of the whole universe from its jjai^ 
ticular point of view. 

Again, the appetition of the Monads is due entirely 
to the principle of sufficient reason. A substance which 
is real in virtue of its mere possibility can have no ten- 
dency to a change of state If it were really to change 
it would cease to be itself. But the appetition of the 
Monads is ruled not by the principle of realizing the self- 
consistent or the abstractly possible, but by the principle 
of reah’zing the best or the full harmony of a system. 
The pre-established harmony of the universe as a 
system of ‘ compossible " substances is the ground or 
reason of the appetition in each, the principle of its 
changes. But this, as we have seen, is a consequence 
of admitting the principle of sufficient reason. 

Lastly, a very slight consideration will show that tlie 
law of coiitinuity (with its obverse, the identity of in- 
discernibles) is a paiticular application of the principle 
of sufficient reason. A breach in the continuity of the 
series of simple substances would moan a void in nature. 
Such a void is not inconsistent with the, principle of 
contradiction : it is not self-evidently impossible. But 
it is inconsistent with the principle of the best or most 
fitting which governs the actual system of things, that 
is to say, it is inconsistent with the principle of sufficient 
reason. That one possible thing is in itself more perfect 
than another is no sufficient reason for the existence of 
the former rather than the latter ; the former might 
perhaps be incompatible, while the latter is corapatilde, 
with the rest of the world. But it is inconsistent 

* Cf. Spinoza's ConatuSf the ‘ effort by which each thing endeavours 
to persevere in its own i^ing,' and which is * nothing but the actual 
essence of the thing itself.' Ethics, Part iii. Prop. 7. Leibniz 
might say that, on Spinoza's principles, to call this an * effort ’ is to 
beg the question, because effort implies tendency towards somo- 
thUig. 

INTRODUCTION 

72 

with tlie principle of sufficient reason that nothing 
Hhould exist where something is possible; for the prin- 
ciple of sufficient reason requires the exist«ice of a 
complete world, that is to say, of that entire system of 
compoHsiblo things which contains the fullest reality or 
the greatest amount of essence Consequently the law 
of continuity derives its force from the principle of 
suffici<;nt reason. And thus, in general, Leibniz’s solu- 
tion of his main ju-oblem is accomplished by the com- 
bination of the principles of contradiction and sufficient 
reason, giving, on the one hand, real units of substance, 
t’von more thoroughly impenetrable and indivisible than 
physical atoms ; and, on the other hand, in consistency 
with these, a real whole, which is not a mere aggregate 
of indepcuident and perhaps mutually contradictory ele- 

* Cf. f'f Clarke (1716), Aposft.ille (K 758b; G. vii. 378) 

;^Clurko’s 1 ruiirtlatiou) : ‘In Ukt‘ manner, to ndiniL u vacuum in 
nature is nscTibiiiK t<> Ood a very inipcrfoct work; Mis violating 
I ho graiul principle of tlie necessity of a svffirunt reason ; which 
many hav<i talked of, without understanding its true moaning. . . . 
'lo uinit. many otbi'i* nrguiuoiiiu against a raamm and o/ems, I shall 
hero mention those wliich I ground upon God’s perfection and 
up<»u the necessity of a sufllcieiit reason. I lay it down as a prin- 
that every perfection which God could impart to things 
without derogating from their otluT perfections has actually been 
imparted to llu ni. Now lot us faucy a space wholly empty. God 
have jilueed some matter in it, without dt*rogatiiig in any 
respei't from all other things; thereioro He hath actually placed 
some matter in that space: therefore there is no space wholly 
empty : therefore all is full. ... I shall add another argument, 
grounded upon the necessity of a !nij)1cien( reason. ’Tis impossible 
there should ho any principle to determine what proportion of 
maiter there ought to bo, out of all the possible degrees from 
a plenum to a varuum, or from a ractium to u plenum/ [?Thc pro- 
portion of miller plenum to vacuum or of racism to plenum.'} * Perhaps 
it will be said that the one should be equal to the other ; but, 
because matter is more perfect than a tocuum, reason requires that 
a goometriciil i»roportion should bo observed, and that there should 
he as much more matter than vacuum as the former deserves to 
have the preference before the latter. But then there must be no 
racmim at all ; for the perfoetjon of matter is to tliat of a wcuum as 
something to nothing.* Cf. also the beginning of Leibniz's second 
letter b ; G. vii. 356) : ‘ Tho more matter there is, the more 

opportunity is there for God to exercise His wisdom and His power ; 
and for this reason, among others, I hold that there is absolutely 
no void.' 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 73 

lYients, but the most perfect system of mutually consistent 
or compossible substances, in each of which the whole is 
in some way ideally contained ^ 

‘ Further coiisideratiou of the isolation between these two greal 
principles in the philosophy of Ixubniz is given in the Fourth Pari 
of this Introduction, p. 174. 

PART III. 

DETAILED STATEMENT OP THE PHILOSOPHY OP LEIBNIZ. 

Passing from the general consideration of the doctrines 
of Leibniz, wo now come to their more specific develop- 
ment. Wo shall, in the first place, examine the relation 
between his philosophical principles and the ruling con- 
ceptions of his Mathematics, and we shall afterwards 
endeavour to trace the principles of the Monadology in 
the various departments of knowledge which are con- 
cerned with Matter, with Organism, and with Self- 
consciousness. This review of human knowledge, pro- 
ceeding from the most abstract or simple to the most 
concrete or complex of the sciences ^ will reveal to us 
the intoriiretation which Leibniz's conception of Sub- 
stance requires us to give to the judgments of common 
consciousness. From another point of view, we may 
consider ourselves as inquiring : — ‘ What are the answers 
which Leibniz would make to objections against his 
system, based upon facts, hypotheses, or common beliefs 
in. mathematical and physical, biological and mental 
science ? ' 

A. Leibniz’s mathematics in relation to his 

PHILOSOPHY. 

It was paiily through Mathematics that Leibniz 
arrived at the notion of Substance which is the core of 
his philosophy. Dissatisfaction with the Mathematics 
of Descartes and with its consequences in Physics led 
him to^reject the Cartesian theory of matter and motion 

^ The canaideratioa of Iieibaiz’s Theology ot Philosophy Reli- 
gion iH beyond the scope of the present volume. 

STATEME1«T OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 75 

and to substitute for it a more adequate theory of Force 
and a higher Mathematics. Both the Mathematics and 
the Physics of the time appeared to Leibniz to be too 
abstract, and the great object of his speculations was to 
bring them more into touch with concrete reality. 

The Transition from Synthetic to Analytic Geometry. 

Early in the seventeenth century a considerable ad- 
vance was made in the science of Mathematics, mainly 
through the work of Kepler, Cavalieri, and Descartes. 
The Geometry of the Greeks was synthetic or synoptic. 
It dealt with ideal figures as discrete wholes, not taking 
into consideration the possibility of their being analyzed 
into elements, of which they ai*e combinations or func- 
tions. Thus the relations of the figures to one another 
are considered as externaL Each is what it is : no one 
is regarded as having in it the possibility of passing into 
another. A rectilineal figure is one thing ; a curvilinear 
figure is another. The barriers between them are re- 
garded as insurmountable, at least by the methods of 
exact or demonstrative science. Thus a curve is still 
a curve, however small may be its curvature. A polygon 
is still a polygon, however numerous may be its sides. 
And the kinds of curves are each independent of the 
others. An ellipse is still an ellipse, however distant 
one focus may be from the other. 

Kepler’s introduction of the notion and the name of 
infinity into Geometry was the beginning of a gi'eat 
change in matheniatical methods. The geometrical 
figures of the Greeks were all finite, and therefore 
capable of representation to the eye, or, in other words, 
capable of being pictured. Every curve must have 
a definite curvature. Every polygon must have a de- 
finite number of sides. Kepler, in order to attain to 
greater exactness in the statement of mathematical 
relations, suggested that finite (or definite) figures might 

INTRODUCTION 

76 

be regarded as consisting of an Infinite (or indefinite) 
number of elements. Thus bo considered a circle to be 
eomposoil of an infinite number of triangles, having 
thoir common vortex at the centre and forming the 
circiimfc*r(‘nco by their bases *. 8uch an analytic con- 
ception of the figure is. of course, not capable of being 
pictured. But it at once suggests the possibility of 
rt^prosonting the figure, not by a rough drawing or 
image, but by an infinite numerical series the terms 
of which are so related to one another that their sum is 
finite. Accordingly, in thus considering the finite as 
made up of an infinite number of olcmoiits, we have 
promise of a connexion between Goometiy and Algebra, 
<»f Rucli a kind that geometrical relations may be sym- 
bolized algebraically and the knowledge of thorn may be 
extended and generalized by calculation. Such a con- 
nexion would jnoan tJio reduction of the discontinuous 
concepts of Synthetic Geometiy to the comparative 
continuity of Algc'braic Concepts or Numbers. It would 
thus lesson the abstractness of Geomehy, and make it 
more adcipialc^ to the continuity of nature, or, looking 
at tlio same thing from the opposite point of view, it 
would onabJo the continuous system of space-relations 
to be more completely brought within the range of 
mathematical donioiistration. For instance, problems 
which the Greeks had to solve by , the indirect and 
unsuggostive method of reductio ad ahsurdum would now 
b<» capable of a direct demonstrative solution, and there 
would arise many now problems which the old methods 
could not touch. 

* In a similar way Cavaliori afterwards suggested that the ai’ea 
of a triangle might bo conoeivod as made up of an infinite number 
of straight lines, each parallel with the base. The lengths of these 
linos ho rogfirdod as forming an infinite series in arithmetical pro- 
gression, of which the first form is zero. The sum of this series is 
equal tq^lialf the product of the last term (i.e. the length of the 
base of The triangle) and the number of terms (i.e. the altitude of 
tlie triangle). As against this it was pointed out that, since a line 
has no breadth, no number ef straight lines can ever make up a 

8TAXEMBNT OF LKIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 77 

The Bam of AncAyticeA Geometry. 

This connexion between Algebra and Geometry was 
definitely established by Descartes in the Analytical 
'Geometry, of which he was the inventor. The laisis of 
the Analytical Geometry is the finding of a definite 
proportion between the space-relations or ratios investi- 
gated by Geometry and certain numerical ratios. But 
the space-relations of Geometry are not merely quantita- 
tive as are the relations of number. To take the simplest 
of instances, the square upon a line may be represented 
by the square of a number. But the square of a number 
n 'is simply n times n, that is to say, it is the sum of 
n w’s added together. The square of n is a quantity of 
w’s or a’ simple series of homogeneous units, which may 
bo interchanged within the series without in any way 
afFecting the result. On the other hand, the relation 
of a geometrical square to the lino upon which it is 
constructed (i. e. to any one of its sides) is not purely 
quantitative. The .square is not a sum of lengths. It is 
a figure with special characteristics. The lino cannot 
intelligibly be regarded as its unit. It is its side, and 
as the side of a square it has properties other than those 
which it would have as a mere line. It is, in fact, 
part of a unity which is more than merely (juiintitativc^ 
And yet a quantitative ratio can express the relation 
between the square and its side, in such a way that the 
properties of the square may be algebraically calculated 
without direct reference to the geometrical figure. Thus 

plane aren. Pascal, hbwevor, showed that Cavaliori’s method 
really implied that the infinite scries of stniight lin<‘M is .'ll! ‘ iii- 
de^nite' number of ^ small' rectangles, which are so small that 
the minute triangles between them and the sides of tJjc* given 
triangle maybe neglected in the computation. This * indefinite’ 
of Pascal is the Mnanite' of later mathematiciuna, and liis <Hmall 
is manifestly their ‘infinitely little.' Thus we have Jiere the 
transition from the ancient to the modern methods. Pascal vindi- 
cated Cavalieri's method on the ground that it differed only in 
manner of expression from the method of exhaustions, used in the 
Greek mathematics. • . 

INTRODUCnON 

78 

relations of quantity (that is to Bay, of mere aggregation) 
may become signs or symbols of relations which are 
more than quantitative, relations in which the part is 
not indifferent to the whole but characteristic of it. All 
the processes of Algebra, however complex and elaborate, 
are forms of the addition and the subtraction (or separa- 
tion) of abstract units. Thus the abstract number i 
remains the same, into whatever algebraic combination 
it may enter as a part. But the conception of a straight 
line, for instance, varies (the line has various functions) 
according to the nature of the whole into which it enters 
as a part, and according to the sj)ecial way in which it is 
related to the whole. Thus in relation to different kinds 
of figures (rectilineal, curved, &c.), or on account of the 
various forms of -its relation to one and tlie same figure, 
a straight line is a side, a tangent, a radius, a directrix, 
an axis, a sine, &c. There is a closer, more real unity 
between the part and the whole than in the relation of 
mere quantity, whore the part is indifferent to the special 
character of the whole. 

Jlelations of purely quantitative Unity and geometrical 
Unity. Infinite Series and the infinitely little. 

But there is no absolute gulf fixed between quantita* 
tivo unity and geometrical unity. The difference is, 
that geometrical unity, while abstract in comparison 
with oiganic unity or with the mal concrete unity of all 
existence, is loss abstract than merely quantitative unity \ 
And the })ridge between the unity which is expressed in 
the Algebra of finite quantities and that which is expressed 
ill the Geometry of finite space-relations is to be found in 
the analysis of a finite quantity into an infinite series. 
*No finite quantity can be resolved into an infinite series 

' Strictly Hpeaking. a merely quantitative unity is a contradiction 
in termsi^for mei'e quantity is pure difference, the absence of unity. 
But what I mean here is unity of Uie lowest degree, unity on the 
point of vanishing, or the most indeterminate unity. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 79 

formed by an addition of independent integers, such as 
I + 1 + 1 , &C., or even 14-2 + 3, &o., that is to say, by an 
addition not conditioned by any special law. But there 
are certain numerical series in which the terms are not 
mutually indifferent (nor immediately reducible to a set 
of mutually indifferent terms), but are arranged, or rather 
proceed from one another, according to a definite law, 
which law is of such a kind that, although it never 
brings the series actually to an end, it results in the sum 
of the series approaching more and more nearly to some 
finite quantity. Accordingly it is held that, if the series 
be regarded as consisting of an infinite number of terms, 
the difference between the sum of its terms and the finite 
quantity will be infinitely little, and therefore practically 
negligible. 

This ‘ practically negligible ’ is the keystone of the 
bridge between algebraic quantity and geometrical, 
physical, or any other kind of relation. Strictly speaking, 
if the series bo regarded as a pure sum, and therefore 
ultimately analyzable into an addition of homogeneous 
units (i + I 4 I, &c., or w + w+w, iS:c.), the fiiiitude of its 
sum is incompatible with its having an infinite number 
of terms. It is only inasmuch as the series is regarded, 
not as a merely quantitative unity, but a unity deter- 
mined by a characteristic law or principle, that we are 
entitled to disregard the ^ infinitely little ’ difference 
between the sum of its terms and the finite quantity. 
There can be no absolute ‘infinitely little' in mere 
quantity. The ‘infinitely little’ here considered is 
‘ infinitely little ' as determined by the law or character 
of the particular series. That is to say, we ^e certain 
that the law of the series holds unchangoably, however 
far the process of analysis may be carried ; and we have 
thus inferential certainty regarding the result .of the 
analysis (the equation of the sum of the terms to the 
whole finite quantity), even although we may be unable 
actually to count each one of the terms. It is the law 

8o 

I5TBODUCrnON 

or principle of the Beries which enables us to say that the 
* infinitely little ' difference may be neglected because the 
character of the series is not affected by it. 

But in neglecting this ^ infinitely little ’ difference, 
because uf the special character or law of the series, we 
have virtually passed from the unity of mere quantity to 
a unity of character, a unity in which the parts are not 
entirely indifteront to the whole and to one another, but 
are connected in accordance with some special principle. 
We have thus given an indefinite increase of elasticity to 
the formulae of Algebra and have prepared the way for 
an algebraic representation and calciiliis not merely of the 
elomontaiy space-unities (figures) of the Greek Geometry, 
but also of more coniprehensivo geometrical unities of 
which those are elements, and further of physical unities 
and indeed of any unity the elements of which are in 
themselves capable of a sufficiently accurate quantitative 
(♦xpression. For instance, the phenomena with which 
Physics deals are differences of a unity, elements in 
a whole. But the unity, the whole, is not one of quantity 
merely. And yet its ekunents are capable of quantitAtive 
expression with a degree of accuracy such that its dif- 
ference from ahsoliite accuracy may be neglected so for as 
physical science is concerned. Consequently it becomes 
possible to state and to work out problems of physical 
science in teniis of Algebra. 

Thd Tn/inifesimal Caimlus and the Principle of Becoming 
or System- 

The practical development of fiiis possibility is the 
function of the Infinitesimal Calculus of Leibniz and 
Newton ’. As we have already seen, the Analytical 

* A succinct account of the famous controversy regarding the 
liiscovory of this method, and of Uie difTei'cnt forms in which 
Leihniz and Newton expressed it, will be found in Dr. William- 
son's aft iole ^ Infinitesimal Calculus * in the 9th ed. of the Enq/clo^ 
pa^dia Britanf^^a. Cf. Merz, History o/Eurepsan Thought in ike Nifideenth ^ 
Cmiury, i. 100-103. 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz’s PHIIiOSOPHT 8t 

G^metry reduces the discontinuity of Synthetic Geo- 
metry to the relative continuity of number, or quantity 
of homogeneous units. But number as a sum of iinite 
units (even though it may take the form of an infinite 
series) is still to some extent discontinuous. It may, 
however, be made continuous by regarding its elements 
not as finite units, but as ‘infinitesimals* or infinitely 
little quantities. In other words, any numerical unit we 
may choose to employ may be subdivideci infinitely, and 
thus every finite number may be regai’ded as the sum of 
an infinite series of infinitely small terms. This is the 
basis of the Infinitesimal Calculus as originally conceiveil 
by Leibnix. It may be otherwise expressed by saying 
that the series of finite numbers or quantities is ulti- 
mately to be expressed, not as a series of terms which 
grow by finite increments (like i + (1 + i) + (i + i-hi) 
&c.), but as a series whose terms flow into one another, 
their differences being infinitely small. That is to say, 
any variable magnitude must bo regarded as increasing or 
diminishing by infinitely small increments or docromonts. 
The work of the Calculus is to determine the relations 
between unknowm quantities or magnitudes, not by 
considering them merely as fixed wholes and directly 
finding equations betw^een them, but indirectly, by treat- 
ing the quantities as variables or as growing, and in the 
fimt place finding equations between their elements or 
differences 

’ From one point of view it may bo regarded na tlie aolving of tlio 
problem of Achilles and the tortoise. Cf. Lettre a M, Foucher (1693) 
(£. 118 a; G. i. 4x6) ; * indivisibles, in the scmse of the mere 

extremities of a time or of a line, wo cannot conceive extremi- 
ties, nor actual nor potential parts in them. Thus points are 
neither large nor small, and no leap is needed to pass them. Yet 
the contifiuous, although it everywhere has such indivisibles, is 
not composed of them, as the objections of sceptics seem to supfMjse. 
There is, iix my opinion, nothing insurmountable in these ohjec;tions, 
as will found if they are put into strict form. Father Gregory 
of St. Vincent has excellently shown, by the Calculus of infinite 
divisibility, the place where Achilles should overtake the tortoise 
which starts before him, according to the proportion of their 
velooitieB. Thus Geometry dissipates these apparent difficulties.* 

Q 

82 

INTRODUCTION 

Accordingly, for instance, Newton regarded all geo- 
metrical magnitudes as capable of generation by con- 
tinuous motion. Lines may be regarded as generated by 
the motion of points, surfaces by that of lines, and solids 
by that of surfaces. That is to say, these figures are dis- 
tinct from one another, not absolutely, but merely in the 
degree in which they possess certain characteristics. The 
difference between the point and the lino is an infinitely 
small degree of length, the difference between the line 
and the surface is an infinitely small degree of breadth, 
the difference between the surface and the solid is an in- 
finitely small degree of depth. ‘ Motion,’ in Newton's way 
of putting it, is in this connexion merely a metaphor for 
continuity. Again, in physical science we have to deal 
with phenomena which not merely are variable but are 
continually varying, and the Infinitesimal Calculus is of 
the utmost value in enabling us to state the laws of these 
variations, that is to say, to establish proportions between 
different sets of constantly changing phenomena. 

The value of the Infinitesimal Calculus in the interpre- 
tation of nature rests ultimately on this, that the con- 
ception of Mnfinitesimals’ which it employs is a virtual 
recognition of System in knowledge or of the principle of 
Becoming as distinct from that of abstract Being. When 
we say that a thing (a geometrical figure, for instance) has 
a certain quality or characteristic in an infinitely small 
amount, wo mean that it both lias and has not that quality 
or characteristic, or (to use another metaphor made familiar 
by Psycho-physics) that it is on the * threshold ’ of having 
it. The identity of the thing is dot merely superficial, 
of such a kind that when a quality seems to pass away 
from it the thing ceases to exist and another thing ap- 
pears ; the identity of the thing is maintained through an 
indefinite amount of difference. Thus, as we have seen, 
the point, the line, the surface, and the solid are all recog^ 
iiiz6<f as differences or relations within one system. So in 
general, when we have shown that the difference between 

STATEMENT OP LElBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 83 

one thing and another is infinitely little, we have not 
converted each into the other, but have explained them 
both by Inferring them to a common ground. We can ex^ 
press each in terms of the other, provided we state expli- 
citly their relations to one another within some system. 
A parabola is not an ellipse ; but a parabola is an ellipse 
with one of its foci at an infinite distance from the other. 

Continuity and the Logical Calculus. 

Now it cannot be said that all this was fully manifest 
to Leibniz himself ; but the truth of it underlies his 
thinking. The Infinitesimal Calculus in his mathematics 
is an expression of the same tendency of thought which 
makes the principle of sufficient reason so important an 
influence in his philosophy — the tendency to a less 
abstract, less dogmatic, more intensive way of looking at 
things, in contrast with the a priori deductive methods 
of the Cartesians. The influence of the mathematics of 
Leibniz upon his philosophy appears chiefly in connexion 
with his law of continuity and his prolonged efforts to 
establish a Logical Calculus. As to the law of continuity 
it is unnecessary to say more. It is the law of the end- 
loss relativity of things, the principle of system, of in- 
finite multiplicity in unity, and we have seen that the 
Infinitesimal Calculus is an application of it'. On tho 

* Cf. Tjettre a M. Bayfe (1687) (G. iii. 51 ; E. 104 a) : * I havo seen 
the reply of Father Malebranche to the remark I made on nomo lawM 
of nature which ho laid down in the liecherrhe de la Vfirite. He 
appears somewhat disposed to give thorn up himself, and his in- 
genuousness is most laudable ; but he gives reasons for it and makes 
rDstrictions which would* bring us back into the obscurity from 
which I think 1 have delivered this subject, and which conflict 
with a certain principle of general order that 1 have observed. I hope, 
therefore, that he will kindly allow me to take this opportunity of 
explainirig this principle, which is of gi'eat use in reasoning, and 
which docs not yet appear to be suiRciently employed nor known 
in all its scope. It has its origin in the conception of the JTxfiniie ; 
it is absolutely necessary in Geometry, and it also holds good in 
Physios, inasmuch as the Supreme Wisdom, which is the source 
of all things, acts as a perfect geometrician, and according to a 
harmony which cannot bo better^. . . . The principle may be stated 
thus : When the difference between two cases can he diminWied below any 

G 2 

INTRODUCJTION 

84 

other hand, the endeavour to find a Logical Calculus 
(implying a universal philosopliical language or system 
of signs) is an attempt to apply in theological and philo- 
sophical investigations an analytic method analogous to 
that which had proved so successful in Geometry and 
Physics It seemed to Leibniz that if all the complex 

qn^m magnitude in datiH or in the antecedents [cc gut est pose^ it will fieces- 
sattiy aho be dimintshed below every ffirm magnitude in quaeaitis w in the 
ronneguentH [a- gui m remlteX <)r, to put it more simply ; whm the 
cnscH [(it what is given) amtinualhj approach and are finalhj lo^t in (me 
another, the vonmpience.s w resulfn (or v^hat i» regwred) must do the same. 
Tiiis n^uin dop^uKis u{)on a moro general principle, to wit : daiis 
ordinatis eham guaesda sunt ordinata, [Tf there is order in the grounds 
there will nlso he r)rdor in the consequents.] But, for the uiider- 
staiiding of this, instances are neeessaiy. It is known that the case 
or HUp}x»sition of an ellipse may he made to axtproximaie, as much 
as Wo like, to the case of a parabola, so that the difforeric‘o between 
the ellipse and the parabola may become less than any given diffoi- 
eiiee, provided that one of the loci of the ellip'^e he made sufficiently 
distant from the otlier, for then the radii m tores prooeciling from 
this distant focus will differ from parallel radii vectorcs rh little as 
we like. Consequently all the geometrical theorems whioli may l>e 
proved of the ellipse in general can he applied to the parabola by 
oonsideiing it ns an ellipw^ one of whose foci is at an infinite 
distance, or ^to avoid this expression) as a figure which differs 
from some ellipse by loss than any given difference. The same 
principle holds in Physics. For instance, rest may Ihj regarded as 
an infinitely small velocity or us an infinite slowness. Accordingly, 
whatever is true of slowness or velocity in general ought also to be 
true of rest, thus undei'stood ; so that the law of rest should be 
regarded ns a particular case of the law of motion. Otherwise, if 
this <iooH not hold, it will be a auro sign tliat these laws are ill- 
constructed. Ill the same way equality maybe regarded as* an 
infinitely small inequality, and inequality may be made to approxi- 
mate to equality as mucli as we like.’ See also New Nssays, Intro- 
duction, p. 376, and Noureaux JCsmis, bk. iv. ch. 16. § la (E. 39a a ; 

455) ' ‘ the Ix'auty of nature . . . requires the appi^arunce 
of discontinuity [sauts] and, so to K}xiak, musical cadences among 
phenomena.’ In the letter to Bayle above quoted, Leibniz also 
remarks (E. 106 a; G. iii. 54): *It is true that in compound 
tilings a small change m< 7 y sometimes produce a great effect. For 
instance, a spark falling upon a large mass of gunpowder might 
overthrow a whole town ; but that is not contrary to our principle, 
and might indeed be explained on general principles. But in the 
case of elements or simple things nothing liko this could happen ; 
otherwise nature would not be the result of infinite wisdom.' 

‘ As tgjtbe analogy between Symbolic Thought and Algebra, Ac., 
cf. Looke, Essay, bk. ii. eh. 29, § 9 (Fraser's ed. vol. i. p. 490), 
See also Fraser, voi. ii. pp. la and 184, where farther referenees 
will be found. 

STATEMENT OF LElBNIz’s PhIlOSOPHY 85 

and apparently disconnected ideas which make up our 
knowledge could be analyzed into their simple elemtmts^ 
and if these elements could each be represented by a 
definite sign, we should have a kind of ^alphabet of 
human thoughts.’ By the combination of these signs 
(letters of the alphabet of thought) a system of true 
knowledge would be built up, in which reality would be 
more and more adequately represented or symbolized. 
For, according to Leibniz, the progress of knowledge con- 
sists in passing from obscure to clear ideas, from clear t(» 
distinct, from distinct to adequate. Ideas are obscure when 
analysis has not proceeded so far as to enable us definitely 
to distinguish them from others. They are clear when 
we can so distinguish them, but are not yet able to 
enumerate their particular elements or qualities. Tiiey are 
distinct when wo can enumerate their qualities, and they 
are adequate only when the analysis is complete, that is 
to say, when all the elements of the clear and distinct 
idea are themselvt38 clear and distinct. In many <^ses 
the analysis may result in an infinite series of elements ; 
but the princiiiles of the Infinitesimal Calculus in mathe- 
matics have shown that this does not necessarily render 
calculation impossible or inaccurate *. Thus it seemed to 
LeiVmiz that a synthetic calculus, based upon a thorough 
analysis, would be the most effective iustruinerit of 
knowledge that could be devised. ‘ I feel,’ he says, ‘ that 
controversies can never l>e finished, nor silence imposed 
upon the Sects, unless we give up complicated reasonings 
in favour of simple calculations, words of vague and un- 
certain meaning in favour of fixed symbols [character esY^^ 
Thus it will appear that ‘ every paralogism is nothing but 
an error of calculation,^ ‘ When controversies arise, there 
will be no more necessity for disputation between two 
philosophers than between two accountants. Nothing 
will bo needed but that they should take pen in hand, sit 

Gf. this IntrodactioD, Part ii. p. 6t note. 

* 0$ SdrnUia UnivtrmUi seu Caicido PhOotophicQ (E. 83 b ; O. viL aoo). 

86 

INTEODUCnON 

down with their counting^tables, and (having summoned 
a friend, if they like) say to one another » Let 
calmlate/ This sounds like the ungrudging optimism of 
youth ; but Leibniz was optimist enough to cherish the 
hope of it to his life’s end. 

Tills project of the Logical Calculus or philosophical 
language connects the mathematics of Leibniz with his 
theoiy of knowledge, while the Calculus of Iiifinitesimals 
finds immediate application in his revision of Descaries’s 
tlieories regarding matter and motion. Descartes treated 
motion and rest synthetically as constant quantitative 
wholes. Leibniz regards thorn analytically as consisting 
of an infinite series of degrees of one constant force. 
Accordingly Leibniz admits that tlie Cartesian laws of 
motion have a certain validity in relation to ‘abstract’ 
motion, but denies that they are adequate to the ‘con- 
crete ’ physical phenomena. 

B. MATTER. 

Descartes's Theory of Matter and Motion. 

As we have already seen, Leibniz’s view of matter can 
he understood only as it appeals in contrast with that of 
Descartes. In accordance with his interpretation of the 
principle of contradiction, viz. that the essence of a thing 
consists in that only which is common to all its manifes- 
tations^ or (othoi’wise expressed) in that only which 
remains after all varieties or specific determinations have 
btHUi excluded, Descartes maintained that matter is essen- 
tially extension. Bodily substance and magnitude or 
spatial extent are identical* Aiid all the changes in 
matter or extension are ultimately reducible to motion. 
Motion is regarded by Descartes as being * the tinnsference 
of a portion of matter or a body from the neighbourhood 
of those bodies which are in direct contact with it, and 
which we consider as at rest, to the neighbourhood of 
other l^odies or portions of matter Matter is infinitely 
‘ Principia, Part ii. 35. I>eaoartes adds : ‘ By a body, or rather 

STATEHE19T OT LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 87 

divisible. Its division is due to motion. Its forms arise 
solely finom the combinations and separations of its parts, 
which also are due to motion. ' All the variety of matter, 
or the diversity of its forms, depends on motion ‘I 
frankly avow that I acknowledge in corporeal things no 
other matter than that which can be divided, shaped 
[figtirees], and moved in all kinds of ways, that is to say, 
that which mathematicians call quantity, and which they 
take as tlie object of their demonstrations ; and in this 
matter I consider only its divisions, aha]>eB ( figures], and 
motions ; and, in short, regarding this I will accept 
nothing as true which is not deduced from it with as 
much certainty as belongs to a mathematical demoiistni- 
tion. And inasmuch as by this moans all the phenomena 
of nature may bo explained ... it seonis to me that in 
Physics no other principles ought to bo accepted, or even 
desired, than those which are here expounded 

Cmscrvation of Motion {or Momentum), its Direction being 
left out of occotmL 

Again, according to Descartes, the quantity of motion 
in the world (or in any material system complete in 
itself and apart from all external influences) is constant 
The motion (or mofnentum), whose quantity is thus con- 
stant, is in each particular case directly proportional to 
the miiss and the velocity of the moving body, and it may 

a portion of matter, I mean tho whole of what ia transferred to- 
gether, although this may be composed of several parts which 
themselves have other motions. And 1 say that motion is the 
transference and not the force or activity which transfers, in order 
to show that motion is always in the moving object and not in that 
which moves it; for it seems to roe that those two things ar»j not 
usually distinguished with suineicnt care. Further, I moan that 
motion is a property of the moving thing anti not a subsianco ; 
Juai as form is a property of the thing which has a form, an<l rest 
is a property of that which is at rest.* 

‘ Prtn/iipia, Part ii. 23 (Veitch's tr.). 

* Ibid. Part ii. 64 (tr. from Abbii Picot's French). Descartes’s 
object is to show that all the motion in the world is one, and thus 
to get rid of the later Scholastic thoories whicli referred each parti' 
cQlar motion to some unexplained principle in the moving bc^y. 

88 

INTRODUCTION 

ho expressed by the formula mv. Now lio new motion 
can come to any body from itself; no material body is 
self-moved, btKsause its essence is pure extension, and the 
idea of oxtonsion does not necessarily involve the trans- 
ference of parts. To any quantity of matter, whether 
larf^e or small, motion comes entirely from without. Thus 
at the creation of the world the whole material universe 
received a certain fixed quantity of motion, which is con- 
served by tho ‘ ordinary co-operation ' [concours ordinaire] 
of God, Motion is thus a jMJsitive thing and not merely 
relative to rest. Motion is not opposed to motion, but 
to Motions do not cancel one another ; they are 

(juantities winch can merely be combined and separated. 
Aiul, on the other hand, each individual portion of matter 
must remain in tho state in which it is, unless it receives 
motion from outside itself. The motion of any one body 
is increased only by a corresponding decrease in the motion 
of some other ; and the motion of any body is decreased 
4)nly by a part of it p<issing into some other. Motion is 
diffused, but never destroyed \ 

* Cf, Vrincipui^ ii. 36 (Voiteh’s tr.) : * With ronpect to tho general 
caiiKo of motion, it Hoems maiiifoat to mo that it is nono other than 
(UkI lliniHolf, M‘ho in tho beginning ereutod matter along with 
motion and rest, and now by His ordinary ‘coneourae' alone pre- 
sorves in the wliolo tho saiuo amount of motion and rest that He 
then Ydaced in it. For, although motion is nothing in tho matter 
moved but its mode, it has yet a oertnin and determinate quantity, 
which we easily understand may remain always the same in the 
whole universe, although it ohnnges in each of tho parts of it. So 
that, in truth, we may hold when a part of matter is moved with 
double the (luicknoss of another, and that other is twice the si?e of 
the former, that there is just precisely as much motion, hut no 
more, in tin* less body as in the greater; and that, in proportion os 
the motion of any one part is reduced, so is that of some other and 
equal }>orl>on accelerated. We also know that there is p^»rfection 
in God, not only Ih^chuso He is in Himself immutable, hut because 
He upemtes in the most constant and immutable manner possible ; 
HO that, with the exception of those mutations which manifest 
experionoe or Divine revelation renders certain, and which we per- 
ceive or believe are brought about without any change in the 
Creator, we ought to suppose no other in His works, lest there 
should tlience arise ground for concluding inconstancy in God 
Himself. Whence it follows, as most consonant to reason, that 
merely becauae God diversely moved the pai'ts of matter when He 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 89 

Now it follows from this, that, while the quantity of 
motion in the world, or in any isolated system of bodies, 
is constant, its direction is variable. For, as all space is 
body and is therefore a plenum^ moving bodies must con- 
tinually impinge upon others ; and if a moving body be 
supposed to impinge upon a body at rest, of such mass 
that the moving body is unable to ovorcomo the resistance 
of the other and to make it move, then the direction of 
the moving body is changed ; it rebounds in the dire<;tion 
from which it came or is deflected in some other w^ay. 
But, as the moving body has been unable to impart any of 
its motion to the body at rest, the quantity of its motion 
remains unchanged, while its direction changes — it being, 
of course, understood that the action of all other bodies, 
except the two in question, is left out of account 

Leibniz's Theory of Motion. Comervation of Force. 

Now, according to Leibniz, motion is simply change of 
position. It is not a positive quality belonging, for the 
time being, to the moving body ; but motion and rest are 
entirely relative to one another. If the relative pcmitioii 
of any two bodies changes, we may regard either as 
moving and the other as at rest ^ And, in general, rest 
is merely an inhiiitely small degree of motion ; nothing 

Jlrnt created ttiem, and now iireHorves all that inatti^r, manifoMtly 
in the same way and on the samo principle on wJiich Ho first 
created it, He also always proserves the same quantity of motion 
in tho matter itsfdf.* 

‘ Cf. Principia^ ii. 41 ; ‘ Each thing, whatever it is, always con- 
tinucui to he as it is in itself simply, and not as it is in relation to 
other things, until it is compelled to change its state by contact 
with some other thing.* From this it necessarily follows that 
a mo'ring body, which meets on its course another Body so firm 
and impenetrable that it cannot move it in any way, entirely Iow^h 
the deti^nninatioii it had of moving in this particular direction, 
and the cause of this is evident, namely, the resistance of tlie body 
which prevents it from going further; but it does not noocHsarily 
on this account lose any of its motion, since it is not deprived of its 
motion by the resisting body or by any other <;ati8e, and since 
motion is not contrary to motion/ 

* Cf. Animadver9(ones ad Cartetii Prineipia (1692?;, Part ii. § 25 
(G. iv. 369 ; Duncan's tr. p. 60). 

INTRODUCTION 

90 

in the world is absolutely at rest. Accordingly no body 
begins to move from a state of absolute rest^ but from 
a state which is to bo conceived as already one of motion, 
however small in amount. Actual motion is not some- 
thing added to a body which, to begin with, is bare mass ; 
it is always gradual growth or increment of a motion 
which is already there. Actual motion always pre-sup- 
poses potential motion or a force which, though it may 
not be observed, tends to appear as actual motion. 
Descartes, then, was right in interpreting actual motion 
as change of position, but wrong in overlooking potential 
motion and thus in regarding the total quantity of actual 
apparent motion in the universe, or in any independent 
system, as constant. He was right also in holding that 
eacli body tends to continue in the state in which it is ; 
but lie was wrong in thinking that a body can ever be in 
a state of ahsoluto rest, and thus in supposing that one 
motion cannot oppose another, but can only be opposed 
by rest. As a matter of fact eveiything tends to move, 
and would move, wore it not for counteracting tendencies 
to motion in other things That which is conserved, then, 
is not actual motion, as an extrinsic property of material 
substance, but this intrinsic tendency or potentiality of 
motion, which Leibniz calls force. As mere change of 
position does not enable us to attribute motion to one of 
the two bodies whoso position changes, and not to the 
other, the body which we call the moving body (a.s dis- 
tineJt from the body at rest) is so, not in virtue of its 

motion (in the sense of change of position), but because it 

« 

' Cf. lA!ttre a M. reU\sson (1691) (Fouchor do Caroil, i. 908 ; Batons, 
1. 733) : * It iniiHt bo obborved Uiat every body makes an effort to 
act on outside thingii, and would perc«*ptibly act if the contrary 
efforts of surrtuinding liodiosdid not prevent it. This has not been 
suffioientiy noticed by our moderns. TJiey imagine that a body 
might be perfectly at rest, without any effort. But this is due to 
their failure to understand what bodily substance really is ; for 
my opiniiM sHbstanctt canruA i^at any rate naturally) he wiifunU 
Tills also disproves the inaction which Sochiians attribute to dis- 
embodied souls.* 

STATEMENT OF LElBNlz’s PIIILOSOPHT 9I 

oontaioB within itself the cause of the change^ the force or 
activity which produces the motion. ^The notion of 
force^’ says Leibniz^ ^ is as clear as that of activity and of 
passivity, for it is that from which activity follows, when 
nothing prevents it. It is effort, conatus; and while 
motion is a successive thing, which consequently never 
exists, any more than time, because all its parts never 
exist together — while, I say, that is so, force or effoi-t, on 
the other hand, exists quite completely at every instant 
and must be something genuine and real. And, as nature 
has to do rather with the real than with that which does 
not completely exist except in our mind, it appeal's (in 
consequence of what I have sliown) that it is the same 
quantity of force, and not (as Descartes believed) the same 
quantity of motion, that is preserved in natum 

This force, then, which is constant, is not only an 
actual but a potential reality. It is not mere capacity 
for motion, mere passive movableness, nor is it actual 
manifest motion or activity in general. It is something 
between the two, an undeveloped or restrained tendency 
to act, which in appropriate circumstances is the producer 
of action This force is to be measured by the quantity 
of effect it produces. Descartes rightly insisted on the 
quantity of effect as the thing to be measured ; but he 

* Lettre a M, Pelisson (no date, probably 1691) (Dutetia, i. 719 ; 
Foucher do Careil, i, 157). ‘The relative velocity of two bodiefi’ 
[i. e. their apparent motion] * may remain the Kamo, although tho 
real velocities and absolute fVjrooR of tho bodies change in an infinity 
of ways, so that conservation of relative velocity has nothing to do 
with what la absolute in the bodies.* Essai de dynamique (U. Math, 
vi. ai6). Cf. Appendix^ I, p. 351. 

” ( 7 f. De Primm PhUox/phiae Emendationey Ac. (1694) (E. 12a b ; Q. iv 
469) : ^Active force differs from tho bare potency cofhmonly recog* 
in the Schools. For the active potency of the Schnlastics, or 
faculty, is nothing but a mere possibility of acting, which neverthe- 
less requires an outer excitation or stimulus, that it may l>c turned 
into activity. But active force contains a certain activity [adwi] 
and is a mean between the faculty of acting and action itscilf. It 
includes effort and thus passes into operation by itself, requiring no 
aids, but only the removal of hindrance. This may bo illustra^l 
by the example of a heavy hanging body stretching tho rope which 
holds it up, or by that of a drawn bow.* 

INTRODUCTION 

92 

conceived the effect in too narrow a way, regarding it 
merely aa actual motion (i. e. the momentitm acquired by a 
body) rather than the work done by the force, the kinetic 
energy it produces (i.e. the via viva which the body 
acquires, and which Leibniz calls action ^noirice). The 
fonnula for this motrice is not mv but wv*. ‘ In the 
uniform motions of one and the same body, (1) the acfion^ 
of tmversing two leagues in two hours is double the action 
of traversing one league in one hour (for the first action 
contains the second exactly twice) ; (2) the action of tra- 
versing one league in one hour is double the action of 
traversing one league in two hours (or, actions which 
produce one and the same effect are proportional to their 
velocities) : therefore (3) the action of traversing two 
leagues in two hours is four times (quadruple) the action 
of traversing one league in two hours. This demonstration 
shows that a moving body which receives a double or 
triple velocity, in order that it may produce a double or 
triple effect in one and the some time, receives a quadruple 
or nonuple action. Thus actions are proportional to the 
squares of the velocities. But most fortunately this 
haj)j)ons to agree with my calculation of force, drawn 
both from experiments and from the pre supposition that 
there is no mechanical peri)etual motion. For, according 
to my calculation, forces jire proportional to the heights 
by descending from which heavy bodies might have 
obtained their velocities, that is to say, as the squares of 
the velocities. And, as there is always conserved the total 
force for re-nscending to the same height or for producing 
some other effect, it follows that tbdro is conserved also 
the same quantity of motive “ force ” [aotion motrirc] in the 
world ; that is to say, to put it definitely, that in any one 
hour there is as much action motrice in the universe as 
there is in any other hour. But at every moment ^ the 

' 1 . o. work done or vira. For a full explanation of the 
whole matter, see Stallo, OonapU qf Modtm Phygicsj ch. vi, especially 
pp, 71 sqq. 

^ * A momentary state of a body in motion cannot contain motion, 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 93“ 

same quantity of force is conserved. And in fact action 
is nothing but the exercise of force, and amounts to the 
product of the force into the time^’ Accordingly this 
motive force or vis viva^ the amount of which is constitnt, 
includes direction, as well as quantity, of motion. For 
the measure of it is height, or position relatively to the 
surface of the earth. Descartes's * quantity of motion ’ 
(mv) is the effect of a given force regarded merely as acting 
during a given time. Leibniz's vis viva (mv^) is the effect 
of a given force regarded also as acting through a given 
distance. And Descartes did not take account of the 
direction of motion, because he did not take into con- 
sideration the distance through which the force acts. 

Leibniz's Theory of Matter, 

(i) Materia prima. 

This doctrine of the conser\'ation of force, as Leibniz 
conceives it, involves the rejection of the theory that 
material substance is nothing but extension *. f]xtension 

fur motion roquiros time, but it nono tho loan inv(»lvcH forco,* Lettre 
a Maiziauj' I1711) (E. 67611 ; <.». vii. 534^ 

Lettre a Bayte (uiulatwl) (^E. 19a a ; li. iii. 60), cf. (I. Math, 
vi. 1 17. Of foursu, from one point of viow, Leibniz’H Btiitoinont i» 
not quito acuiirato, siinco thoro nre ninny forms of onorj?y of whicii 
it takoH no account. It is, howovor, on ri^ht Jinow. And indoin] 
(as Du Boia-Koymond and Stulio liavo pruntod out) Leibniz in one 
pasf^ago nnticipate.s tho iiiodorn theory of th (3 iranafonnation of 
onergy (tho apparent loss of molar motion boiug roprOHcnUHi by 
incroaao of molecular motion), although tlio idea was not worked 
nut until a much more rocunt time. *1 hud maiutuined,' uayM 
Ijoibnlz, ‘ that active forces are consorvod in tho world. It i» objected 
that two soft, or iion-elaatic hodiea, when they collide, lose Home 
of thoip /orc€. I answer, No. It is true that tho “ wholes *' Ioho 
force in respc^ct of their total motion ; but tho parts received it, 
being agitated within the whole by the force of tbe colliHibn. Tlius 
it iu only apparently that tho loss occurs. Tho forces are not 
destroy but dissipated among the particles. That is not losing 
them but doing as is done by those who turn large money into 
small change.* Oinquieme Lettre d Qarke, 99 (E. 775 a; ( 1 . vii. 414). 

’ preset dune Lettre d Amauld {t 686 ) ii. 7a) : '£xt«n^ion is an 
attribute whioli cannot constitute a concrete [accompli'^ being. We 
cannot draw from it any activity or change. It expresses only 
a present state, and not at all tho fiiturti and the past, which the 
notion of a substance ought to express. When two triangles are 

INTRODUCTION 

94 

is mere capacity for receiving motion, bare movablenese, 
while motion is complete activity and is entirely extrinsic 
to that which is moved. Force, on the other hand, is, as we 
have seen, something between the two, viz. a potentiality 
of motion or action that is always passing into actual 
action when it is not prevented by a similar tendency in 
another body. This force, then, shows itself not merely 
in actual, positive motion, but in hindrance or resistance. 
And if this force were not of the essence of material 
bodies there would be no resistance among bodies and 
the absurdity of perpetual motion would be true. For if 
material bodies consist solely of extension, and if one 
such body moving should come into contact with another 
at rest (i. e. destitute of motion), then the former must 
(iarry the latter along with it. For, cjp h^pothes^ them is 
nothing but space to resist the progress of the moving 
body, and, if motion is possible at all, it must be motion 
through space, i.e. motion which mere space cannot resist \ 

Accordingly, in addition to extension (however it may 
be interpreted), every material body must have resistance 
or impenetrability. This mere passive resistance Leibniz 
on various occasions calls avnnnrtcu The avrirviria of a 
body is simply its need of sj^ace. The body is not mere 

found joined togothor, wo cannot infer from them how the joining 
has taken place. For it may liave happened in various ways ; but 
notliing which can have several causes is ever a concrete [accomjrftJ 
beim;/ 

* Kpistola ad Deft Dosses (1706) ((^. ii. 395): *If, With the Carte* 
sians, we wert' to admit a plenum and the uniformity of matter, 
adding only motion, it would follow that there would never be any- 
thing In the world but a Hul>stitution of eqi^valents, as if the whole 
universe wore to i-oduce itself to the motion of a perfectly uniform 
■wheel about its axis or to the revolutions of conoentrio circles of 
perfectly homogoniK>us matter. In that case, it would not bo p<»s- 
sible, even for an angel, to distinguish the state of the world at one 
moment from its state at another moment. For there could not be 
any variety in the phenomena. That is why, in addition to hgure, 
size, and movoniont, tliere must be admitted forms from which 
there aiijes in matter a variety of appearances ; and 1 do not see 
w'henoe wo can draw these forms, if they are to be intelligible, 
except from Entelechies.* Cf. Ik Ipsa NeUura (1693), § 13 (£. 138 b ; 
G.iv. 51a). 

STATEHEKT OF LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 95 

place : but it cannot be a body unless it has a place of its 
own. And its dyrirviria consists in its maintaining its 
place, staying where it is. Resistance is thus a passive 
force. ‘ Matter taken by itself or bare matter consists of 
dmnjjria and extension. By dvrinriria I mean that attribute 
in virtue of which matter is in space. Extension is con- 
tinuation through space, or continuous diffusion through- 
out a place \ * Matter is that which consists in dmrwia 

or which resists penetration ; and thus bare matter is 
merely passive In so far, then, as a material body is 
extended and occupies a place which cannot be occupied 
by any other body at the some time (for this is the 
meaning of amruTrta or impenetrability), it consists of 
bare matter. Bare or abstract matter, os thus dehned 
(dmrwr/a-f extension), Leibniz usually calls materia prim<L 

(2) Materia secunda. 

But we must beware of supposing that this materia 
prima is by itself anything actual. As the mathematical 
point is nothing actual, but is the indivisible limit of 
extension, so materia prima is the indivisible limit of 
matter. No portion of matter, no material body, consists 
of materia prima alone, just as no portion of extension 
is a mere mathematical point. For materia prima is 
simply body considered as if it were purely passive : it is 
the abstract passivity of body. But, as we have seen, 
there is, according to Leibniz, no such thing as absolute 
passivity. Passive resistance, impenetrability, ineiiia, 
always invoh’^e a real force, a tendency to action, though 
that tendency may adtually be prevented by counteracting 
forces from realizing itself at this or thaf particular 
moment. Passivity is the limit of activity, as rest is the 
limit of motion. Every material body, then, is ultimately 
something more than dvrirviria -f* extension. It is essen- 
tially force or energy, activity of some kind. And 

* De Aninui BntUrruvn (1710), $ i (E. 46a a ; O. vii. 3a8). 

* Upitiiola ad Bierlingium (1710) (£. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 

INTRODUCTION 

96 

inasmuch as this force is a potential activity, a force 
which tends to realize itself, it is automatic or sponta* 
neous, it contains within itself the principle of its future 
conditions, it is an Entelechy. Thus every actual 
inatt^nul body is materia secundUy from which materia 
prima is merely a mental abstraction \ Every complete 
substance is matma prima 4- Entelechy, L e. passivity -f 
iictivity. 

Now while wa/majpWwa, being abstract passivity, is not 
1o be r(>‘garded as iml substance, materia sccanda, inasmuch 
as it is matter and is therefore extended and infinitely 
divisible, is, on the other Imnd, not to be confounded 
with individual substance. Materia scciinda must con- 
tain an entelechy, but is not identical with it. Alateria 
sevunda is an aggregate of things : it is to be conceived as 
iiuaiititativo, consisting oi partes extra i>arte, and is thus 
<[uite distinct from substance, which must be conceived 
as striving force, i. 0 . under the relation of means to end*. 

* Cf. Kjnsida ad 1L (\ Wagntrum (1710) (E. 466 a; G. vii. 529) : 
‘Th« nctivo principlt^ it) not attributed by mo to baro nmtlor or 
wah'tia pinna, which is inoi’ely pn«Bivo and coiiBiHts sololy in dvri- 
ivttia and extension ; hut to body or clothed matter or materia 
Hi'cumlay whi('l) containn in addition a primary cntolcchy or active 
principh^ . . . The n-sisianco of hare matter is not activity, but mere 
passivity, inaMnuch as it has dyrirvma or iinjHmotrability, by which 
indeed it n'MisU that which wtiuld penetrate it. but does not redact 
unless it has in addition an elastic force. This elastic force must 
be derived from motion, and thus also from an active force super- 
addisl to matter.’ Also De JjKia Xatura (1698), § 12 (E. 158 b; G. 
iv. 51a ■ : * Matter is understood as either materia fteiyunda or materia 
jnima ; materia setinida is indeed a complete suhstaiico, hut not a 
nioroly passive one ; fnateria ptima is merely passive, but is not 
a complete substance ; and there must further he added to it a soul, 
or form analogous to a soul, ivr^Xixua i) vpdrrrf^ that is a certain 
etTort or primary force of acting, which' itself is an indwelling law, 
imprinted by Divine deerve.' It siiould be noted that the expres- 
sion * substance, ’ as here applied to materia secuftday is not to be 
taken too strictly. Materia secunda is not so ipuch mbaiantia aa su&- 
.'ttafUiata, This is more clearly brought out in Leibniz's later 
writings. See Monadology, note a, and this Introduction, Pait iii. 
p. 98 note. 

'' Cf. Lettre d litanond (1715) (E. 736 a; G, iii. 657): ‘Strictly 
speak tUg, matorm pnma is not a substance, but something in- 
(K>mplete. And materia secunda ^as, for instance, the organic body) 
is not a substance, but for another reason : namely, l^cauae it is 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 97 

In short, as materia pritna is abstract passivity, the limit 
of activity, and is thus in reality merely the hnitude or 
imperfection of a Monad, so materia semnda is mere 
abstract quantity, the limit of intension, and is thus a 
mere phenomenon of that which is essentially one and 
indivisible, of the ‘soul' which the body ‘ contains *.* 
Accoidingly every created Monad or simple substance 
has materia prima in so far as it is not entirely active ; or, 
in other words (since activity and passivity are ndative 
terms), every created Monad must have materia prima, 
bncauso its activity is not entirely realized, but is in part 
potential, because it is not actus purp^s, activity without 
passivity. ^ Materia prima is essential to every entelechy 
and can never be separated from it, since it completes it, 
and is itself tho passive potentiality of the whole complete 
substance. . . . God . . . cannot deprive a substance of 
materia prima; for He would thus make it wholly pure 
activity [purus aCfus\ which lie Ilimsolf alono is’*’.’ 
Materia scrunda, on the other hand, is not necessarily 
attached to any specific entelechy or individual substance. 
It is a relationship of Monads imperfectly conceived by uw 
as a group of things which may vary from time to time, 
and which, as a matter of fact, is constantly varying. 
Leibniz compares it to a river *. ‘ God, by His absolute 

power, may be able to deprive substanco of materia 
6ecunda\* *In fact, it is not by itself anything real, but is 
merely the relation of certain Monads, regarded abstractly 
as a temporary aggregation or collocation. The onh/ real 
existences are the Monads, which are purely spiritual, 
non-spatial existencoif, but in relatively confused or 

a coLleotion of severnl substnnees, like a pond full of or n flock 
of aheep ; and contsequontly it is what is called unum per (H'cufenti : in 
a word, a pheDomeiion. Aresl substance (such as an animal) in 
oomposed of an immaterial soul and an organic body ; and it is the 
combination of these two that is called unum per ee* 

* Cf. this Introduction, Part iii. pp. 76 sqq. 

* BpiMa ad Des Boesrm (1706) (£. 440 b ; G. ii. 394). 

* Ibid. (1 706) (£. 436 b ; G. ii. 306;. Of. p. 1 14 and MonadUogy^ §71. 

* Ibid. (1706) <£. 440 b ; G. ii. 395^ 

H 

INTRODUCTION 

98 

abstract and imperfect thought, (i.e. in 'sense' or 
' imagination ’ as distinct from thought proper) we are 
presented with the phenomena of things variously 
grouped in space, and these groups, qua groups, are 
materia sccunda \ 

Phenomena hene fundata. 

As materia secunda is always a mere aggregate, while 
yet GV4^ry aggregate pre-supposes as its reality an in- 
divisible simple substance or soul, such aggregates or 
groups of things, together with their powers, acts, and 
affections, are sometimes described by Leibniz as well- 
foundod phenomena {phenomena hene fundata). They are 

* Cf. Leftre a Aniauld (1686) (G. ii. 75, 76) : * In my opinion, our 
body in itH<»lf (setting aside the aoul), or the Cmiavet^ can bo called 
one Hubstatice only by a wrong une of torma, like a machine or 
a boa]) of sioncfl, whicli are only beiiigH by aggrogation ; for regular 
or irregular arrangement has nothing to do with unity of sub- 
Htaiice. ... 1 hold that a marble ])aveinent is probably only 
like a lieap of stonoR, and thus cannot pass for only one sub- 
Ntance, but is a colloction of several. For suppoao there are two 
stoncH — for example, the diamond of the Grand Duke and that of 
the Great Mogul — we might give them both, in respect of their 
value, one and the same collective name, and wo might say that 
they are one pair of diamonds, although they are actually far 
distant from one another. But it will uot be said that those 
diamonds compose one substance. Now more or less make no 
difference here. Accordingly, if we bring them nearer one 
another, and even make them touoh one ariotlior, they will be 
none the lunre united in substance ; and although, after they had 
been brought into contact, wo were to join to them some other 
body in such a way as to prevent them 8«?parating again — for 
instance, if wo were to set tiiem in one ring — all thot would make 
of them only what is called unum per accidens. For it is as by 
aecLdeiit that, they artt compelled to sharu in the same motion. 
I hold then tliat a marble pavement is not one concrete [accamplui] 
HUbsUince, any more than would bo tho^ water of a pond with all 
the fish it holds, even although all the water and the fish were 
froren together; or than a flock of sheep, in which the sheep 
should be supposed to be so bound together that they could only 
walk in step, and that one could not be touched without all tlie 
otheni crying out. There would be as much difference between 
a subsUnoe and such a being as licdwoen a man and a community, 
like a ^)eop1e, army, society or college, which are moral beings and 
in which there is something imaginary and created by our mind. 
Unity of substance requires an indivisible and naturally inde- 
structible concrete [oci'omp^M] being, since the notion of suoh a 
being includes all that ia ever to happeii to it/ 

dtATEMEXT OF LEIBNIz’S PHILOSOPHY OO 

* ^ 

bene Jundaia in contrast with the phenomena of dreams 
or visions, which are phenomena pure and simple, not 
liaving any proper bond or connexion. Phenomena bene 
/undata may be distinguished from the phenomena of 
dreams, inasmuch as the former are vivid, multiplex (i.e. 
varied in their relations and capable of a variety of tests 
or observations\ and congruous or consistent both w'ith 
themselves and with the general course of life or 
experience, which we find in other phenomena. The last 
of these tests is the most satisfactory, especially when it 
is 8upi>orted by the testimony of other pec^do who have 
also applied it. ‘ But the most powerful proof of the 
reality of phenomena (a proof which is, indeed, sufficient 
by itself) is success in pn'dicting future phenomena 
fiom those which are past and present, whether the re- 
diction be founded upon the success, so far, of a reason or 
hypothesis, or upon custom so far observed In short, 
phenomena bene ftmdaia are distinguished from illusions, 
inasmuch as they are not merely separate and discon- 
nected, but held together in a system so that their ante- 
cedents may be traced and their consequents deduced 
And Leibniz goes so far as to add: — ‘Although this 
entire life were said to be nothing but a dream, and the 
visible world nothing but a phantasm, 1 should call this 
dream or phantasm real enough, if we were never 
deceived by it,' when we use our reason rightly®.* On 

‘ De Mode di^ingiuifuii phenomeiia realm ab imaginai-ih (E. 444 a ; 
G. vii. 330). 

* Can this he reconciled with the view that materia serunda is 
a mere aggregate or colIcK’tiori ? 

* Loc, cit. Of course it must be remembered that tfio 

attributed by Leibniz to phtmfjmma bene /undata is entirely relative 
to the illuaoriness of ‘pure' phenomena, such as wo have in 
dreams, and is not to be confounded with the reality of substjince. 
Cr. Nmiveatix JEtutaiSf bk. iv. ch. s, ( 14 (£. 344 b ; G. v. 355 ' : * The 
truth of the things of sense consists only in tho cfmnexian of the 
phenomena, which must have its reason [ground], and that is 
what distingaiBhes them from dreams ; but the truth of our 
eristence and of the cause of phenomena is of another kind, 
because it eetablisbes substances. . . . The connexion of the pbeno- 
mmia which establishes tndke in regard to sense-objeeta 

H 2 

TOO 

INTRODUCTION 

several occasions Leibniz uses the rainbow as a simile by 
which to illustrate what he means by a phenomenon bene 
fundatiim\ Ho simply mentions it without explanation; 
but wo may suppose him to have meant that the rainbow 
is the type of a phenomenon bene fundatumj inasmuch as, 
l»oing merely colour, it exists as a rainbow only for those 
who actually behold it, and is thus a mere appearance, 
wliile, being an appearance which results from certain 
physical conditions of light and moisture, it has a ground 
or cause, it is tho plienomenon of something and is there- 
fore hene fundatum and not a pure phantasm or illusion. 

Thus, in general, tho qualities of matter, whether 
srcondaiy, as colour, smell, sound, &c., or primary, as 
extension, iigiire, and motion, are phenomena bene /undata. 
Takni by theinsolvos, as qualities of a matter which has 
no ‘soul,’ they are not real but merely subjective. But 
their order or connexion implies a principle of order (i.e. 
a soul), and accordingly they are confused (i.e. not fully 
analyzed) representations, perceptions, or symbols of 
that which, expressed distinctly, is real substance. 
Ultimately (‘metaphysically’ as Leibniz would say) tliey 
are nnlucible to non-spatial porceptioiis or appetitions of 
Monads ; but in tho form in which they are given to us 

oiiUido f»f UH In verifiod by iiioaiiN of truths 0/ rmsm ; as tho phono- 
moiiii of optica aro explained by geometry. Yet it must bo 
admitted that this certitude ia not of the highest degree. . . , For it 
is not iiiipoaaible, oietaphyaically H{)eakiiig, that there is a consecu- 
tive dream lasting os long as the life of a man ; but that is a thing 
as contrary to reason as would l>e tho fiction that a book t^ould 
bo formed by chance through throwing down typo in confusion.' 
Cf. liocke, Kssriy^ bk. iv. ch. a, ( 14 ; Fra.aor'8 ed., vol. ii. pp. 185 
sqq., with Prof. Fraser’s and also lys lilies on pp. 33a and 333. 

‘ Of. Epistola ad iMs Bossfs ^,1715) 728 b ; C 4 . ii. 504) ; * I pi^er 

to say that not substances but species* [i.e, sense- qualities j 
^nmiain, and that these are not illusory, like a dream or like 
a sword pointing towards us out of a concave mirror, or as 
Dr. Fauatus ate a cartful of hay, but true phenomena, that is, in 
the sense in which a rainbow or a mock sun is a sx>ecies, indeed 
as, according to the Cartesians and in truth, colours are species.* 
Als^ Kpisdota ad Jk V^older (1706) (U. it. 98 1, note) : * Extension 
mass and motion, are no more tilings than the image in a mirror 
or the rainbow in a cloud, . . . They exist p 6 it^ rather than to 
use the expression of Demooritus ’ (p. a8a, note). 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZS PHILOSOPHY lOI 

by our senses or imagination (which perceive things 
confusedly) they are mei*e connected or orderly pheno- 
mena, abstractions or incomplete things, which pre- 
suppose souls or Monads. 

Space and Thnc. 

In one of the Letters to Arnauld^^ Leibniz s|waks of 
sjmce and lime as phenomena hene fundata. Probably, 
however, he did not intend this statemont to be very 
rigidly interpreted, and there is much value in the view 
of Erdmann that space and time are to bo regarded as 
purely ideal, cniia nuntalia^^, while extended bodies and 
actual events iii time are eniia semimentalia ^ or phenomena 
hene fiindata. . In any case, wdiat Leibniz desires specially 
to maintain is that sjmee and time are not real subshinces 
nor attributes of real substances. They are nothing but 
orders or arrangements of co-existing and successive 
Ihings or phononiena. Individual substances or Monads, 
which are the sole realities, arc» not to be conceived as 
paties extra paitcs: the central thought of Leibniz’s 
philosophy is that this quantitative aspect of things 
should ho treated is subordinate, as not belonging to the 
essence of real things. llenc(^ space is to be regarded, 
not as the mutual exclusiveness of real substancos, but as 
siinjdy the order of co existence pre-supposed in the 
aggregation or grouping of phenomenal things, while 
time is the order of sequence of phenomena. ‘Time, 
extension, motion, and the continuous in general, in the 
way in which they are considered in luathematies, are 
only ideal things ; tfiat is to say, things whi^h exju'ess 
}>08sibilities, just as numbers do. Hobbes has even 
defined space as phantasma cxisteniis. Bui, to speak 
more exactly, extension is iha order ot possible co existences^ 
as time is the order of possibilities which are inconsistent, 
but which have nevertheless some connexion. Thus 

* G. ii. ii8. ® H{$t. ofPhUowphy 'Eng. <r.), vol. ii. p. 185. 

^ Of. £|n«fo{a ad Dts Bo$$^ (1708; (E. 436 b ; 0 . ii. 306;.. 

102 

INTKODUCTION 

extension relates to simultaneous thin|gs or things which 
exist together, time to those which are incompatible and 
which are nevertheless all conceived as existing, and it is 
this that makes them successive. But space and time 
taken together constitute the order of the possibilities of 
a wliole univei'se, so that these orders (that is space and 
time) square not only with what actually exists but also 
with whatever might be put in its place, as numbers are 
indifferent to whatever can be res nurncrata Thus 
space does not mean any pa WicwZar situation of bodies, nor 
time any particular succession of phenomena. Space is 
simply the indefinitely applicable relation of co-existence, 
while time is the indtjfinitely applicable relation of 
succession or order of successive positions. In each case 
the things or jdienomena related might have been other 
than they are, and thus the orde!*b are orders of possi- 
bi/Hics. But in neither case is the order actual apart from 
some ordered or rcdatod things. There is no actual empty 
space or empty time. These are abstractions, harmless 
or j)ossihly useful wlieii recognized as abstractions, but 
hurfful if tliey are regarded as actual things. 

Leibniz’s disproof of the iiidepondoiit reality of space 
and time is directly based by him upon the principle of 
sulFicieiit reason. *1 say, then, that if space was an 

* lU^plfqut^ auj- Jitlfh'xioHs de Bayle (1702) (E. 189b; G. iv. 568). 
Tlio trnnsliitiuii is fruin Oerharilt'8 tt^xt. Cf. //i"** Lcttre a Clarke* 
4 (Clarkf's tr.) (E. 75a a ; G. vii. 363): ‘I liold space to bo somo- 
iliing relative, as tiino is : 1 hold it to l>e an order of co-exiat^ 

ances, as iiiiut i8 an order For spaco denotes, in terms 

of possibility, an order of things which exist at the same time, eon* 
sideretl ns existing togcdlior ; without inqgiiring into their particular 
manner of existing. And wliou many things are seen together 
one pu'ooives that order of things among tbeinaelves.' The corre* 
spoudence betwcHUi Leibniz and Clarice is mainly devoted to this 
question of tho meaning of space and time. Clarke endeavoured 
to defend (he view of Newton that inOnite space is real, and is to 
be regarded as u kind of sensoriuin of God or as His omnipresent 
}M)rception of things. Leibniz attacks not merely this particular 
view, but all other theories which make apace real, as, for instance, 
thosS which confound infinite space with the Immensity of Qod 
or with any other of His attributes. Cf. Fraser's ed. of Locke's Esaay^ 
vol. i. pp. 359, a6o. See also Exj^anatim qf the New Spsleiii, 1, note. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNlz’s PHILOSOPHY I03 

absoltiie being them would something happen for wliich 
it is impossible there should be a sufficient reason, which 
is against my axiom. And I prove it thus. Space is 
something absolutely uniform ; and, without the things 
placed in it, one point of space does not absolutely difl'er 
in any respect whatsoever from another point of spaesL 
Now from hence it follow's (supposing space to be some- 
thing in itself, besides the order of bodies among tliom- 
sclves) that ’tis impossilde there should be a retvson why 
God, presei'ving the same situations of bodies among 
themsolvos, should have placed them in space after one 
certain particular manner, and not otheiwise ; why every- 
thing was not jdaced the quite contrary way : for instance, 
by changing eiist into west. But if space is nothing else 
but that order of relation, and is nothing at all without 
bodies but tlie poasibility of placing them, then those two 
states, the one such as it now is, the oilier suppofiwHl to 
be the quite contrary way, would not at all differ from 
one another. Their difference, therefore, is only to be 
found in our chimerical supposition of the reality of space 
in itself. But in truth the 0110 would exactly be the same 
thing as the other, they being absolutely indiscernible ; 
and consequently there is no room to inquire after a reason 
of the preference of the one to the other. The case is tlie 
same with respect to time. Sup[>osing any one should 
ask why God did not croiito everything a year sooner, and 
the same person should infer from Uieiicu that God has 
done something concerning which Tis not possible thffro 
should be a reason why He did it so and not otherwise ; 
fbe answer is, that His inference would be right if time 
anytliing distinct from things existing in time. For 
it would be impossible there should be any reason why 
things should be applied to such particular instants, rather 
than to others, their succession continuing the same. But 
then the same argument proves that instants, considered 
without the things, are nothing at all, and that they 
consist only in the successive order of things; whicli 

INTRODUCTION 

104 

order remaining the same, one of the two states, namely, 
that of a supposed anticipation, w^ould not at all differ, 
nor could be discerned from the other which now is^’ 

Accordingly, Leibniz’s theory of space and time may 
be suiTimurized thus. Phenomena are hene fundata in 
|!h*oportion as they are connected together. Space ai^d 
time are oi’ders or systems of connexion between pheno- 
mena, the bond being co-existence in the one case, 
succession in the othtsr. Apart from the phenomena, 
space and time are mere abstractions. Thus pure space 
and pure time iu*e at two removes from reality, for 
the tilings which are in space and time are not Monads 
but phenomena. Y('t ultimately pUeieimeiia are imperfect 
realities, unanalyzed ])erce]>tions. They liavo a basis in 
simple substance. Thus there mus’t be something non- 
s]>atiul and non-temporal, of which space and time are 
the impeiioct expressions. And in a letter to Schulenburg 
(1698) Leibniz, after defining space and time in his usual 
way, says that ‘ in themselves \pcr ,sy| they have no reality 
beyond the Divine Immensity and Eternity 

‘ ///"•* heVre, h i'huke^ 5, 6 (Cl!irk€»*M tr.) (E. 75a n ; O. vii. 364). 
]n jiiiswer to tiiis, Cliirko, whilo jmjfessodly admitting the priii- 
ol* sufflriont rc‘as<iii, really doiiieH its validity l>y maintniiiing 
that thit inoro Avill of (lod is to be rountcd as a sii^ciciit n^asoii, 
and that therefore Loibni/Zs application ctf the )>ririciplo does not 
prove his euMe. Of. IV”** Ldin: h Oarhr, 18 ' E. 756 h ; U. vii. 374) : 
* Spare being unirorni, there eau be neither any external nor 
internal reason by ^vliich to distinguish its parts and to make 
any cheiet* among them. For any external roii.son to discern 
bt'tueen them can only be grounded upon some internal one. 
Otherwise we should discern what is iiidisoerniblo, or choose 
without di>corijing. A will without reason would bo the ‘ chance* 
of the KpK'ureans. A Oud, who should \ict by such a will, would 
bo a Ood only in iiaiiio.’ 

With regard to the general question, cf. V”** Lettrc a (llarht^ 6a (E. 
771 b ; Cl. vii. 406) : ‘1 don't say that matter and space are the 
Home thing. 1 only say, there id no s|)ace where there is no 
matter, and that space in itself is not an absidute reality. Space 
and matter differ ns time and motion. However these tilings, 
though different, are in.se}>arable.* 

* Math. vii. 2143. For Leibniz s account of the origin of 
uui* idea of space, see Appendix B, p. aoa. 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZS PHILOSOPHY IO5 

Activity and Passivity of the Monads, Mutucd h^fluenve 
of Substances, Cause and Effect 

So far, then, from space being, as Descartes held, the 
essence of matter, it is a purely ideal relation which we 
inenUilly construct between things or phenomena whoae 
ultimate reality or essence is not quantitative, and is 
consequently not material *. But, as we have seen, every 
one of the real substances (the Monads), each of which is 
the essence or reality of a portion of matter, contains that 
wliicli, taken abstract 1 }% may 1)0 described as materia 
prifna. Eveiy created Monad is both active and passive ; 
for there is no such tiling as absolute jiaasivity, and pure 
activity belongs to (lod alone. As passive tho Monad 
has materia prinia, as active it is entelechy. Thus every 
soul lias a l>ody ; there is no such thing as an absolutely 
disembodied spirit, unless it he tho Spirit of (Jod, And, 
on the other hand, more soulless body has no real exist- 
ence ; it is an abstraction. The world is active, living 
through and through, even in its infinitesimal parts. It 
is compact of souls. 

Now this activity and passivity of tho Monads do not 
mean that any Monad exerts a real iniluence outside of 
itself or receives any n»al iin]>rt*ssion from a substance 
external to it. The relations between the Monads ar<* 
purely ideal, and their activity and passivity are altogether 
internal. As wo have seen, a Monad is in itself ]>aHsive in 
so far as its ])(*rcei)tions are relatively obscure or confuseil, 
active in so far as they are relatively clear and distinct. 
And similarly, as ca^jh Monad perceives or rejjieseiils th<; 
whole universe from its own point of view, oAe Monad is 
said to be passive in relation to anotluT in so far as certain 
}K)rceptions in the former are obscure or confused in com- 
parison with the corresponding perceptions in the lathu* ; 

* In Hpite, however, of ihi» reduction hpaccj, inatlj-r, Ac., to 
confused perception, Leibniz continues to un<' the language of 
those whosjxiak of them as ronl, comparing himself to a Copernicaii 
who Hf»caks of sunrise. Cp. IVuxxitcee, $ 65 (.K. 521 a ; O. vi, 138). 

I 06 INTRODUCTION 

while, on the other hand, the Monad whose perceptions 
are clearer and more distinct is said to be so far active in 
relation to the other or (ideally, of course) to act upon 
It *. Thus, as we have already seen, the pre-established 
hannony is tlie basis of the inter-relation of the Monads 
and of, their mutual changes*. Further, as clear and 
distinct perceptions are simply the unfolding (explication) 
or explanation of the corresponding more confused per- 
ceptions, the action of one substance upon another is to 
be regarded as meaning that the active substance, in so 
far as it is active, contains within itself (or, simply, is) the 
explanation of the passive substance, in so far as it is 
passive. Substances acting upon others are, accordingly, 
those ill which the reason of the changes in the others 
maj^ be read more distinctly than in those in which the 
changes actually occur Thus the connexion between 
cause and effect in different substanec^s is a purely ideal 
reflation, a harmony of internal changes and operations, 
implying no physical influence of one substance upon 
another. And, furtluT, the cause of any change is not its 
obscure antecedent nor any power or activity prior in 

' Of. SpiriozaVs viows of action and passion in Ethics, Part iii, 
ospocially Dofs. i and a, and Props, i, a, and 3. AIho Ethics^ 
Part V. Prop. 40, Corollary. 

* Of. p. 40 ; HOC also Left re a Arnaufd (1690) (G. ii. 135 ; E. 107 b^, in 
wliich Loibniz Kivcrt a summary of liis position: ‘There must be 
every wboro in body substances incUvisiblo, uubiu'ii and iinporish- 
able, having something eor responding to souls. . . . E:ieh of these 
substances contains in its own nature ^Ur/jem confinuaUoms aei-iei 
m*arwn opmiHo 7 ium (the piinciplo of succosHion of the series of its 
c>wn operations] and all that has happened and shall happen to 
it. All its actions come from its own iniior being [/onfls]y except 
its dependence upon God. Each substance expresses the entire 
universe, hut one does so more distinctly than another, and each 
expresses it more esjmcially with regard to certain things and 
according to its own ptiint of view. Tlio union of soul with body, 
and indeed the operation of one substance upon another, consists 
only in tin* perfect mutual accord of substances, definitely estab- 
lished through the order of their first creation, in virtue of which 
each substanoo, following its own laws, agrees with the rest, 
meeting their demands ; and the operations of the one thus follow 
or acconipitny the operations or change of the other.* 

^ Of. M<madvh)ffy, §§49 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY I07 

time to the effect ; the true cause is always the reason Or 
explanation^ the distinct as opposed to the confused per- 
ception, whatever may be the time-order of the events or 
phenomena \ 

Mechanical and final Causes. Soul and Body. 

Every substance, as wo have seen, consists of soul and 
body. And the soul, being on the one hand the relatively 
distinct perception of the substance, and on the other 
hand its activity, is the final cause of the substance, the 
end for which it is, the self-development of its nature. 
It must bo conceived under the notion of Becoming, as 
a thing whose essence it is to move towards an end. It 
cannot, therefore, be adequately described l)y purely 
mechanical conceptions. It has something more than 
a static self-identity ; its unity unfolds itself in the series 
of its changes. Its reality is thus not determincul merely 
by the principle of contradiction, taken as a principle of 
pure or abstract self-consistency. The body .of every 
substance, on the other hand, i. e. its matter, its confused 
perception, its passivity, is the physical or mechanical 
cause of the substance. Being entirely aV>stract, and in 
itself a bare possibility, body may by itself be adec^uatoly 
described by mechanical conceptions, under the principle 
of contradiction. Thus we may have an abstract science 
of physics by whicli the phenomena of abstract maiU*r 
aro explained on purely mechanical principles, that is, ns 
a system of physical or efficient causes. But if we wouW 
explain the concrete Reality even of material substance w'c 
must employ dynamical rather than mcjchankal concoi>- 
tions, or, in other words, we must regard the world os 
ultimately and essentially a system of final causes, a 
system W’^hich is the expression, not of an indifTereiit all- 
powerful Will, but of an all-pow'erful Will which knows 
and decrees the best 

‘ See Appendix C, p. 304. 

* Cf. Bpiatola ad Bierlin^um (1711) (E. 677 b ; O. vii. 501) ; ‘You 

io8 

INTRODUCTION 

C. OKQAKISM. 

Organic and inorganic Bodies, Simple and compotmd 
Substances, Dominant Monad, 

The notion of body existing by itself and that of soul 
existing by itself are results of confused or imperfect 

uttk about 8pi ritual, or rather incorporeal things, nnd you say that 
we Meo the mechanical arrangement of Die parts but not the 
pHnciploa of the mechanism. True ; but, when we see motion also, 
we understand from this [what we see] the cjiuse of motion, or 
force. The source of mechanism is primary force [vis pnmittva], 
hut the laws of motion, according to which impulse.s or 

derivative forces arise out of the primary force, is-suo from the 
perception of good and evil, or from that which is most fitting. 
Thus it is that efficient causes are dt)penderit U])on final causes, 
and spiritual things are in their nature prior to material things, 
as also they are to us prior in knowledge, becau.'^e we jxjrcoive 
more immediately [mfmiw] the mind (as it is nearest to us) 
than the body ; and this indeed IMato and Descartes have 
observed.* Also Ldtre d Kenmid (1714) (E. 702 a; U. iii. 607); 
*I havo found that most of tho philosophical M*cts are right in 
a good part of what they inaiiitnin, but not to the same extent in 
what tiiey deny. Tho Formalists, such as the Platonists and 
Aristotelians, are right in seeking the source of things in final 
and formal causes. But they €)rr iii neglecting efficient and 
material causes and in inferring (as did Mr. Henry Mure in 
England, nnd some oth«*r Platonist-s) that there an» phenomena 
which euniiot be explained on mechanical principles. Bui, on 
tho other hand, tho Materialists, or those who hold exclusively 
to the inecliuuical philosophy, err in setting aside metaphysical 
4‘onsidorations and in trying to explain everything by that which 
is dependoiit on tho i magi nation. I tliittei* my.self that I have 
discovered the harmony of the diffenuit sy.stems and Jiavo seen 
that both sides are right, provided they do not clash with one 
another: that in the phenomena of nature every’tbing happens 
mechanically and at th(« same time metaphysically, but that the 
source of the mechanical it* in the metaphysical.' Also Lettre d 
Arnauld (1686) {G. ii. 77) : ‘We are obligt^^l to admit many tilings 
of whicli our knowledge is not sufficiently clear and distinct. 
I hold that the knowledge of exUuision is very much los.s so* 
[than that of sub.stantiiil Forms, of which he has been speaking], 
* witness the nunarkable ditflculties as to tho comiKisition of the 
(M)ntinuou3 ; and it may even be said that bodies have no definite and 
precise shape^ because of the actual sub-du'ision of their parts [i. o. thoir 
sub-division ad So that bodies would without doubt be 

fiumo//ung mereiy imaginary and apparent if there uxrc nothing but matter 
and its modi/icatiofis. Yet it is of no use to mention the unity, 
notion, or substantial Form of bodies, when we are explaining the 
particular plienomena of nature, as it is of no use for matlie* 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY IO9 

perception. The world consists solely of Monads, each 
of which is a concrete unity of soul and body, ofenteleohy 
and materia prima. Thus nature is throughout living ; 
there is nothing really inorganic *. What, then, is meant 
by the common distinction between organic or living and 
inorganic or material bodies? In order to answer this 
question, we must consider moi*© fully the nature of 
compound substance. 

While the simple substances alone are real they appear 
as phenomena in groups or aggregates, which we call 
compound substances. Indeed, although in realit// they 
are secondary, compound substances are prior to simple 
substances in the order of knowlrdgr. As phenomena 
they can bo perceived by the senses, while the Monads 
cannot bo so perceived. For tbo Monads are not realh/ 
grouped or combined ; ibo aggregation is purely pheno- 
menal. Now each Monad implied in any such aggregate 
perceives or represents all the phenomena constituting its 
group, since it perceives the whole universe, of which they 
are parts. But as each Monad differs from all the others 
in the degree of <listinctnoss of its perceptions there must 
in each group ho one Monad which represents the group 
more distinctly than does any other Monad implied in it. 
This Monad of most distinct perc<*ption in each compound 
8\ibstanco Leibniz calls the dominant Monad of the 
substance \ It has a formal superiority over the others 

inaticMAns to investigate the difflcultrex da compo/nfionr continm wtion 
they are working at the sioluiion of sr^nio prohlcin. Tliose tliin^^n 
ar<» none the Ions important and worthy of conaiderntioii in their 
own place. All the jrhenomena of bodies can ho explained 
mechanically or by the corpuscular philoaophy, according to certain 
principles of inech.nnics, which are laid down without taking into 
consideration whether there are souls or not ; hut in an ullirnato 
analyKls of the principles of physics, and even of mi^dianics, it 
appears that we cannot explain these principles by modi Heat ions 
of extension alone, and the nature of force already r#M|uiros some- 
thing else.' See also Aniibarharun Physicutty &c. (after 1687; (( 1 . vii. 
343'. I'or Leibniz's account of the development of his views, see 
UUimate OhffintUicn of Things^ Appendix, p. 351. 

*■ Of. Monadology^ $$ ^3 

• Cf. ibid. § 70 ; Prindpfca of Nature and (f 6'rarc, $ 3. 

no 

INTRODUCTION 

implied in the group, though all are really independent. 
Its control or dominance consists solely in the distinctness 
of its perceptions. J ust as cause is not a real influence of 
one substance upon another, but merely the relation of 
activity in the one to corresponding passivity in the other, 
or of distinct to confused perception, so the central 
Monad of any compound substance has no physical con- 
trol over the others, but is dominant because of its 
activity and distinctness. Thus the relation between the 
dominant Monad and the phenomena (implying other 
Monads) which, along with it, constitute a compound 
substance is similar to the relation between the two 
elements, active and passive (entelechy and 'imiicria prima\ 
which together constitute simple substance or the indi- 
vidual Monad. The dominant Monad is the entelochy or 
soul of the compound substance, while its body is a 
phenomenal aggregate, every portion of which in turn 
implies a Monad or soul. But this aggregate is materia 
secunda ; and thus we have simple substance consisting of 
malena pr'ma and entelochy, and compound substance 
consisting of materia secunda and dominant Monad. 

While obsi^rving this analogy, we must not forget the 
essential diflerence* between simple and compound sub- 
stance. The former alone is rtmlly substance ; the latter, 
in so far us it difir<3r8 from the former, is merely sub- 
stance by courtesy or common usage. Sim}>le substance 
is a concrete unity ; compound substance, in so far as it 
is compound (i. e, apart from its soul or dominant Monad, 
which is non-quantitative, and therefore cannot be an 
element in a compound), is merely an aggregate. Thus 
the materia prima or passivity of the individual Monad is 
a name for its confused, undeveloped or implicit nature 
taken abstractly : it is confused perception in the sub- 
stance itself. But the materia secunda or body of the 
compound substance is not confused perception in the 
substance , itself, for the body as compound has no 
perception of its own, as distinct from the perceptions 

STATEMEOT OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY III 

of the simple substances which it implies. Materia 
sectmda^ then, Ls due to the confused perceptions of 
those who observe the compound substances. Thus to 
the eye of God there can be no materia secufida^ no com- 
pound substance ; for in Him there is no confused percep- 
tion. 

The aggregates of phenomena which wo call things or 
extended bodies are thus the result of confused percep- 
tion. And the differences amongst them, which we 
describe by the names of organic, inorganic, iS:c., are 
really differences in their dominant Monads. Without 
a dominant Monad, body would be more indeterminate 
quantity, ‘without form* if not ‘void,* a cliaos of pure 
difference. The dominant Monad is the unity implied 
in a specific or definite aggregate, the unity in virtue of 
which an aggregate or compound is one thing as distinct 
from other things. If the dominant Monad bo a bare 
Monad, with unconscious perceptions, wo call the body 
inorganic. If the dogi*ee of distinctnoss in the perceptions 
of the dominant Monad bo a little higher, wo call the 
body a plant and so on. The organic and the inorganic 
pass imperceptibly into one another, and the degree of 
organic unity possessed by any body is notiiing but the 
degree of distinctness in the perceptions of its dominant 
Monad. Thus the parts of an organism are more closely 
connected, more firmly hold together, than those of an 
inorganic mass, because the dominance of the central 
Monad is greater, more complete (that is to say, its per- 
ception is more distinct), in the case of the former than 
in the case of the latlor. , 

Body without soul, or mere matter considered as inor- 
ganic, that is to say, as an aggregate of parts which have 
no unity other than their aggregation, is unreal. We 
may regard it either as an abstraction from concrete 
substance or (more nearly in Leibniz’s way of thinking) 
as an imperfect perception or representation of concrete 
substance. Nature is organic throughout : no real thing 

1 12 

INTRODUCTION 

i’h completely inorganic: what we call ^inorganic’ is 
really organic in a low degree^ 

The body of every created substance is the point of 
view of its soul. As there is no vacuum in nature, the 
changes in any one body affect every other. Thus in 
every body the whole world i>s represented or expressed. 
Jhit in each dominant Monad, or soul, the aggregate 
forming its particular body is more distinctly represented 
than the rest of the w'orld. Thus each soul perceives or 
represents the universe through the medium of its own 
body. Whil(» it does represent the 'vvhole, it represents 
it in a form in wdiich its own body is more distinct than 
any other ^ The ]>ody is like a spc^eial Ions through 
which the soul sees the universe. This, of course, fol- 
lows from the view that body in general is relatively 
confused perception. For cmch substance represents the 
universe ‘from its owm point of view/ and its point of 
view is simply the degree of eonfusodness (or of distinct- 
ness, for they are* entirely relative) of its perceptional 

* Cr. Antiitniharuii Physicus, Ac. (C. vii. 344): ‘But indeed, 
nitliough all hodioH arc not orpinie, novortludras in all bo<lies, 
including; tlio inor^^nnic, ormini<' bi>dies lie hid. so Unit every ina8<i» 
wliieh to outwnrd appoaranee is formless fn^hs] and iindif- 

feroutiaUsl ia inwanlly not undifTorenI iated hut diver- 

aiflod, an<l yet its vnriely is not eonfused hut orderly. Thua then3 
is everywhere orRanisni, nowhen' chaos, which would bo unbo- 
eoming a wist* (.’retitor.* 

' Moniidolog]!^ § 63; <f. Hpmozn, Ethir% Part ii. Props, rs, 13 
{Scholtum^^ lO ^(^ondl. i\ 36, Ac. 

^ Yet it must not be supposed that tin* soul has perfect knowledge 
of all that takes place in its own body. Of. IMfre u Ar nauld (1687) 
;(l. ii. 90) : ‘ It does not ftdlow that the soul must be perfectly 
coiiHcitMis j s'apcjimoh] of what happens ifi the parts of its body, 
since there are degrees of ivlationship between those parts them- 
.selvos which are ni>t all cxpre-sed equally, any more than external 
things are. The distance of tho latter is balanced by the smallnORs 
or other disadvantages of the former, and Thale.** sees tho stars 
when ho does n4)t see the ditch before his feet.* Also Letfre a 
Ati^nulfi (1687) (O. ii. iia) : ‘In natural perception and in feeling, 
it is eiiougli that what is divisible and material, and is actually 
divitled among several beings, should be expressed or represented 
in one indivisible being or in sut^stance wltich possesses a genuine 
unity. We cannot doubt the possibility of such a representation 
of several thinga in one only, since our soul gives us an instance 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY II3 

Changes in compofund Substances, Development and 
Envelopment, 

Every compound substance is in constant change. No 
created Monad, as we have seen, can ever be entirely at 
rest; each, in virtue of its appetition, is continually 
either unfolding (developing) itself (i. e. passing from 
confused to nioi-e distinct perception), or enfolding (en- 
veloping) itself (i, e. passing from distinct to more con- 
fused perception). And thus, as the dominance of any 
dominant Monad consists solely in the degree of distinct- 
ness of its perception, the relations of formal dominance 
and subordination, which constitute a compound sub- 
stance, must be continually varying in particular cases. 

*'f it. But tluH ropvi'Hentiition is aooompunied in t)io rntionul soul 
by L'OiiHciousnt^sH, and thun it is called thc>uf;ht. Nf>w tliis expres- 
sion occurs fvorywhorc, bccau.NO all substaiuM'S arc in sympathy 
with one another, and each re«*oivcs sonic proportional chan^‘, 
coire8r>ondinj? to the least change^ which happens anywhere in the 
universe, though this change is more or less l)h^e^vnhlo, according 
as (dher bodies or their actions have more or loss relation to ours. 
And I think that M. IX*sCHrtes hiinstdf would have admitted this, 
for he would doiihtless allow that, hociiuse of the continuity and 
divisihility of all matter, the l€*aht motion lias its effect upon 
neighbouring bodies, and consfMpiently upon om* body after another 
ful infinitum^ the effect proportionally diminishing. Thus our body 
must he in some way affected by the changes in all others. Now 
to all the motions of our body there corresjwnd certain more cu- less 
confused pc^rcoptions or thoughts of our soul. Hence the soul also 
will have some thought of all the motions in the uiiivei-so, and, in 
my opinion, every other soul or substance will have some ]>ercep- 
tiori or expression of them. It is true that we are not distinctly 
conscious of nil the motions of our body, as, for instance, that of 
the lymph ; but this may ho compared with the fact that 1 iiuist 
have .some perception ot th© motion of each wave on th«» sliore, 
in order that I may be c<inscious [ajwrcei'o/r] of that wbicb results 
from th© totality of them,* namely the great noise that I Jienr when 
*‘lose to the sea. Thus also we experience some corifuscid rt-sulf 
of all th© motions which take place iii us ; hut being accustomed 
to this iaternal motion, w© are not distinctly and reflectively 
conscious of it, except when there is a considerahlo change in it, 
as at the beginning of an illness. . . . Now since w« are conscious 
of other bodies only through the relation they liave to our own, 

I was right in saying that the soul expresses b<ist what belongs 
to our own body. Thus wo know the siitellites <if Saturn or of 
Jupiter, only in consequence of a motion which takes place in our 
eyes.* Cf. Spinoza, Ethics, Part ii. props. 34 and 37. 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

II4 

The phenomena which make up the body of a compound 
substance must be continually changing according as the 
dominant Monad rises or falls in perceptive rank. No 
dominant Monad has a changeless body ; because of its 
own variations its body ‘is in a perpetual flux like a 
river, and parts are entering into it and passing out of 
it continually And there is endless room for variation ; 
because each compound substance is made up of other 
compound substances (each with its dominant Monad), 
and tliese again are made up of others ad infinitum^. 
Thus some or all of the things which at one time form 
an inorganic body may, in new relations, become parts 
of an organic body and vice versa. And the size of any 
body, belonging to a particular dominant Monad, may 
increase or decrease indefinitely. 

JUJetamoiphosis, Birth and Death, 

Accordingly the change in compound substance of 
eveiy kind is always metamorphosis ratlier than metem- 
j»sychosis\ The fundamental element in every com- 
pound substance is the dominant Monad, and the matter 
or body of tlie substance is continually changing by a 
gradual removal and ad<litioii of parts. It is the body 
which bit by bit transfers itself fi’om one soul to another. 
There is no such thing as the sudden transference of 
a soul from one body to another entirely new’ body. 
Such a transference w^ould involve a sudden or discon- 
tinuous change in the soul itself, which is impossible. 

* § 71- Lotze eorapart*» tho lift* of tho part^ to 
a throng of travolha'». MtcrocosintiSf bl^. iii. ch. 4, § 4 (Eng. Tr., 
vol. i. p. 368). 

* Cf. Kpistola ad Btmoulltum (1698' (G. Math. iii. 560 : ^ I would 
rt'adily allow that thcro are animals (in the ordinary sen»e) in- 
comparably greater than oum; and I have aomotimes aaid in jest 
that there may be some system similar to ours, which is the watch 
of a very great giant.* AIjhi Monadoiogy, §§66 sqq ; cf. Spinoza, Ethic»l 
Part ii. I^mma vii. Scholium. 

^ Cf. Epiatola ad BenmUlium (1698) (G. Math. iii. 561) : ‘I do not 
admit into a now animal, but fitTafjL 6 p^ejctSf aC^ifats, 

of the Mime animal.* 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZ 'S PHILOSOPHY II5 

Though, on the one hand, no soul is limited to any 
partioular phenomenal aggregate as its body, yet on the 
other hand, no soul can be completely and instantaneously 
severed from its body and transferred to another. Again, 
the. birth and the death of any organism are simply forms 
of this metamorphosis *. There is no absolute birth, that 
is to say, no direct and immediate implanting of soul in 
body, and there is no absolute death, no complete sever- 
ance of soul from body. All the Monads which constitute 
the sole reality of a compound substance are alike unborn 
{ing&nerabU) and imperishable”. They proceed directly 
from God : they are produced by ‘ fulgiiratioiis of Ilis 
Divinity’.’ None of them comes out of anything else. 
Thus the phenomena we call ‘ birth * and ‘ death ’ are 
transformations, cluinges in the relations between Monads. 
When we speak of an animal being born, we mean that 
the body of a microscopic animalcule has enormously 
increased in size, and that its dominant Monad has under- 
gone a corresponding internal change. The animal was 
an animal from the first, even in the microsco])i(i, sper- 
matic st^ige. In being born it Inis merely become an 
animal of a higher kind. In eve ry case the process ol 
birth is, in fact, similar to the change which takes {>]ace 
when a caterpillar develoj)s into a butterfly, * nature being 
wont to reveal in some paiiicular cases her secrets, which 
she conceals on other occiisions\’ Birth is thus indis- 
tinguishable from growth, increase, development. And 
on the other hand, when we speak of an animal as dying, 
wo mean that its bo<ly has decreased in size or been 
broken up into now Compounds. The animal has not 
ceased entirely to exist, but has been contracted so tliat 
it is no longer perceived. Death is thus the same as 
decay, decrease, involution®. There is no spontaneous 

* UonadiiUjgy^ 73 * Cf. rrtit^ip’cs oj Katuro and of (Jrace, ( 6. 

’ Monudologyy § 47 ; tho note to that Hoctiwu. 

* Lcttre d Arnauld (1686) (O. ii. 75). 

* MonadiAogy, $§74 and 75. ,Cf. Jlt^dicee, § 90 ;E. 527 b; G. vi. 
15a), 

1 16 INTRODUCTION 

generation and no passing from life to absolute lifeless- 
ness. For lifelessness is entirely relative : the very dust 
and ashes still have life \ 

Indestructibilitij and Immortality of Souls. 

Accordingly the souls of all living beings are inde- 
structible, while the soul of man is both indestructible 
and immortal, since it not merely persists in existence 
but continues to have consciousness, memory, and such 
other characteristics as constitute personality*. It is 
apparently, in Leibnizes view, impossible for the*mind 
of man to degenerate so as to pass into a lower stage of 
exishmcG. The j)ossession of scdf- consciousness is in- 
alienable. The rational soul thus differs from all souls 
that ar6 beneath it in rank, inasmuch us it does not 
experience such wide variations as those to which the 
latter are subject. In a letter to Ariiauld (1687), Leibniz 
says : ‘ Others, not Iwing able to exphiin otherwise the 

‘ Cf. Epiatola ad Bn-nouUiurn (1698) (d. Muth. iii. 553' : ‘ You argue 
«'ntiroIy to my mind when you 8iiy that cliangos do not tako place 
per mltum. And further. I do not laui^h at your conjecture, but 
1 definiitdy avow that there are in the world animals as much 
larger than ours, as ours are larger than microscopic animalcules. 
Nor does nature know any limit. And again it may bo, nay it 
inuHt be, that in the very smallest grains of dust, and indeed iu 
the least atoms [atomvUtA'] there are worlds not inferior to our own 
in beauty and variety ; nor is there anything to prevent what may 
appear a still more wondc^rful thing, that animals at death are 
transferriHl to such worlds ; for I regard death us nothing else than 
the contraction of an animal.’ 

* (^f. Leifre a Bes Mai^eaux (1711) (E. 676 a; O. vii. 534) : *I am 
of opinion that the souls of men pre-existed, not as rational souls, 
but merely as * Housitive’ [wn.n61ej souls, which attained this higher 
dcgi-eo (.that is to say, reason) only when the man, whom the soul 
is to animate, was conceived. I grant an i^xistonce as old as the 
world not only to tlie s<mls of the lower animals, but in general to 
all Monads or simple substances from which compound phenometm 
result : and I liold tliat each soul or Monad is always accompanied 
by an organic lK>dy, which is nevertheless |>er}>etually changing ; 
so that the body is not the same, though the soul and the animal 
are. These rules apply also to the human Ixxly, but npf>arently in 
a higher degree than to other animals which are known to us ; 
since man must oontinue to be, not merely an animal but also 
a person and a citizen of the City of Gr>d, which is the most 
perfect possible state, under the most perfect Monarch.’ 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY II7 

origin of forms, huve allowed that they have their be- 
ginning in a real creation. While I grant this creation 
in time only as regards the rational soul, and hold that 
all forms which do not think were created with the 
world, they believe that this creation happens every day 
when the smallest worm is engendered*.’ There is, 
then, something comparable to a special creation in the 
case of every mind or rational soul, although this creation 
is practically no more than the promotion of a Monad 
to self-consciousness. ‘Minds are not subject to 

these revolutions [of bodies], or rather these revolutions 
of bodies are subservient to the Divine economy regarding 
minds. God creates them when the time comes and 
detaches them from the body, at least from the earthly 
fr/ro.wVrl body, by death, since they must always retain 
their moral finalities and their recollection in order to bo 
perpetual citizens of that universal all-perfect common- 
wealth, of which God is the Monarch, which can lose 
nono of its members and the laws of which are higher 
than those of bodies 

‘ G. ii. 117. 

* Ijdtre a Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 99\ Cf. $ 91 (E. 527 ; 

G. vi. 152): ‘Thus 1 should think that tlio souls which will somo 
day be human souls have, like of other sjmvuos, heoii in the 

seed and in their ancestors up to Adam, and have consequontly 
existed, since the beginning of things, always in some kind of 
organic body. ... It appears to me also for various reasons prohahlo 
that they tlion existed only as sensitivo or animal souls, endowed 
with perception and feeling, and devoid of reason ; and that they 
remained in this state ti]) to the time of the begt^tting of the man 
to whom they were to belong, but that then tiu'y received rensmi ; 
whether we suppose that there is a natural means of raising 
a sensitive soul to tlio ri^nk of a rational soul (which I find it 
difficult to conceive), or that God has given reason to tbis soul by 
a special act, or (if you like) by a kind of transcreation. This is the* 
more easily admitted, as revelation informs us of many otJu^r 
immediate acts of God upon our souls. . . . And it is much more in 
harmony with the Divine justice to give to the soul, already 
physically or as an animal corrupted by the sin of Adam, a new 
lierfection, namely reason, than, by creation or othcrwiKc, to put 
a rational soul into a body in which It is to bo moraUy corrujifccd.* 
Also Leitre d AmatUd i z686) (O, ii. 75) : ‘ The rational soul is created 
only at the time when its body is formed, being on finely different 
from the other souls wo know, because it is capable of reflexion 

INTBOBUCTION 

it8 

The Vinculum Suhstantmlc. 

As to organic substance, one other point requires a brief 
consideration. In a coiTOspondence with Father Des 
Bosses, Leibniz draws a distinction between a compound 
substance, strictly speaking, and a mere collection of 
things, such as a heap of stones, or a flock of sheep, or 
an army. The compound substande has a certjiin unity ; 
it is substantia composita [singular number]. It involves 
somotliing which gives a certain reality to its phenomena 
(ms rmlizans phenomena)^ or, in other words, there is a 
genuine bond of connexion between its phenomena {vin- 
ruluin suhstantinle). It is unitm perse. The mere collection, ^ 
on the other hand, is not a substance but substances 
{substantiae, substanfiatum, semi- substantia). It has no 
unity of its own. Whether, as in the case of a h»)ap of 
stones, its unity consists in the contact of its parts or, as 
in the case of a regiment, it is united by a common 
purpose, the bond of connexion is entirely in tlio mind of 
an observer. In short, when we regard such a thing as 
a mere colh^ction, we regard it as without a dominant 
Monad, and therefore as not liaving a genuine body. It 
is like the ‘ coq^oration ' which, according to Sydney 
Smith, ‘ has neither a body to bo kicked nor a soul to be 
damned.* It is unum per aeculens, in contrast with unum 
per sr 

This distinction, however, is not to bo regarded as 
absolute. It is, in another form, the distinction which 
we have already considered * between phenmnena bene 
fundata and the pure phenomena of imagination and 
dreams. The vinculum suhstantiale is simply the con- 
nexion of tlie phenomena, in virtue of which wo describe 
them as bene /undata, since this connexion arises from the 

and resembles in minrature the Divine nature.' See Mmadology^ 

§ 0b note. 

^ Cf. this Introduction, Part iii. p. 96, notes i and a. 

* Cf. tliis Introduction, Part iii. p. 98. 

STATEMENT OP LElBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY I T9 

mutual relations of the Monads which aro implied in the 
compound substance. The vinculum substantmJe is no- 
where mentioned by Leibniz except in the coiTespondence 
with Des Bosses. It is in no way essential to his philo- 
sophy ; but it is the suggestion of a way in which his 
system might possibly be made consistent with the Roman 
Catholic dogma of Transubstantiationf which requires 
that bodies should be considered as real substances. 

Leibniz tells us plainly that he has no great liking for 
the vhifuhnn suhst antiale, and that it is bettor to dispense 
with it, unless any would-bo disci}de of his finds it 
necessary as an aid to religious faith \ It ought not, 
however, to bo forgotten that Lei])niz was encouraged in 
rejecting the Cartesian view that the essence of bodily 
substance is extension and motion, by tho fact that this 

' Of. O. ii, 499. A. L'lnoino, in Ioh Ihi'Mis (jmdsif 

iipud Leilmitht7n ( Pari.s, i85o\ di»cu.s'*os fully Uh* to Jhs liohvtA, 

with tho ohjo<!t of^howinK that (ho tim'ulnm subittafitiah' is un oxcros- 
<'on(‘0 upon (ho philom)j»hy of Lcihni/, and that I ho uhi* he inakos 
«if it iuvohos inoon.'^iHtoiicy with his oral poKitioii. Kidiiuirm, 
in his J/iVori/ «/ Phdoso]»hy ^ Kng. Tr., vol. ii. j*. 188) holds (hut it 
is not to ho regarded moroly as a corioos.siuii to tho r<digi<»iis 
scruples of Homan Catholics, but (hnt it is really a part of iicilmi/Zs 
lifV‘-loiig endeavour to reconcile (he Homan (.‘atholic and Lutheran 
(diurclies Cf Lcttre au Dim .Mm Fruit rd (no date) 'KIo[>p, iv. 
444); — ‘There is al.so a considerable fea(uro of iny jihihtsophy 
which will make it somewhat welcome (o the Jesuits and other 
theologians. It is this, that I re-oHtahlisli tho substantial forms 
wdiieh tho Atomists and ('artesians claim to Imvo exterminated. 
Now it is certain that without these forms ami the difTorence then* 
is hctw'cen tlioin and real accidents, it is inipo-Hsiblo to maintiiin 
our mysteries; for if tho nature of body consists in extension, 
as Descartes holds, it undoubtedly involves a contradiction to 
maintain that a ho^iy exists in many places at once.’ Dillmanii 
Xeue Darstdlung der L&tbTj^izisclmi Mofioulenlche, p. 25) has no doubt 
that tho lineulum subutanitale is the same as tho * sjiul ’ of (}iu 
body or its dominant Monad. Logically, perhaps, it ought to 
he so ; but it is far from clear that l/.ibniz ineiint this. For bo 
several times uses tho terms ‘soul ' or ‘ dominant Monad ' in the 
same sentence as the term vinc-vium fiubstantidie witliout identifyiiig 
them. And he speaks of the vtnculum subsfantiale lading ‘abolished,' 
‘ destroyed/ ^supernaturally removed/ &c. But ho afterwards admits 
that the vinculum mhstanliale cannot come into being or be destroyed. 
Bo that Leibniz’s entire tr<*atment of the matter is tentative and 
unsatisiactory. 

120 

INTRODUCTION 

tlieory is inconsistent both with the Roman Catholic and 
with the Lutheran doctrine regarding the Real Presende 
in the Eucharist. 

T). SELF-CONSCIOUSN ESS. 

By means of the different degrees of clearness and 
distinctness in th(3 perceptions of their respective souls or 
dominant Monads, the organic compound substances of 
which the world is composed may )>o divided into three 
main chisses, (i) mere living beings, (2) animals, and 
(3) men. Substances of the first class, including plants 
and all lower forms of existence, have as their soul a bare 
Monad, liaving mere perception or representation, un- 
accompanied by consciousness. Animals, on the other 
hand, hav(» a higher degree of perception, which appeal's 
as consciousness or feeling including memoiy. 

The soul of man possesses the characteristics of both of 
tlie low(^r classes, but its perception has a still higher 
degn^e of clearness, appearing now as s(>lf-consciotisness or 
apperception. The self-conscious soul or spirit does not 
m<n'ely connect its particular perceptions in the empirical 
seqiumce of memoiy ; but, liaving a knowledge of eternal 
and necessary truths, it can represent things in logical 
onler, that is to say, in their necessary rational relations. 
Tliis is wliat is meant by its having reason, or being 
a rational soul. The possession of reason means the 
power of reflexion or self-consciousm‘ss, because necessary 
and eternal truths are simply perceptions developed to 
the highest degree of distinctness, and conswiuently tlie 
knowledge of such truths is a clear iwid distinct conscious- 
ness of what is in oui'selves (of the perceptions which 
constitute our nature), and hence indirectly a clear and 
<listinct knowledge of substance in general'. 

' Monadology^ §$ 1830 ; Principles of Katun mid 0/ Grace^ $$4 and 5. 
Of coiirsi) it is not to bo supposed that the soiiie of organic being 
ends with man. There must bo lH*tw<H>n iniuv and God a continuous 
succossion of other oinbodiod souls, each more perfect than the one 
benenth it. Otherwise the law of continuity would be broken. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZS PHILOSOPHY I2I 

Now, as we saw in considering the meaning of life and 
death \ while the self-conscious or rational soul really 
differs only in degree from the conscious and the uncon- 
scious soul, it can never completely lose its rationality. 
The animal soul may at death lose memory and descend 
to a lower grade. But this is not possible in the case of 
the self-conscious soul. And on the other hand, while 
an animal soul may be misod to self-consciousness, 
Leibniz finds it ditliciilt to conceive that this can take 
place without a s|KKjial act or operation of God. Self- 
conscious beings liave thus a position of peculiar inde- 
pendence, which requires us to devote to them special 
consideration. We pr(K*eed, then, to consider Leibniz's 
account (a) of the form in which pt^rception appears in 
man, and (h) of the form in which appetition apiMiars in 
him ; these being the two essential characteristics of the 
human soul as well as of every other Moiuul. 

(fl) THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE. 

Lelhnis seeks a Via Media heUreen the Mews of Descartes 
and of Locke, 

Human perception or ap])erception is knowledge, 
strictly speaking. Leibniz’s theory of aj)perc<q)tion is 
thus a theoiy of knowledge. Now apperception is the 
perception of t*t<*rnal and necessary tridhs. It is clear 
and distinct knowl<*dge. But the human soul has ailso 

* It is also reasonable to suppose that there are liolow us huY>- 
siances capable of perception, as then) are such Kubstancc'S above 
us ; and that our soul, "far from the last of ajl, o(5rupi<'S 

a middle position, from which it in possible to go up or down ; 
otherwise there would be in the order of things a deft^ct, wliirb 
certain philosophers call imcuum /ormanim.* Sw ks Prinripea dn Vie 
(1705) (E. 431 a; O. vi. 543). Leibniz calls these higher beings 
ffenifA (genii), * It is to be believed that there are rational souls 
more perfect than we, which may lie called g^ies, and it is fjuiUi 
possible that some day we shall be of their number. The order of 
the universe seems to require it.* Le/fre a la Mneesse Sophie (1706) 
(G. vii. 569). 

* p. 1 16. 

122 

INTRODUCTION 

knowledge which is not clear and distinct^ knowledge of 
contingent things which it cannot reduce to eternal and 
necessary tnith. This must be so, for otheiwise the 
human soul would be perfectly clear and distinct in its 
perceptions, complete and unrestrained in its activity, 
actus jmrus, Hut this characteristic of perfect intuitive 
knowledge and absolute activity belongs to God alone ; 
the perceptions of man are always at best only relatively 
clear and distinct Accordingly it is impossible for 
Lei}>niz to assent to the Cartesian theory of knowledge, 
which gave worth only to the absolutely clear and distinct, 
drawing a hard and fast line between self-conscious 
thinking and all else. I)(\scartos’s use of the princi})lo of 
contradiction was inconsistent witli the possibility of 
relative tiadh. It oxjdains the universal arnl neceasiiiy, 
but only by setting aside the contingent as ultimately 
inexplicabh*. 

On the oilier hand, the theory of Leibniz is equally 
opjiosed to tho o])[)osite view, expounded in Locke’s J'jssaij 
on the Human U n dcr stand in ff. If distinctively human 
knowlo<lge does not consist solely in the jiorcoptiori of 
universal and neci'ssary truths, neither is the human mind 
altogether d(*stitute of such knowledge and tlopendeiit for 
its ideas entirely upon the contingi'iicy of the senses. As 
tho human soul is a Monad, its knowledge* does not come 
to it from outside itself, for it cannot be really inlluenced 
by any other substanc<3. It is not originally a tabula rasa 
on which externally-pnxluced impressions are made ; for 
no Monad can ever bepurely passive or absolutely without 
perception. The human mind, being spontaneous in all 
its activities, must produce its knowledge entirely from 
within itself. It is not a vacuum, gradually filled nb extra 
with independent ideas ; it is a force or life transforming 
itself, a growth, a self-revelation 

^ Cf. N(mi>eawc Sttsais^ bk. ii. eh. i, § a ;E. aaa b ; G. v. 99^ : 'This 
tabula rfiura, of which so much is said, is in my opinion nothing but 
a Action, which nature docs not allow and which has its grounds 

STATEMEOT OP LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY 123 

Thus in his theory of knowledge, Leibniz may be 
regarded as seeking a via media between two extreme, 
views, the basis of both of which is mechanical rather 
than dynamical. Each in its own way fails to do justice 
to the relations in knowledge, to its unity as a system. 
Each rests on the absolute (not the relative) validity of 

only in tho incomplefo notions of philosoplioi's, like tljo void, 
atoms and abMduto or relative rit.st t»f two ]uirt8 of a in 

rogard to ono niiothor, or liko tho mufena primOf whicli is conooivod 
as absolutoly passivo |sa»^t aunovs /onnes^. Things whieh aro 
uniform and contain no variety arc never anything Iml nhstractions, 
like time, spare, and tho other beings of pure inaihematies. There 
»s no body W'host) parts ai-«> at rest, and there is no siihataneo 
wlii<h has luttliiiig to distinguish it from every other, lliitnan 
m>uls differ, not only from other souN, but also from one niioDier, 
althitiigh the diftereiiei" is not of the kiiul that is called ‘^speeifie/* 
And 1 think I can prove tlial every siihstniitiul thing, whotlier 
soul or body, has its own speeial relaticii to evc'ry other; and one 
must always differ from another iutrtiisic charaeters; without 
mentioning that those who say so much about this tabula rawi, after 
having removed fnun it the ideas, eaiiiiot tell what reiriainr^ of it, 
likci tlie Seliolastie phihisopherH w)io Irave nothing in their >»rjt(r/a 
ptima, Terhaps it may ho replied, that this fububt rum c.f tho 
philosnphiTs means that th«* soul has originally and by nahire 
nothing t»ut hare fai'ultieH. But faeiillies without any activity, in 
a W'ord the pure potencies Tpursva/ir#.'?] of tho Sehohisties, are them* 
mdves only liidions^ whiili nature knows not ami whieh are 
obtained only by making abstracteuis. For wliere in the world 
*^h.‘ill wo evor find a faculty W'hich is shut up in inoro potency 
without any activity? Thfiie is nlwa^'s a particular diH[M)silion to 
action, and to oiio action rather than another. And bi'Mides the 
disposition there i.s a tendency to action, and indeed there is always 
an infinity of those tendeiiciob at onco in every object; and thews 
teiidoncioM are n(*vor without some <*fl[’cct. FxpeiioiK'o is ntHH-ssary, 

I admit, in order that Iho suiil shoiiM t»o determinod to such and 
such thoughts, ami in onler that it may take notice of th<» ideas 
which are in us. Jhit by what moans can exjHiiieiUie and the 
sen 8<^s give ideas? Has the soul windows? Is it like a writing- 
tablot? Is it like w'ax f It is plain that all thosre who think thus 
of the soul make it at bottom cor|>oreal. There will be brought 
against me this axiom, accepted among the philosopluo-s, that 
nothing is in the .v>id that dr^s mjt mmc from the But the soul 

itself and its affections must 1 h) excepted. Kthtl ust in iutdJpctu^ quad 
non/tferit in sensu ; ezcifie ; nisi ipse mteVrclus. But the soul coutiiins 
the notions of being, substance, unity, identity, cause, perception, 
reasoning and many others, which the senses c^innot give. This 
agrees well enough with your author of the Easay^ who finds the 
origin of a considerable section of the ideas in the mind’s reflexion 
on its own nature.’ Cf. New Essay$f Introduction, pp. 360, 367 sqq. 

INTRODUCTION 

124 

certain ideas or impressions ; each is a kind of atomism. 
•The eternal and necessary truths (or cloar and distinct 
ideas) of Descartes are unconditionally valid ; they are 
a priori atoms, forming the totality of knowledge. The 
* simple ideas ' of Locke are equally unconditional in their 
validity ; they are a posteriori atoms or data of knowledge \ 
But, here as elsewhere, Leibniz would rather reconcile 
than overthrow. While the mechanical view of things is 
not the tniest, it nevertheless has value in its own sphere. 
Thus he regards the erroi s of Descartes and Locke as due 
in each case to the over-emphasis of one of the two com- 
plementary elements in knowledge, the necessary and the 
contingent. Descartes’s view might hold if knowledge 

' Lockcj’n opi»of4ition f-o Doscnrtos, groat though it waa, ought not 
to ho omphtiaizfU to «uch nil oxtont as to hide tlio fact that they 
have much in common. For instance, wo know tliat Locko's first 
attraction to philosophy cnme from a reading of Dem'nrtos, and he 
may jiethaps owe the suggestion of some of his leading ideas to 
such pAHsages ns the following extract from an unfinished dialogue 
of Des<‘.art>t^s, in which the method of doubt is wittily sot in con- 
trast witli tlie Scholastic metapliysics. The question is : * Wliat 
is man's llrst knowledge ? In what part of the soul does it dwell? 
And why is it so imperfect at the beginning?’ Epistomon, the 
representative of Scholastic learning, says: ‘That appears to me 
to he very cU'urly explained, if we liken the imagination of infants 
to a tabula rasa on which our ideas, which are as it were the living 
imago of objects, are to he p.ajiited. Our senses, the dispositions of 
our mind, tmr teachers and «>ur intelligence are the different painters 
who can ex<'Oute this work, and those among them w'hich an^ least 
fitted to succe<‘d, bt»gin it ; namely imperfect senses, blind instinct 
and foolish nurses. At hi'^t comes the best of all, intelligence ; and 
yet is it still necessary that it should serve an apprenticosliip of 
several years and for some time follow the example of its teachers, 
before it dare rectify one of their errors, ... It is like a clever 
artist, called to put the liiiishing touches tp a picture sketched by 
learners. Though he use all Ids art, correcting gradually now one 
featun', now another, and putting in nil that has been omitted, 
there must still remain great defects in it, because the picture was 
badly drawn at first, the figures were ilharranged and little atten- 
tion was given to projiortion.’ Hecherche da la Vr'riie par les lumi^es 
natureitfSj QCuvrea de Pesrartfs (ed. Cousin \ vol. xi. p, 345 ; cf. ibid, 
p. 375 I ‘ All truths follow from one another and are united by 
a coin^ion bond ; the whole secret consists in beginning with the 
first and most simple, and rising gradually to the most remote and 
most complex.* See also Fraaer*s ed. of Locke’s Essay ^ vol. i. 
Pn>lagomenaj p. ao. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’S PHILOSOPHY I25 

were entirely neceasiuy ; Loeke’e might hold if knowledge 
were merely contingent. But human knowledge is both ; 
it includes both self-evident truths and truths of fact 
A true theory of knowledge must do equal justice to both. 
It must have affinity with the views both of Descartes 
and of Locke, without altogether accepting either. 

Leibniz's Solution of the Question of Innate Ideas and the 
Tabula Rasa. 

Locke endeavoured to establish his empiricism as 
against the position of Descartes by denying that there 
are in the human mind any innate ideas. If there be 
no innate ideas, all our knowledge must roach us ab 
extra, through the senses. And accordingly the only 
true theory of knowledge must explain it a posteriori, 
entirely from sense-experience. This was the contrary 
opposite of the Cartesian view tliat all our genuine 
knowledge comes from pure thought, in complete 
independence of the senses (which are bodily, and there- 
fore excluded from the sphere of thinking), and that the 
only true theory of knowledge must explain it a priori, 
as a logical deduction from self-evident innate ideas. To 
Leibniz it seoniR that the conception of the human mind 
as a Monad leads to a theory of knowledge which har- 
monizes the other two, by combining in a new form tlie 
truth they each contain, and at the same time setting 
aside their errors. As a Monad the soul of man is not, 
as in Locke’s view, a purely passive tabula rasa, continually 
receiving external impressions. It is always an active 
force, and it is itself the spontaneous source of all its 
ideas, i. e. of the entire sequence of its experience. All 
its ider^s are therefore innate. But none of its ideas is 
from the beginning clear and distinct. When thtjy first 
appear they are confused and imperfect The recognition 
of their self-evidence is the result of a process, a develop- 
ment from relative confusion to distinctness. But what 
Locke calls sensation is, accoinling to Leibniz, confused 

126 INTRODUCTION 

perception, the indistinct representation of things external 
to the individual mind. Thus the self-evidence of uni- 
versal and necessary truths is a result of experience, 
though that experience is purely internal. And though 
all our ideas are innate, there are many which can never 
be reduced to the perfect clearness and distinctness of 
self-evident truth, but which we have nevertheless quite 
sufficient ground for recognizing as true. Further, though 
our experience is entirely internal, it is none the less 
objectively real, for it consists in a representation of the 
whole universe, in accordance with the pre-established 
harmony between substances. Human knowledge is thus 
at once a priori fxiiA a 2>Oisieriori, innate and exponential 

llclatiuity of the Distinction hehceen Perception and 
Apperception. 

The acceptance of this theory involves a change in the 
point of view held both by Descartes and by Locke. They 
both argue on the assumption tliat perception and apper- 
ception are quite distinct from one another. Descartes’s 
theory of innate ideas rests on his doctrine that absolute 
cei-tainty belongs to self-conscious thought alone, ex- 
cluding all other forms of human experience as pheno- 
mena of body, whicli is the contradictory opposite of 

* ^If all our ideas \ vonnaiasances] are innate in so far an they are 
ideaa distinct in thomselvoM, they are all acquired in so far as they 
ai'e ideaa distinct for us.* Boutroux, od. of NounaiiT. EssaiSf 
latroduotion, p. 83. Cf. Lotzo, Shreitttcht {ft, p. 13 : ^ In earlier times 
pc«ople made too free a use of the name of innate ideas ; but now it 
seems to me that they have fallen into an opi^site error when they 
at 01106 set aside this notion, wdth a superlicial depreciation of its 
aomowhat inappropriate name. 1 have never been able to convince 
myself that the logical and metaphysioal principles regarding the 
nature of things, which are necessary to our thought, the aesthetic 
feelings and the consciousness of obligation rest upon anything 
else than the immediate depth of our spiritual nature, so that they, 
under the stimulus of experience, come into our consciousness as 
origi^l possessions of our nature, not as complete innate images, 
always hovering in our oonsciouaness, but as so grounded in us Uiat 
they indeed require the stimulus of experience, but are never given 
to us by experience.' 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY 127 

mind« Locke, on the other hand, denies the existence of 
innate ideas on the ground that children, savages and 
idiots do not consciously possess them ; an argument 
which implies that we have an idea only when we are 
fully aware of it, that is to say. that ideas exist only in 
self-consciousness or apperception. Thus apperception 
(in the Leibnitiaii sense) is regarded by Descartes as 
containing absolute, innate first principles, from which 
particular truths may be deduced, while by Locke it is 
held to give, not first principles, but simple ideas, which 
are the elements out of which knowledge is built. In 
both cases it is apperception that is appealed to ; mere 
perception does not count \ 

Now the great central principle of the philosophy of 
Leibniz is the idealizing of all substance, by regarding it 
as throughout perceptive or representative. Apper- 
ception. feeling and bare perception (which is not 
necessarily anything more than the mere possession of 
real qualities) are not different in kind but merely in 

' Of. Nour-eaux Ensaisj bk. ii. ch. t, § 19 (E. 236 u ; (S. v. 107) : ^ Phil- 
alethes [roprahentativo of Locke]. body is oxtendod without 

having parU and that a thing thinks without hoing consciouH 
[s’apc'rcciv)ir 1 that it thinks, are two nssortirms which appear equally 
unintelligible.*' Thenphihts [represtjutntive of Lcibnizj. “ Forgive 
inc^ sir, but I must tcdl you tlmt in your coiiiention ihut there is in 
the soul nothing of wliicli it is not couscious, there is a petitio prin- 
cipii, which has already dominated our first disi'UHsieii. It wus 
thei*c used for the overthrow of innate ideas and truths. If ne 
wore to grant this principle, we should not merely find oiirsolvos 
in conflict with experience and reason, but we should have without 
any reason to give up our opinion, which I think I have made siiffi- 
ciently intelligible. But our opponents, very clover tliough they 
are, have never produced any proof of what they so often and so 
couhdontly declare regarding this mutter, and besidep it is easy to 
prove to them the opposite, that is to say, that it is not ]K>Hsible wo 
should always deliberately reflect on all our thoughts. Otlierwise 
the mii^td would make a reflexion upon each reflexion ad injlniium, 
without ever being able to pas.s to a new thought. For instance, 
in being conscious of some present feeling, I should always have to 
think that I think of it, and again to think that 1 think of think> 
ing of it and so ad infinitum. But I must surely come to an end of 
ixsflecting ujwn all these reflexions, and there must, in short, be 
some thought which we allow to pass without thinking of it ; 
otherwise we should always dwell upon the same thing." * 

128 

INTRODUCTION 

degree. One reality pervades them all ; no one of them 
is separated from another by any impassable barrier. 
Body is confuvsed soul ; soul is cleai* and distinct body. 
Self-consciousness is not a unique certainty or reality, 
but a high degree of clearness and distinctness in that 
which is already real in lower forms. The self may be 
exclusive, self- limited, individual; but it is so only in 
common with every other substance. There is no sub- 
stance which is not potentially an Ego, a self-conscious 
being. What Descartes and Locke both ignore is the 
internal movement, the becoming, the growth and 
development, which is of the essence of every substance. 
For them a thing, a mind, an idea, a principle is what 
it is, unchangeably ; so that either, as in the case of 
Descai’tes, the variety of real thought is contained, perfect 
and entire, within its unity, and is to be set forth by pure 
sub-sumption, the lifting out of class from within class, or, 
as in the case of Locke, the unity of real thought is a mere 
aggregate of its varieties, the elements remaining nn- 
changeable into whatever groups we may gather them. 

As against Descartes^ Leihniz denies the complete Separation 
of Matter and Mind. 

Accordingly, Leibniz brings against Descartes’s view of 
mind essentially the same argument as he used against 
Deacartos’s view of matter. The Cartesian view of sub- 
stance as that which is in itself and is conceived through 
itself, without need of anytliing else, resulted in the 
complete separation of matter and mind. Leibniz, on 
the other hand, unifies without absolutely identifying 
them, through his view of substance as that which is 
continually in process of perceiving or representing all 
things. Thus, against Descartes’s view of matter as an 
independent substance, Leibniz argues that a true 
doetrine of substance makes matter by itself an abstrac- 
tion, for it is really the confused perception which is 
potentially clear and distinct perception, apperception or 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY I29 

mind. And similarly, against the view of Descartes that 
mind is an independent substance, opposed to matter, 
Leibniz maintains that pure mind belongs to God alone, 
and that mind as we have it is inseparable from matter 
and is really nothing but matter raised to a higher power, 
confused perception that has passed into greater clearness 
and distinctness. As among created substances there is 
no body without soul, so there is no soul without body. 

In opposition to LockCy he holds that the Mind always 
thinks. 

On the other hand, as against Locke, Leibniz contends 
that the mind is never without thought. If mind is 
a tabula rasa, receiving all its impressions from outside 
itself, a mind without thought is a pei^fectly natural 
supposition. And a posteriori Locke holds that in dream- 
less sleep the mind exists without thinking. Its existence 
during such a sleep is, he thinks, assured to us by our 
recollection afterwards of what took place in the mind 
before the sleep. Further, Locke maintains that, 
as body can exist without motion, mind can exist 
without thought '. Now the ground of this contention 
manifestly is that motion and rest are not relatively 
hut absolutely distinct from one another and, similarly, 
that clear and distinct consciousness is absolutely and 
not relatively different from unconsciousness. When 
a body has no apparent motion, it is absolutely at rest ; 
when a mind has no clear and distinct consciousness or 
apperception, it is absolutely without consciousness. 
To this the central * principles of the philosophy of 
Leibniz are in complete opposition While motion and 

' Could this he regarded as a strictly logical development of one 
side of Descartes's philosophy, thus revealing Descartes's incoiisj«f> 
tency? Descartes would say that, as thinking is the oKsenec of 
mind, mind cannot exist without thought and yet it may exist 
without any spociOc thought. 

• Cf. Nouveaux bk. ii. ch. i, $ to (E. 333 a ; G. v. lox): 

‘ PkOaleihea, ** But I cannot conceive it to be more necessary for the 
•oul always to think than for the body to be always in motion, the 

K 

INTRODUCTION 

130 

rest are apparently absolute opposites, in reality, when 
we regard them not abstractly but concretely in their 
relation to the rest of the world, they can be understood 
only as relatively distinct. For otherwise, the law of 
continuity, which is the basis of any workable interpreta- 
tion of the universe, would be broken. In virtue of this 
Jaw, then, rest must he considered as an infinitely small 
degree of motion, and every Y>ody possesses at least a 
tendency to motion or a virtual motion, even if it has no 
actualj apparent, complete motion. In the same way, 
when mind is considered concretely, as a real substance 
related (through its representation of them) to all the 
other substances of which the universe is composed, the 
distinction between consciousness and unconsciousness is 
seen to be relative. There can bo no total absence of 
perception, for absence of j>erception (representation) 
would mean absence of relation to the rest of the world, 
and thus a breach of the law of continuity. Unconscious- 

jwrception of ideas being to the soul what motion is to tho body.” 
. . . Theojihilus, “You are right, sir. Activity is no more iiisepHi*- 
able from tho soul than from the body, a state of tho soul without 
thought and iibsoluto rest in tho body appearing to mo to bo things 
wliich are equally contrary to iiaturo and of wdiich there is no 
instance in tlio world. A substance whicli is onco in activity will 
bo 80 always, for all its iinpi-esuioiis persist and are merely mixed 
with other new ones. When we strike a body we arouse in it (or 
rather determine) an infinite number of vortices as in a liquid, for 
at liottom every solid has some degree of fluidity, and every fluid 
has some degree of solidity, and tlierc ia no way of ever entirely 
stopping those internal vortices. Now wo may believe that, if the 
body is never at rest, neither will the soul, which corresponds to 
it, ever Ik^ without perception.’*. . . Fh, “But. this proposition — 
tho soul always thinks — is not evident itself.'* 7%. “ I don't say 
it is. It requires a little attention and reasoning to see it. Ordi- 
nary pecqde recognize it as little as they recognize tlie pressure of 
the atmosphere or tike rouiidiiess of the earth ’* Ph. “ I doubt if 
1 thought last night. This is a question of fact, to he settled by 
sense-ttxperience.” Tk. We settle it in the same way in which we 
prove that there are imperceptible bodies and invisible motions, 
althougii some people regani these things as absurd. In the same 
wmy there are perceptions without much sharpness, which are not 
distinct enough for us to be conscious of them or to remember 
them : but they make tliemselves known by certi|in oonsequenoes 
they have.*’* 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz'S PHILOSOPHY 131 

ness or apparent absence of perception is then merely an 
infinitely small degree of perception, and every mind 
must possess at least virtual thought or consciousness, 
a tendency to clear and distinct perception, even although 
it may actually appear to be empty of all thought \ The 
mind is not like a block of veinless marble, from whicli 
the sculptor may take what figure he pleases. It has 
veins which give the outline of the statue that is to come 
forth from it*. In other words, it is the nature of the 
mind to ‘look before and after.’ Lei)>niz regards lus 
view as expressing the truth that underlies the Platonic 
doctrine of reminiscence. The present perceptions of tlie 
mind may he regarded as recollections of the past, inas- 
much as they were already virtually contained in those 
past perceptions and are developed from them — are, 
indeed, these past perceptions grown more distinct. And 
again, the present perceptions of the mind are forecasts 
or prophecies of the future, since all its future porceptions 
are confusedly wrapi)ed u]) in its present states. 

The Pehtes Percept 

Thus in the Monadoloyy^^ Leibniz maintains the 
existence unconscious i>erceptions, on the ground 
that percei>tion can only proceed from perception, and 
accordingly that in the passage from the unconsciousnesH 
of a swoon or a deep sleep to full waking consciousness 
there must be an infinite series of jxjrceptions gradually 
rising in degree from infinitely little perceptions, which 
are apparently indistinguishable from absence of percej)- 
tion, upwards to the fuller perceptions of actual waking 
life. These little perceptions (petites perceptions^ confused 
perceptions, or, as we might now call them, sulvconscious 
thoughts or mental activities) express the continuity of 

* Of. Locke, Eftsay^ FraHer’s ed., vol. i. p. So note. 

® jSTew EssaySf Introduction, p. 367. Cl. Locke, Esttay, Fraser’g ed.^ 
▼ol. i. p. 48 note, and p. 60 note. 

’ $§ at and 33. 

K 2 

INTRODUCTION 

132 

all souls, from the soul of the pebble to that of the 
angel, as Leibniz puts it in his correspondence with 
J. Bernouilli The characteristics of these petiies 
perceptions^ which prevent us from being clearly aware of 
them, are, he tells us^, their smallness, their number, 
or their individual indistinctness. And by means of 
them he explains such psychological phenomena as our 
ceasing to be aware of the sound of a mill or a waterfall 
when we have become accustomed to it. The perceptions 
are still there, but ^ having lost the attractions of novelty, 
they are not strong enough to claim our attention and 
memory, which are directed to more interesting objects. 
For all attention requires memory ; and often, when we 
are not, so to speak, warned and directed to take notice 
of certain of our own present perceptions, we let them 
pass without reflexion, and even without observing 
them ; but if some one immediately afterwards draws our 
attention to them, and speaks to us, for instance, of some 
noise that has just been heard, we recall it to ourselves 
and perceive that a moment ago we had some conscious- 
ness of it. Thus there were perceptions of which w’e 
were not aware at the time, apperception arising in this 
case only from our attention having been drawn to them 
after some interval, however small The petiies perccp- 

* G. Muth. iii. 560. 

* Nvxv Introduction, p, 370. Cf. bk. ii. ch. 9, § i (E. 333 a ; 

G. V. lan : ‘Wo ourwelvos have also jpem'ptxons^ of which we 

are not conscious in our present state. It is true that we might 
quite well bo conscious of them and refioct upon them, wore we 
not proventod by tlieir multitude, which distracts our mind, or if 
they were not effaced or rattier obscur^ 3 d by greater ones. ... 1 
sliould prefer to djstingui.^h between perception and apperception. 
For instance, the jierception of light and colour, of which we have 
apperception (are conscious] is made up of a quantity of peHtes 
percepiiom, of which w'e have no apperception [are not conscious] j 
and a noise, of which we have perception but of which wo take' 
no notice, becomes appercepHUe by a small addition or increase. 
For if what precedes had no effect upon the soul, this little addition 
wwuld have none either, and no more would the whole have any.' 

* Isew Essays, Introduction, p. 371. Cf, Nmveaux Essais, bk. ii. 
ch. 1, § II (,E. 334 a ; O. v. 103) : ‘We think of a number of things 
at once, but we take notice only of the thoughts which are most 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY I33 

• 

tumSf accordingly, are merely the confused perceptions of 
the self-conscious Monad, and their function and value in 
psychology may be estimated by reference to the im- 
portance of confused perception in Leibniz’s general 
doctrine of substance. However great may be their 
degree of confusion, and however little wo may be 
conscious of them individually or collectively, they are 
still perceptions, one in kind with the highest, most 
distinct apperception or self-consciousness. The realm of 
self-consciousness includes tho whole of substiince ; it is 
by no means limited to man and spirits higher than man. 
But in the infinite variety of substances, self-consciousness 
exists in an infinito variety of degrec^s ; and there are 
many substances in which its degree is infinitely little, 
that is to say, less than any degree that cun bo assigned 
or named. 

Leibniz's Theory of Knowledge in relation to the main 
Principles of his Philosophy, 

Thus Leibniz’s theory of knowledge is simply tlui 
epistemological expression of the main principles of his 

distinct : and matters cannot bo otherwise, for if we were to tukti 
notice of all, we should have to think attentively of an infinity 
of things nt once, all of which wo feel and all of which make 
impression on our wnses. I say oven more : something from all 
our past thoughts romains, and none can over bo entirely effaced. 
Now when we sleep without dreaming, and when wo aro Hiunned 
by some blow, fall, illness, or other accident, there ajipi*arfl in us 
an infinite number of little confum-d feelings, and df3ath itself can 
produce no other effect on the souls of animals, which must 
without doubt, sooner or later, regain distinct perceptions, for 
everything in nature happens in an orderly way. . . . Each soul 
retains all its preceding* impressions, and cannot split itself up. 
... In eac;h substance tho future has a pc^rfect connexion with the 
past. This is what constitutes tho identity of tho iudivj<lual. 
Yet memory is not necessary nor even always possible, bocause 
of the multitude of present and past impressions, which come 
together in our present thoughts, for I do not believe that there 
are in man any thoughts which have not at least some confuf^ed 
effect, or which do not leave some vestige to be combined with 
later thoughts. We can certainly forget things ; but wo might 
also recollect them after a long interv'al, if only wc were reminded 
of them in the right way.' 

INTRODUCTION 

^34 

philosophy. All truth is innate, virtually if not actually. 
But there are two kinds of truth. Eternal and necessary 
truth has its ground in the principle of contradiction. 
It is either self-evident or the result of strict demonstra- 
tion from the self-evident. * Our mind is the source of 
necessary truths, and however many particular experiences 
we may have of a universal truth, we cannot assure our* 
selves of it for ever by induction without knowing its 
necessity through reason. . . . The senses may suggest, 
support, and confirm these truths, but cannot demon- 
strate their infallible and perpetual certainty*.* On the 
other hand, truth of fact or contingent truth, while 
equally innate, is not demonstrable through the principle 
of contradiction, but through that of sufficient reason*. 
It is obtained by induction rather than demonstration. 
It is truth of experience, or percc‘ption w'hich we cannot 
analyze into perfect distinctness and self-evidence, because 
of the infinite complexity of its relations to the system of 

‘ Nouveaiix Kagaisj hk. i. oh. i, § 5 (E. 209 b ; Q. v. 76, 77), 

® TliUH Iioibni/ nyocis the viow of Locko that our real know- 
ledge, iiH dietiiict fi'oni merely probable knowledge, * extends as 
far as the present testimony of our senses, employed about par- 
ticular objeots that do then afTect them, and no farther.' (Essay^ 
l)k. iv. ch. ir, § 9; Fraser's od., vol. ii. p. 332 ) Cf. the corresponding 
jmssage in the Kouvcaux Esnais ,E. 378 b ; O. v. 426) : ‘Yet I think 
that we might extend the names of knowledge and certainty to things 
otln^r than actual sensations, for clearness and plainness [evidence] 
extend further, and 1 regard them ns a kind of cortiiinty ; and it 
would without doubt be an absurdity sorioUvsly to doubt whether 
there are men in the world, when we do not see any. To doubt 
scu’ioiisly is to doubt practically, and we might take certainty as 
a knowledge of truth which we cannot doubt practically without 
madness ; and sometimes we take certainty in a still more general 
hens4> and apply it to cases in which wo cannot doubt without 
deserving to bo greatly blamed. But endcnce would be a luminous 
certaint}'', that is to say, a certainty such that, because of the 
connexion we see between tlie ideas, we have no doubt whatever. 
A^ocording to this definition of cert4iinty, we are certain that 
Constantinople is in the world, that Constantine, Alexander the 
Great, and Julius Caesar have existed. It is true that some 
p^sant of the Ardeuues might justly doubt these things, from 
lack of information ; hut a man of letters and of the world could 
not do so, without great mental derangement.' . Cf. also Locke's 
Esaay, bk. ii. oh. ai, ^ 75 (Fraser’s ed., voL i. p. 373). 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNlz’s PHILOSOPHY I35 

things. This infimtely oomplez mass of relations, which 
it is impossible for us to reduce to perfect order and 
simplicity, is our confused perception. Confused percep- 
tion is, then, the representation in us not of our own 
nature, but of the system of things other than ourselves, 
that is to say, the other Monads as they are related to us. 
But distinct perception is tho I'epresentatien or perception 
of our own nature, of that which is in ourselves, and it is 
at the same time the evolving of some of our confused 
perceptions into clearness; it is not something quite 
separate from our confused perception. Thus we rise to 
a knowledge of ourselves through our knowledge of 
external things \ Self-consciousness implies the con- 
sciousness of objects ; apperception is, indeed, the veiy 
flower of perception, the beauty to produce which per- 
ception, in all its degrees, is living and growing. In 
experience or confused thought, rightly interpreted, there 
is the basis of distinct, rational knowledge. Sense, 
experience, imagination, must not be derided as fiction- 
makers by the intellect which they have nourished 

The Meaning ivhich Leibniz attaches to ^ Pcrcqjtim' or 
^ Ikprcsentaiion,' Ilotv docs he endeavour to avoid an 
endless lielativiiy? 

Something remains to be said as to the meaning of this 
‘ percC|)tion, ’ ‘representation,’ or ‘expression,’ which is 
the key-word to Leibniz’s theory of knowledge. There is 
a strong suggestion of petitio primij^ii about it. What 
exactly does it moan ? What is perceived, represented, 
expressed? And wha^ does the perception, representation, 
expression consist in? If the essence of every real sub- 

* Cf. ^^oureaux Eamis, bk. ii, ch. ai, ( 73 fE. 369 b ; G. v- 197) : 
*The HentHMi furuish us with material for reflexion, and wo should 
mover even think of thought, if we did not think of suinotbing 
<'lbe, that is to say, of the particular things with which the senses 
furnish us. And I am persuaded that souls and created s))irits are 
never without organs and never without sensations, as they cannot 
reason without symbols.* 

‘ See Appendix D, p. ao6. 

INTBODUCTION 

136 

stance is to perceive, represent, or expre»i^ every other, we 
seem to have come upon the doctrine of the relativity of 
human knowledge in its worst form. It seems as if 
knowledge must be compared to the life of those unhappy 
islanders ^ who earn a precarious livelihood by taking in 
one another’s washing.* 

A>s to the meaning of the terms, Leibniz says that * one 
tiling expresses another (in my sense) when there is 
a constant and regular [regie] relation between what can 
be said of the one and what can be said of the other. It 
is thus that a projection in perspective expresses the 
original figure Any two things, then, are related to 
one another as percoivor and perceived, when the predi- 
cates or qualities of the one (whatever these predicates or 
qualities may be) always vary concomitantly with the 
predicates or qualities of the other. Perception, repre- 
sentation, or expression is then a relation of harmony (or 
development according to some law or principle) between 
the qualities of individual substances. But these (qualities 
are themselves perceptions. What, then, is the ultimate 
reality of which they are all representations? Leibniz’s 
answer is that the ultimate reality is the nature of God or 
the ideas of God as an intuitive Knowor. God alone has 
a knowledge which is entirely adequate, perfectly realized ; 
in Him the universe is transparent through and through. 
There is no reality beyond thought, to which thought 
must correspond. Thought cannot in any way represent 
that which is entirely other than itself, that which is 
separated from it ‘ by the whole diameter of being ’ (or by 
an even greater distance if that were possible). For no 
sign can bo entirely cut off from the thing signified. Sign 
and thing signified must have some ground of unity in 
virtue of which this relation between them is possible. 

^ Letire a Amauld (1687) (G. ii. iia) : ‘ Expression is common to 
all «oul-principles [/orTnca]. It is a genus, of which natural per- 
ception, animal feeling and intellectual knowledge are species.* 
Cf. this Introduction, Part iii. p. 11 a, note 3. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 137 

Thus pure thought cannot symbolize, represent, or per- 
ceive that which is absolutely pot-thought. Confused 
thought is the symbol both of other confused thought and 
of clear and distinct thought. Accordingly, as between 
confused thoughts the relation of sign and thing signified 
is such that that which is now regarded as sign may from 
another point of view be taken as the thing signified, and 
vice* versa. Nevertheless it is evident that the clearer 
and more distinct of any two corresponding perceptions 
will naturally be regarded as the thing signified by the 
more confused perception, that is to say, the thing which 
the more confused perception is trying to express, b.ut is 
unable to express adequately. And thus the ultimate 
‘ thing signified,’ the fundamental reality, which all other 
perceptions in various degrees symbolize or represent, 
must be perfectly clear and distinct thought, or, in other 
words, the thought of God. So also God is First Cause as 
well as Ultimate Reality. For we have already seen * that 
cause is always reason or explanation, the relatively clear 
and distinct perception as against the corresponding con- 
fused perception, which is the effect. Accordingly, as the 
nature of God is absolutely clear and distinct perception, 
He must be the Ultimate Cause of all things \ 

(b) ETHICS. 

Degrees of Appetition in the Mmads — ImpulsCy Instinctive 
Desire, Will. 

Every Monad has appetition as well as perception. 
Appetition is the principle of change in the Monad, that 

* pp. 106, 107. • ^ 

* This seems to imply that God is the ultimate reality of whom 
all individual created things are modes or manifestations. But 
Leibniz endeavours to avoid such a conclusion ns this, by main- 
taining that the essences of things are independent ideas in the 
mind and understanding of God, eternal truths wliose nature is 
not subject to His will. It Is hardly necessary to point out how 
unsatisfactory is this explanation ; hut it is manifest that the 
weakness of Leibniz's theoiy at this point is the inevitable conse- 
quence of his attempt to work with two first principles, the 
mutual relations of which he has not thoroughly thought out. 

IHTBODUOTION 

138 

in virtue of which the Monad passes from one perception 
to another. Like perception it has an infinite series of 
degrees ; but three main varieties of it may be noted, 
corresponding to the three main varieties of perception. 
Thus the appetition of the lowest class of Monads (the 
bare Monads) is mere unconscious impulse or tendency, 
a potential blind force tending to become actual. It is 
the pai-ticular appetition or change of perception (repre- 
sentation) which has its source or ground in unconscious 
perceptions. This bare impulse may be compared to a 
watch-spring wound up, which tends to unwind itself ' ; 
it is a tendency such as that of ‘ the stone which goes by 
the most direct but not always the best way towards the 
centre of the earth s* The apjietition* of animal souls is 
instinctive appetite or desire, which proceeds from feeling 
or conscious, yet relatively confused, perceptions. Like 
the appetition of the bare Monads, it seeks immediate 
present satisfaction, having nothing to guide it but the 
consciousness and memory of the animal soul. Finally, 
the appetition of rational souls is self-conscious desire or 
will, a principle of change whose basis is apperception or 
clear and distinct rational knowledge Appetition, like 
perception, is one and the same throughout all its degrees 
and varieties, from bare force to the freest, most rational 
volition. And in the nature of man we find all degrees 
of it ; he is not a purely rational will, but has instinctive 
impulses and passions, which belong to the middle class 
of appotitioiis, and physical powers w hich belong to the 

^ Nimveaux EasaiSy bk. ii. ch. 20, § 6 (E. 248 b ; G. v. 152, 153). 

* Ibid. bk. ii. ch. 21, § 36 (E. 359 a ; G. v. 175). 

* Cf. ibid. bk. ii. ch. si, § 43 (E. a6i b ; G. v. lOo) : ‘There are 

unfolt inclinations, of which we liave no consciousness 

[apperception] ; there are felt [aefmble] inclinations, whose existence 
and objtHjt we know, but wdiich are formed without our being 
aware of it, and these are confused inclinations, which we attribute 
to yie body, although thero is always in the mind s<imething cor- 
responding to them ; and finally, there are distinct inclinations 
which reason gives us, and of whose force and formation we are 
aware.* 

STATEUEMT OF LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHT I39 

lowest clasa As on the cognitive, so on the practical side 
of his nature, the law of continuity holda 

Feeling. Pleasure and Pain. ‘ Semi^ins ’ and 
* Semi-pleasures . ' 

The chief features of Leibniz’s ethics are fixed by these 
general considerations. In applying them it is necessary 
for us, who have become familiar with post-Knntian 
distinctions, to remember that the usual threefold 
division of mental elements into cognition, feeling, and 
will, is not of older date than the age of Rousseau \ and 
accordingly that Leibniz still works with the Aristotelian 
twofold division of the elements into theoretical and 
practical. Thus the ‘ appetition ’ of Leibniz covers both 
feeling and will (in our sense of the terms\ as well as the 
lower forms of both, which are conscious and unconscious 
forces more or less restrained from full activity, that is 
to say, more or loss potential or virtual. Accordingly, as 
appetition and perception always accompany one another, 
Leibniz maintains that there is no perception absolutely 
colourless and entirely unchanging or at rest. Eveiy 
perception has an element of feeling and activity, although 
the degree of it may be infinitely small. If we can be 
pardoned the anachronism of using a phrase which Lotze 
has made familiar, we may say that every perception has 
a * value ’ or ‘ worth ’ ; but it must not be forgotten that 
for Leibniz this value is not anything absolute or pre- 
eminently real, but merely the unrealized potentiality of 
clearness and distinctness in the perception ^ 

Speaking then of liuman nature, which iifcludes all 
the varieties of perception and appetition, Leibniz says 
that Hhere are no perceptions which are entirely indifferent 
to us, but when their effect is not observable wo can call 
them indiff^erent ; for pleasure and pain seem to consist in 

^ It is usually attributed to Tetens {circa 1750). But it first 
comes into prominence through Kant. 

^ Cf. Lotze, MicrocosmiUj bk. iii. ch. 4, § 4 Tr., vol. i. p. 366). 

INTRODUCTION 

140 

an observable help or hindrance This, he warns us, is 
not to be taken as a strict definition of pleasure and pain, 
for he does not think it possible to give such a definition. 
But his account of these feelings seems to follow directly 
from his general point of view. Pain is essentially a 
hindrance or restraining of a Monad’s appetition, while 
pleasure is its free action*. They are thus entirely 
relative to one another. And while we speak of the 
hindrance or freedom of appetition as pain or pleasure, 
only when the appetition has reached the degree of con - 
sciousness, yet consciousness is separated from unconscious- 
ness by no hard and fast line, and consequently appetitions 
of a lower degree may bo regarded as minutely painful or 
pleasant, according as they are retarded or advanced. Thus 
Leibniz speaks of * somi-paius ’ and ‘ semi-pleasures ’ or 
little imperceptible [inaperc(‘ptibles \ pains and pleasures,’ 
corresponding to the petites perceptions in the theory of 
knowledge. Like the petites perceptions these semi-pains 
and seini-ploasiires may, by growing in individual inten- 
sity or by combining into one totality, become observable 
in consciousness as complete pains and pleasures ^ No 
soul can ever be absolutely at rest, absolutely without 
appetition. And no created soul can be purely active, 
with a perfect freedom. Thus every soul has continual 
appetition, which is partly free and paitly restrained. 
That is to say, every soul hiis continually pleasure and 
pain in some degree. 

Accordingly Leibniz takes great interest in the ‘un- 
easiness’ in which Locke finds the first movings of 

• 

* Ntyuveau.r Essaisj bk. ii. ch. ao, $ I (E, 246 b; G. v. 149). Cf. 
Locku’s Hsitay i^oorrospoiidiiig place), with note in Fraser's ed., vol. i. 
p. 30a. 

* Cf. Koutmux EssaiSf bk. ii. ch. ai, $ 4a (E. a6i b ; O. v. 180) : * I 
think that fundamentally pleasure is a feeling of perfection, and 
pain a feeling of imperfection, provided the feeling is sufficiently 
mailed for us to be definitely conscious of it [fl'en apercevoir]* Cf. 
De tiribus juris naturae et genJtivm gradibus Molls t, p. ai) : ^Pleasure 
is nothing else Uian the sense of increasing perfection.* 

’ See Ncuveaux Essais, bk. ii. ch. ao, § 6 (£. a48 a ; G. v. 151, 153). 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY I4I 

desire \ This uneasiness is not exactly pleasure or pain, 
but a vague feeling of discomfort or restlessness, that 
tends to pass into more definite desire and so to produce 
action. It is thus for Leibniz the confused perception 
and undeveloped striving or appetition out of which, by 
a process of evolution, clear and distinct perception and 
free volition arise. In so far as this evolution is re- 
strained, we suffer jmin : in so far as it proceeds smoothly 
without impediment, we enjoy pleasure. Thus every soul 
instinctively seeks its own pleasure : it follows the line 
of least resistance. This it does in virtue of its own 
nature, which is to unfold itself spontaneously from 
within, its present state flowing entirely from its past 
and holding a prophecy of iis future. Souhactivity is 
pleasure, soul-restraint is pain ; and it is of the essence 
of the soul to be active, for every simple substance is 
primarily a force. 

Freedom^ Liberiy of Indiffcrcme^ and the ‘ Will io will.' 

Prom this Leibniz’s view of freedom directly follows. 
There can be no such thing as a liberty of indifference, 
an absolutely undeterminpd choice ; for that would imply 
discontinuity in the life of the soul. An absolutely un- 
determined choice can only mean that the state of the 
soul when it makes the choice is not an orderly unfolding 
of the state of the soul preceding the choice, but is a 
beginning of action dc novo. And this is contrary to the 

* Nouveanx A'.swi/s, bk. ii. ch. 20, § 6 (E. 247 ; O. v. 150), Cf. 
oil. 21, §36 (E. 258 b; G. V. 174): ‘If you consider your “un- 
easiness as A real disconifort I do not adinit*ihat in this 

sense it is the solo goad to action. Most frequently ibo goad is 
those little unfelt [insensible] perceptions, which we might call im- 
perceptible [inaperc^ible] pains, were it not that the notion of pain 
implies apperception. These little impulses consist in the continual 
freeing of oursolyes from little hindrances, at which our nature 
works without thinking about it. In this really consists that un- 
easiness, which we feel without knowing it, which makes us act in 
passion as well as when we appear most tranquil, for we are never 
without some activity and motion, which' comes memly from this, 
that nature is always working so as to put herself more at oase.' 

INTRODUCTION 

142 

very notion of sub^ance. Both in tho Thiodicee and in 
the Nmveaux Essais, Leibniz freely illustrates his view 
^y reference to particular instances, such as the parable 
of the asB between two equal bundles of hay ; and he 
makes it evident that, as a matter of fact, in every case 
there is in the state of the soul before the choice is made 
some determining element of perception. The extreme 
case, of course, is that of ‘willing to will,’ resolving to do 
a thing contrary to our judgment and wishes, merely 
because we have the power to do it. Leibniz points out 
that even here our volition is determined by a previous 
idea, namely that of showing to ourselves or to others 
that we possess a certain power *, so that in every case 

* Cf. Nouveaur EssaiSf bk. ii. cli. at, § 35 (E. 255 b ; O. v. 168 j : 
‘Men 8ny that, after liavinj^ known and eonnidored overytliing, it 
i« still in their power to will, not onlj^ what pleases them most, 
but also the opposite of that, just to show thoir freedom. But it is 
to bo noticed that this very cajjrice or obstinacy or, to Miy tho least, 
this reason which prevents from obeying other reasons, also comes 
into the balance and makes pleasing to them that which otherwise 
would not pleaise them at all, and accordingly thoir choice is 
always determined hy |>ercoption. Thus we do not will merely 
what wo will, but what pleases us, although the will may indirectly 
and, as it wei*e, from afar contribute to make a thing pleasing to 
us or n«>t.’ See also the coiTesjionding passage in L(K:ke*8 Essay 
^bk. ii. cli. 21, $ 24), Fraser’s ed., vol. i. p. 327. 

A hint of Leibniz's psychology of volition is given in the 
Nouveawc- Essais^ bk. ii, ch. 21, § 39 ^,E. 260b ; O. v. 178) : ‘Several 
|X)i*coptions and inclinations conspire towards complete volition, 
which is the result of their conflict. There are perceptions and 
inclinations which are individually im|X 5 rceptiblo, but the totality 
of which produces an uneasiness, which impels us without our 
seeing the ground of it ; several of these perceptions combined 
together, direct us towards some object or away from it, and then 
we have desire or fear, also accompanied by an uneasiness, but an 
uneasiness which does not always amount to pleasure or pain 
Finally there are impulses actually accompanied by 
pleasure and pain, and all these perceptions are either new 
sensations or images remaining from some past sensation, accom- 
panied or unaccompanied by memory which renews the attractions 
these same images had in these preceding sensations, and so 
renews the old impulses in proportion to the vivacity of the imagi- 
nation. From all these impulses there finally results the prevaUing 
effort, which* constitutes tlie full volition. Yet the desires and 
tendencies of which we are conscious are also frequently called 
voliHona (^although less compMe) whether or not they prevail and 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNlz's PHILOSOPHT 143 

the will is determined by some reason or peroeption. 
The error of abstract indeterminism arises from neglect 
of sub’Conscious perceptions and appetitions. It is thus 
akin to the error of Descartes and Locke with regard to 
knowledge, namely that of regarding only self' conscious 
knowledge or apperception as real knowledge. We have 
seen * that to regard all thought as self-conscioiis or reflec- 
tive would make any progress in thought impossible, 
because it would imply that the mind thinks that it thinks 
that it thinks ad infinitum, and is accordingly never able 
to go on to any new thought. Similarly, the doctrine of 
a liberty of indifference, regarding all volition as neces- 
sarily developed and conscious, implies a power of willing 
to will that we will ad infinitum. But in fact volition 
cannot be restricted to deliberate conscious desire or 
intention. Wo do and experience many things which 
ultimately contribute to determine our w'ill, although we 

give rise to action. It thus roadily follows, that volition can 
hardly exist without (ksire and avovimm \^fuite] ; fur I think wo may 
give this name to the opposite of dosiro. There is uneasiness not 
only in the troublcHoine passions, like hate, cruelty, anger, envy, 
shame, but also in thoir op].K)si<es, such as love, hope, favour and 
glory. It may be said that wherever there is desire, there is 
uneasiness ; but the contrary is not always true, because often we 
have uneasiness without knowing what we want, and then there 
is no definite desire. ... As the final determination [to action] is 
the result of weighing, 1 should think it may hapiien that the 
most pressing unoasiiiess does not prevail [in intluencing the will]; 
for even though it might prevail over each of the upjwsite 
tendencies, taken singly, it may be that the others, combined 
together, overcome it. 'The mind may even make use of the 
method of didtotomy to make now one and now another sot of 
tendencies prevail, as in an assembly we can make one or anotlior 
party prevail by a majority of votes, according to tke order in 
which wo put the questions. It is true that the mind ought to 
make provision for this beforehand; for at the inoinont of struggle 
there is no time for these artifices. Everything whicli strikes us 
at that moment has a strong influence upon the result and helps 
to make up a compound direction, composed almost as in mechanics, 
and without some quick turning aside we cannot stop it. Fertur 
0(mi8 auriga nec audit currus hahentis [The driver is borne on by his 
horses and the chariot heeds not his guidancej.’ The' quotation is 
from Virgil, Georgies, i, 514. 

^ Part iii. of this Introduction, p. 127 note. 

144 INTRODUCTION 

do not at the time deliberately contemplate that they 
shall afterwards have this effect \ 

Moral and meta/physical NecessHy. 

On the other hand, volition is not absolutely neces- 
sitated as the system of Spinoza requires. Will is not 
to be identified with the abstract understanding, whose 
principle is that of contradiction. Will does not invari- 

* Cf. Nouveavx Essais^ bk. ii. ch. ai, $ 33 (E. 255 b ; G. v. 167) : 
*We do not will to will, but we will to do, and if we willed to 
will, wc should will to will to will and that would go on ad 
infinitum. Yet wo munt not overlook the fact that by voluiitai*y 
actions wo often contribute indirectly to other voluntary actions, 
and thougli wo caunot will what wo will, as we cannot oven judge 
what we will, we may nevertheless so act beforehand that wlion 
the time comes we may judge or will that which we would wish 
to be abh3 to will or judge to-day. We devote ourselves to the 
people, the kind of reading, the conditions generally that are' 
favourable to a certain side, wo give no heed to what comes fi'om 
the opposite side, and by thc'se and many other directions which 
wo give to our minds, usually without definito intention and 
witliout thinking of it, wo succeed in deceiving ourselves or at 
least in changing ourselves, becoming converts or peiwerts, according 
to the experiences 'Wo have had.* 

Tliere is an interesting suggestion of the views of Leibniz in 
Montaigne’s Esaais^ bk. ii. ch, 14. Leibniz may quite well have 
rend it. ^It is a pleasant fancy,' says Montaigne, Ho think of 
a mind exactly balanced between two like 'desires For it is 
indubitable that it will never come to a decision, inasmuch as 
determination and choice imply inequality of value ; and if wo 
should bo set between the wine and the bacon, with an equal 
desire to drink and to eat, there is doubtless nothing for it but 
to die of thirst and hunger. To provide against anything so 
inconvenient as this, the Stoics, when they were a^ked how our 
soul cc^mcMj to make choice between two indifferent things, so that 
out of a large number of crowns we take one rather than another, 
though th(^y aro all alike and there is ijo I'eason which disposes 
us to a preference - > tlie Stoics reply that this motion of the soul 
is extraordinary and exot*ptional, arising in us from a strange, 
accidental and fortuitous impulse. It seems to me they might 
rather have said that nothing comes before us in which there is not 
some difference, however slight ; and that, to sight or to touch, 
there is always some preference which tempts and draws us, 
though it be imperceptibly; just as if we suppose a piece of 
twfte equaUy strong throughout, it is utterly impossible that it 
should over break. For in what part of it is the breaking to begin, 
the ffaw to appear? And for it to break in every part at once is 
against all nature.* Cf. Kate Essays^ Introduction, p 37a. 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’s ^ PHILOSOPHY I45 

ably act from a reason the opposite of which is self- 
contradictory : it frequently acts from a sufficient reason, 
that is to say, from an inclining or probable reason. We 
do not act merely because we must, because the eternal 
nature of things makes it absolutely impossible to do 
otherwise. We act towards an end or ideal which is 
not a mere fiction of our own imagination, but a recogni- 
tion of the fitness of things, a more or less clear perception 
of the best among various possible courses of action. Our 
will is thus determined by a moral, not a metaphysical 
necessity, by the inclination which arises from its re- 
cognition of the best, however perfect or imperfect 
that recognition may be. Our will (being our conscious 
appetition) moves in accordance with our ideals ; for 
these ideals are nothing but our perceptions, the potenti- 
alities of our nature, and not merely of our own nature, 
but of the nature of all things, since our perceptions an» 
representations of the whole universe. 

Freedom is Sponianciiy -f Intelligence, 

Accordingly Leibniz, following Aristotle, regards free- 
dom as consisting essentially in spontaneity and intelli- 
gence. But intelligence is not to be interpreted merely 
as the abstract understanding of pure self-consciousness : 
it includes every degree of perception or representation. 
There is thus an infinite variety of degrees in freedom, 
and no actual concrete substance is subject to an abso- 
lutely pure nece^ity, that is, to a necessity which is other 
than an infinitely small degree of freedom. And as all 
Monads alike have spontaneity (for they unfold the whole 
of their life from within themselves), the degree of freedom 
belonging to any Monad depends on the degree of its 
intelligence, that is to say, on the degree of clearness 
and distinctness of its perceptions. Similarly in human 
beings, an action is free in proportion to the clearness 
and distinctness of the reasons which determine it. Thus 
a capricious or wilful action, far from indicating any 

INTHODUCTION 

146 

special freedom of will, is rather lacking in freedom, 
since its determining reason is so obscure or confused 
that it is hardly possible to describe it. Its obscurity 
leads people to overlook it and to fancy that the action 
is entirely without reason. No human action is unde- 
termined, as none is absolutely necessitated ; but the 
liighest freedom accompanies the most perfect knowledge, 
and God is the freest of beings, not because He can do 
whatever He pleases, nor because He always acts spon- 
taneously, from the necessity of His own nature, but 
because every act of His is determined by infinite wisdom 
to the best possible ends. 

Good and Evil. The End of Conduct. 

So also good and evil are relative terms. Actions are 
good in so far as they are determined by clear and distinct 
perceptions, evil in so far as their determining reasons 
are confused. As error is confused perception and is thus 
imi>erfect truth, so sin is the action or appetition which 
flows from confused perception, and is thus imperfect 
righteousness. Now since it is of the essence of the soul 
to bo continually active, since its activity is more free 
the clearer and more distinct are its perceptions, and 
since pleasure consists in the freedom of its activity, the 
end of conduct is the highest degree of freedom, which is 
at once the highest degree of pleasure or felicity and the 
highest degree of perception or knowledga Every soul 
more or less blindly seeks pleasure ; but the blinder it is 
the more does it tend to seek satisfaction in present, 
momentary pleasure. Its blindness or confusedness of 
perception means that it does not think the matter out, 
that it does not take into account the deeper nature and 
coimexions of things, and thus fails to find the best way 
t<T freedom, felicity, wisdom. The soul instinctively tries 
to take the shortest way to happiness ; but the way that 
is really shortest is apt to appear to purblind souls a 

STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY I47 

roundabout way — an Umweg — and so they fail to achieve 
their end. ‘ The stone goes by the most direct, but not 
always the best way towards the centre of the earth, not 
being able to foresee that it will meet rocks on which it 
will be broken, while it would have more nearly attained 
its end, if it had had the intelligence and the means to 
turn aside. Even thus, going straight towards present 
pleasure, we sometimes fall over the precipice of misery . 
*We must not abandon those old axioms that the will 
follows the greatest good it perceives and shuns the 
greatest evil. That the truest good is so little sought 
after is mainly due to this, that in matters and on occa- 
sions in which the senses have very little influence, most 
of our tlioughts are, so to speak, insensible [sourdcs] (I call 
them in Latin, cogitationes cctecae [blind thoughts)), that is 
to say, they are void of perception and feeling and consist 
in the bare use of symbols, like the work of tliose who 
make calculations in algebra, without looking from time 
to time at the geometrical figures. In this respect words 
usually have the same effect as arithmetical or algebraic 
symbols. We often reason in words, hardly having the 
object in mind at all. Now this knowledge cannot move 
us : something vivid is required that we may be moved. 
Yet it is thus that men most often think of God, of 
virtue, of happiness; they speak and reason without 
definite ideas. Not that they cannot have these ideas ; 
for they are in their minds. But they do not give them- 
selves the trouble of carrying on the analysis of their 
ideas 

• • 

* Nouveaux Essaisy bk. iu ch. ai, $ 36 (E. 359 a ; G. v. 175). 

* Ibid. bk. ii. ch. ai, § 35 (E. 357 a G. v. 171^. A» thin 

passage suggests, Leibniz is full of moral optimism. Cf. $ 38 of 
the same chapter (E. a6oa; G. v. ‘When I consider how 

t much ambition and avarice can effect in all thoM wlio once 
set themselves in this line of life, which is almost entirely without 
sensuous and immediate attractions, I despair of nothing, and 
1 hold that virtue, accompanied as it is by so many substantial 
blessings, wbuld have infinitely more effect* [than these vices], if 
some Iwppy revolution of the human race were some day to give 
it vogue and make it iSsshionable.' 

148 

INTRODUCTION 

Justice. Self-love^ Love of Man and Love of Qod, 

Self-love, more or less enlightened, is the ground of all 
our actions. And the more enlightened our self-love is, 
the higher is the ethical value of our action and the better 
are its results. But as, like all other Monads, our souls 
are not mere self-centred atoms but reflect the whole 
universe, our self-love is at the same time, according to 
its degree, a love for others. To love others is to desire 
their good as we desire our own. And as it is the 
essence of our souls to represent or perceive all other 
souls, the more enlightened our own desire of good is, 
the more are wo seeking the highest good of others and 
fulfilling the ends of God. Wo can really love others, 
and express our love to them only in proportion as we 
clearly perceive what is best for them ; and the more 
clearly we perceive what is best for ourselves, the more 
clearly we perceive what is best for them. This follows 
from the very constitution of our being. In other words, 
we seek our own perfection, however blindly ; and we 
are so united to all other men, that in realizing our own 
perfection we are also realizing theirs. Thus the more 
enlightened our self-love is the more disinterested does 
it become and the more nearly does it approach to a pure 
love of God 

Accordingly love is the root of law. Law is not a 
merely external arrangement, an arbitrary command, an 
expression of bare power. It is a moral power, and 
^ moral’ means that which is natural to a good man. 
^ A good man is one who loves all^men, so far as reason 
allows. Accordingly,’ says Leibniz, ‘justice (which is 
the ruling virtue of that affection which the Greeks call 
^iXavSpwrCa) will, if I mistake not, be most fittingly 
defined as the chanty of a wise man^ that is to say, charity 
iiiT obedience to the dictates of wisdom. • . . Charity is 

' Cf. On ih$ NoMoai Right and Justice, p. 385 (£. xt8 b). 

STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 1 49 

universal benevolence, and benevolence is the habit of 
loving*.* 

Thus the ethical progress of man is an approach to the 
reality that is in God, a bringing forth of the image of 
God which is hidden in the soul, through growing en- 
lightenment, that is to say, through the appetition of the 
soul passing fomard to ever clearer and more distinct 
perceptions. This feature of the philosophy of Leibniz 
leads Windelband to describe his ethics as expressing 
‘ the philanthropic ideal of morality which was character- 
istic of the AufkUirung period * in Germany. ‘ ‘^Enlighten 
thyself, and have a care for the enlightenment of thy fel- 
lows : so shall you all be happy that is the philosophy 
professed by the whole eighteenth century i]i Germany 

' On the Notions of Right a'nd Justice (1693), p. 283 (E. n8 a). Cf. 
Nouveaux Essais, bk. ii. c)i. 28, § 5 (K. 286 b; G. v, 232): ‘Ac- 
cording to tliis notion* [externally iinpoHod lawl, *oiie and tlio 
same action would be at the aaim^ time morally good or morally 
bad, under different legislators, just as our able author* [Locke] 

‘ considered virtue ns that which is praised, and accordingly one and 
the same action would be virtuous or not, according to iho different 
opinions of men. Now, as that is not the moaning that is usually 
given to morally good and virtuous actions, I should prefer for my 
part to take as the measure of moral good and virtue the invariable 
rule of reason, which it is the office of God to maintain. So we 
may be assured that by His mejitis, eve,ry moral good becomoH also 
;i physical go<^d, or as the ancients said, every honourable act is 
useful ; in place of which, if wo would express the view of our 
author, wo should have to say that moral good or evil is an imposed 
or ordained [instituiif] good or evil, which he who has command of 
power endeavours by rewards or penalties to make us do or shun. 
The good thing is, that what proceeds from the general ordinance 
of God is conformable to nature or to reason.' 

® Windelband, Geschichie der neueren Philosophiey vol. i. p. 477. 
Cf. Von der Qliicksdigkeil (E. 673 a ; G. vii. 89; : * If now a noble [ hohe \ 
person attains to this, thal in the midst of all luxury arid honours 
he yet finds bis greatest enjoyment in the activities of his umler- 
standiug rnd the practice of virtue, then I hold him doubly noble: 
in himself, on account of this happiness and true joy of his ; and 
for others, since it is most certain that this person, on account of 
his power and insight, can and will also impart light and virtue 
to many others, for such an imparting means a roffecied light 
upon the giver, and those who have tlie same common aim can 
help one another and give new light in the investigation of truth, 
the increase of human powers, and the promotion of that which 
ia best for all. Thus the exalted [^Ae] happiness of noble [AoA«] 

INTRODUCTION 

150 

and also enlightened persona appears from this that they can do 
as much for their happiness as if they had a thousand hands and 
a thousand lives, indeed as if they were to live a thousand times 
as long as they do. For our life is to be counted a true life in so 
far as we do good in it. Now he who does much good in a shorter 
time is the same as him who lives a thousand times longer; which 
is the case with those who can get a thousand and more than a 
thousand hands to work along with them, and consequently in 
a few years more good can happen for their highest peace and 
enjoy mont than otherwise many centuries could bring to pass.' 

PART IV. 

HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL ESTIMATE OF THE rHILOSOl^HY 
OF LEIBNIZ. 

Relation of Leibniz to earlier Thinking^ especially to the 
Peripatetic and Aiomist Positions. 

No genuine thinker can set himself outside of the 
philosophic succession. However protostant or revolu- 
tionary he may be, his problem is always to a great extent 
determined for him by the systems of the past. Unless 
intellect is to be called ‘ bloodless' those systems may be 
said to be in his blood ; he could not turn against them if 
they were not in him, if he had not made them his own. 
He may cease to seek for truth in the perplexing world, 
and try to find it in what he takes to be the simplicity 
and certainty of his own nature ; but, whether he knows 
it or not, that very nature of his is to a great extent what 
the tiresome world has made it. He may ignore history 
or scorn it, but he cannot escape from it 

The conviction of some such truth as this was very 
strong in Leibniz. He held it against the fashion of his 
time. The early port of the seventeenth century was 
a time when the new felt itself to be so very new, the 
modern so very modern, that, with the infallibility of 
youth, it could afford to despise what seemed ancient, 
worn-out, and superseded. When ' our moderns ' (as 
Leibniz frequently calls them) were not contemptuous 
of older thought they were unconscious of it. In fact, 
history for them meant a blind tradition, which they had 

INTRODUCTION 

152 

cast off. Descartes, for instance, when he turned from 
courts and camps to meditation by his own fireside, 
professed to renounce entirely the methods and results of 
earlier thinkers, and to draw from his own unaided con- 
sciousness a system of truth which no learned sophistry 
could shake. Descartes was the discoverer of the * plain 
man.’ Unsophisticated mother-wit will of itself produce 
absolutely certain knowledge, if only we put the right 
instrument into its hands, or in other words, if we 
suggest to it a right method Thinking thus, Descartes 

‘ Recherche de la Vthriie par les Lumieres NaturelleHy (Eui^rea de 
JJesoartes (Cousin), vol. xi. p. 334 : ‘My purpose in this work is to 
i)rin>(f to lijiht tlio wonlth ot oiii* nature, i>y throwing o])en to every 
on© tlie wny hy w'hicli he may lirul in himself, without borrowing 
any tiling from anybody else, the knowledge that is necessary for 
the conduct of his lif<*, and by which ho may afterwards make use 
of this knowledge to master the most abstruse sciences to which 
humun reason can attain. But lest the magnitude of my plan 
should at once fill your mind with such amazement that you can 
no longtu* find it jsiMsiblo to have* any confidence in what 1 say, 
1 may tell you tliut what 1 am uiidortakiiig is not so difiicult as 
might be imagined. In fact, the branches of knowledge which are 
not beyond tho roa<;h of the human mind are united together by 
so vvonderfiii a boml and can be deduced from one another with so 
eoiniilete a necessity, that not much art and skill are required to find 
them <»ul, provided we begin with the moNt simple and learn to 
j ise gradually to the most exalted. This I intend to show here, by 
nn'uns of a succession of reasonings so clear and so commonplace 
that every one will see that, if lie has not noticed the same things 
us 1 have, it is only because he has not turned his €*ycs in the right 
dir<*clion n<»r given Ins thoughts to the same objects as I have, and 
(hat 1 no more deserve glory for having di>covcred those things 
than Would a ]>easant deserve it for having found hy chance under 
his feet a treasure which had long remained hidden, though 
diligently sought after. ... 1 will not inquire into what others 
have known or have not known. Sufiico it to obst^rve that, 
although all the knowledge we can desire w'ore to bo found in 
books, ytd the good they contain is mixell up with so much that 
is useless and is scattered throughout so many big volumes that life 
is not long enough to read them, and to recognize what is useful 
in th(3iu would require more ability than to find it out for our- 
selves. So 1 hope the r(*ader will not 1^ displeased to find here 
n sliorter way, and that the truths I bring forward will be accept- 
able to him, although I do not borrow them from Plato or Aristotle 
but ofi^r them as having value in themselves, like money which 
has the same worth whether it comes from a peasant*© purse or 
from the treasury.' Cf. JHsc<mrse on Method^ Part vi. (Veitch's 
Translation, pp. 109 et sqq.). Huet says that ‘though Desoartea 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 1 53 

inevitably turned his back upon the history of thought, 
counting it little better than * old wives’ fables 

In Leibniz, on the other hand, there is a double re- 
action — a reaction against the scorn of history, and a 
reaction against the extremes to which modern philosophy 
had been carried in its opposition to Schohisticism. The 
whole bent of Leibniz’s thought was against sharp and 
absolute divisions. Thought does not proceed per saltum. 
In the history of thinking, as in all other history, * the 
present is laden with the past and full of the future 
Thus, for Leibniz, the Scholastics may have boon wrong, 
but they were not absolutely wrong. And the inodornH 
may be right, but they are not entirely right. Nothing 
ill tlie past is to bo completely set at naught, for out 
of tho past the present has como. The one cannot be 

}inil carefully studied the aneimt philosophei’H and several of flu* 
iniKlerris, he yet affected to a|»p<iar ignorant of them, in order that 
lie ini^ht he regarded ua tlu* solo discoverer of liia doctrine. Tn 
this Hcvenil of liis diaciple.s have too thoroniihly followed Ins 
example; for tlioy have imitatod his fei^^ned ij|;uoninco hy eulli- 
vating u real ignorance/ TiaiU philosophniuc (b' la fathlcsse Uc V Etfittil 
humatnj bk. iii. cli. lo. Voltaire also givc*H jadnt to tlui general 
opinion ngarding DoMcarti*** by tho satirical suggestion that 
l^escartes had ‘never read anything, not ov<*n tho Gospels.’ 
Sy$tnnci(, liiu* 37 ; fJMrres CompU'fesj vol. x. j). 169. 

^ It was not only the /arf of a rovolutioii in tlumght that gave 
rise to the (’artesian disregard of history : the very nature of the 
revolution itself contributoJ to this end. Tho substitution of 
a iii(.*ctianical for an a pnoH dogmatic way of explaining things 
was inevitably connected with a fresh interest in tho study <»f 
mathematics, and this le<l to a preference of niathematicnl to 
historical methods in philosophy. Cf. lif>f/lcs pour la Direction dc 
V Esprit j (Euvres de Ikstxntes (Cousin), vol. xi. p. aii: ‘We shall 
never be matliematiciaiis, oven although we were to know hy 
heart all the doraoiistratfons of other people, if we arw not capable 
of solving by oursolvo.s all kinds of problems. In the same way. 
though we have read all the reasuniiigs of Plato and Aristotle, tluit 
will not make us pliilosox>hers if wo c^innot bring to any qiuistioii 
a steady judgment. In such a case we should, indecfl, liave 
learned not a science, but history.* Also, p. 309 : ‘ Regarding the 
object of our study we must inquire, not what others have* thought 
nor wliat we ourselves surmise, but what wo can see dearly and 
manifestly [avec ^tdence], or what we can deduce with certainty. 
This is the only way to obtain real knowledge pa science j.’ 

* Cf. Wallace, Logic qf Hegel (and ed.; ; J^oiegomcnaf pp. 203 sqq. 

INTHODUCTION 

154 

understood without the other. Leibniz from his earliest 
days had been a vast reader of books, and his erudition 
tempered his imaginative optimism with reverence and 
caution. Thus his philosophizing most often takes the form 
of hypothesis or suggestion rather than that of dogma or 
demonstration. In the Kantian sense his philosophy is, 
of course, ^ dogmatic ' and not ‘ critical * ; but to some 
extent he foreshadows the ‘ critical spirit As a thinker, 
he counts as foreign to him nothing that men have 
thought, and his ideal philosophy would be a philosophy 
which says clearly all that all previous thinkers have 
stammeringly tried to say. So people have called him an 
‘eclectic,’ and possibly his fame has suffered from the 
imputation. But there is no lack of originality in the 
‘metaphysical romance he brings us, for he is to be 
called an eclectic mainly in contra^it wdth the Cartesian 
extremists, who repudiated all obligation to the past. 
While convinced of the value of his own hypotheses, 
Leibniz rather glories in his indebtedness, rejoicing to 
find himself in the philosophic succession. ‘I despise 
almost nothing,’ he says, ‘except judicial astrology and 
trickeries of that kind ^’ ‘It happens somehow that the 
thoughts of other people are usually not displeasing to me, 
and I appreciate them all, though in divers degrees 
‘ There is as much or more reason to beware of those who, 
most often through ambition, claim to put forth something 
new as to mistrust old impressions. And after having 
devoted a great deal of thought both to the old and the 
new, I have come to the conclusion that most of the 
received doctrines can be taken in alright sense. So that 

' Leibniz iho dogmatic philosophy comes in oil points so 
near to the critical that only one step is needed to rise from the 
point of view of the one to that of the other.' K. (Mscher, Oesch. 
d. neueren PAtl., vol. ii. ch. ai, § i. 

* Hegel, GfeacA. d. Philosophies vol. iii. p. 408. Kant also speaks of 
the universe of Leibniz as *a kind of enchanted world’ [citis Art 
wn besauberter Well]. Rosenkranz, i. 591 ; Hartenstein, iii. 445. 

^ Leitre a Bourguet (1714), (O. iiL 563). 

* BjMicimen (1695) (Q. Math. vi. 936). 

. ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 155 

I wish clever men would seek to satisfy their ambition 
rather by building and making progress than by going 
back and destroying ‘This system’ [Leibniz’s own] 
‘appears to combine Plato with Democritus, Aristotle 
with Descartes, the Scholastics with the modems, theology 
and ethics with reason. It seems to take the best from 
all sides, and then to go further than any one has yet 
gone. ... I see now what Plato meant when he regarded 
matter as an imperfect and transitory thing ; what Aris^ 
totle intended by his entelechy; what is that promise 
of another life, which Democritus himself made, accord- 
ing to Pliny ; how far the Sceptics were right in crying 
out against the senses ; how animals are automata, as 
Descartes says, and have nevertheless souls and feeling, as 
people think ; how a rational explanation is to be given of 
the views of those who attribute life and perception to all 
things — such people as Cardan, Campanella, and (better 
than these) the late Countess of Conway (a Platonist), and 
our friend, the late M. Francois Mercure Van Helmont 
(though otherwise bristling with unintelligible paradoxes), 
with his friend, the late Mr. Henry More 

‘ Nmiveaux bk. i. ch. a, § ai (E. 319 G.-v. 99). 

a Ibkl. bk. i. ch. i (E. aps a ; G. v. 64). Leibniz might have 
added the name of Spinoza, who says that ‘all individual bodioH 
are animate, though in different degrees.* Ethics^ Pt. ii. prop. 13, 
Scholium. Cf. Ldtrc a Basnage (1698) (E. 153 b ; G. iv. 533) ; * When 
we penotrahi d^wply into things, wo observe more reason than 
would be believed in most of the soots of the philesfjpliers. 'Hio 
lack of reality in tlm things of sense, according to the Sceptics ; 
the Pythagorean and Platonist reduction of everything to har- 
monies, numbers, ideas, and iKirceptions ; the “One** and oven tho 
one Whole of Parmenides and Plotinus, without any Spinozism ; 
the Stoic connexion, cdmpatiblo with the spontaneity of others ; 
the vital philosophy of the Gabbalists and Hermetics, who attri- 
bute feeling to everything ; the forms and ent^dechies of Aristotle 
and the Scholastics ; and on the other hand the mechanical 
explanation of all particular phenomena, according to Democritus 
and the moderns - these are all combined together as in a centre 
of perspective, viewed from which the object (confused from every 
other point of view') reveala it« regularity and the Imrmoily of its 
parts. Wo have failed to accomplish this by our wetarian 
limiting ourselves by rejecting others.* The writings of Leibniz 
are full of similar passages. 

INTRODUCTION 

156 

Descartes himself ^ took a good part of his best thoughts ’ 
from the men of old \ And thus, Leibniz would say, it 
is better frankly to own our obligations and to go back to 
the past that we may, if possible, draw from it neglected 
truths, by the aid of which our present theories may be 
improved and thinking may go forward. For the idea 
of progress on the basis of history controls the mind 
of 'Leibniz, to whatever objects he directs his think- 
ing''. Accordingly, admitting the value of the modern 
mechanical philosophy, and yet being conscious of its 
imperfections and dissatisfied with some of its results, 
Leibniz turns back to Scholasticism and its roots in the 
philosophy of Greece, to ‘recover the gold from the 
mire,’ and so build up a more perfect system®. Thus 
Dillmann rightly contends tliat Leibniz can be properly 
understood only if we recognize that his main endeavour 
is to reconcile the modern mechanical view of things witli 
the ancient doctrine of ‘substantial forms.' Yet it must 
not be forgotten that Leibniz sought to effect this recon- 
ciliation by modifying and reconstructing, and not by 
merely dovetailing one system into another. 

The w'ay of ex])luining phenomena by reference to 
‘ substantial forms,’ which Descartes and Gassendi rejected 
in favour of n mechanical explanation of nature, was a 
growth of the Peripatetic philosophy, which in course of 
time had run to seed. It sprang origiiuilly from the 
sound Aristotelian idea that all events or particular things 
are to be explained by reference to active principles, not 

> Leitre u Nioaise (169a) (E. lao a ; G. ii. J34). Cf. Dc siil<f pki/oso- 
phico Nicoltt -,1670), § 34 (E. 67 a ; G. iv. 154). 

^ Thus ouL* (*f liis latest (and not least able) expositors, E. Dill- 
inann, offers Ltubiiiz a homage which he himself would at one© 
Jiave eoudemned. For Dillmann regards the philosophy of Leibniz 
AS final and all-sufticient, if only it bo rightly understood. ‘The 
Monadology is the most perfect fruit of philosophical reflexion, 
the most complete and brilliant system in the history of philo- 
sophy.’ ^ Darstelfunii^, &c., p. 535.) There is a strange irony 
in the fact that so able and devoted a disciple has so completely 
missed his master’s spirit. 

Zsttrs d Bemond (1714) (K. 704 b ; G. iii. 635). 

ESTraATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I57 

entirely external to the events or things, but appearing in 
them. But the meaning, the spirit of Aristotle’s method 
was lost sight of. * Find a principle, a form, of any kind,’ 
came to be the rule of explanation. And thus the number 
of ^substantial forms’ or principles of substance was 
multiplied indefinitely, while, in addition, the most 
minute changes in substances were each explained by 
reference to some * accidental form ’ or principle of 
accident. Anything sufficed as an explanation so long 
as it was called a form. Thus when no intelligible 
account of a phenomenon could readily l>e given it was 
attributed to some hidden principle {qualitas occuUa)f 
which was described by the name of the phenomenon to 
bo explained. Thus, for instance, Toletus * gives us the 
valuable information that ‘ the substantial form of fire is 
an active principh^ by which fire, with heat as its instru- 
ment, produces fire.’ Aft<}r making this amazing sbite- 
ment he recollects that fire is sometimes produced by 
things other than fire, and he proceeds with grave 
elaboration 'to prove that ‘fire can result from all the 
substantial forms capable of producing it in air, in water, 
or in anything else.’ 

This may be ilie reductio ad ahsurdum of the Peripatetic 
Scholasticism ; for indeinl pciitio prhicipn could no farther 
go. It is almost worse than the virius dormitiva of 
Molifere’s satire. But the author does not appear to have 
seen the humour of it. Can we wonder, then, that 
Descartes turned his back upon history ? To him it 
seemed that an explanation to be an explanation must at 
least be intelligible. , There can l>e truth and certainty, he 
thought, only where there is clearness and (distinctness. 
Accordingly all these hidden principles and inexplicable 
forms must be thrown aside as philosophical lumber, a 
screen of ignorance and a source of confusion. In true 
explanation there must be no obscurities, fancies, or 

^ Francisco de Toledo (1539-1596), a Spanish cardinal and thoo* 
logian, author of Sumtna Camiwn Comcientitte, 

158 INTRODUCTION 

guesses ; but it rtiust consist in tracing the necessary 
connexions of things or finding definitely measurable 
relations between them — connexions and relations which 
the understanding can clearly grasp. That is, in brief, 
the mechanical view of what explanation ought to be, 
as the Cartesians held it in opposition to the Scholastics. 

Now Leibniz, as w’e have seen, is not so exclusively 
enamoured of the clear and distinct as Descartes was. 
He thinks Descartes has gone too far in the zeal of his 
refonnatioii. Doubtless the Scholastics were guilty of 
gross absurdities, but if we are to be satisfied with no 
explanation which is not absolutely pei-fect in its intelli- 
gibility, we shall have to do without explanations of most 
things, and our science will perforce bo very abstract and 
very limited. For to be perfectly intelligible or clear and 
distinct in tho Cartesian sense, an explanation must either 
be a self-evident truth or must be logically reducible to 
such a truth. And Leibniz maintains that, while ideas 
or abstractions possible ’ things) may be capable of such 
explanation tus this, it is impossible so thoroughly to 
explain any actually existing finite thing or phenomenon. 
We may * clearly and distinctly ' exphiin how such a 
thing is possible ; we cannot ‘ clearly and distinctly * 
explain why it exists. No absolute reason can be given 
for its existence ; wo must be content with a sufiicient 
reason. An examination of tho measurable relations or 
connexions of things does not yield an exhaustive account 
of their nature, and accordingly, while such an exam- 
ination is valuable so far as it goes, it requires to be 
supplemented by other considerations. The * infinite 
complexity of things makes a perfect analysis impossible, 
and consequently, if we confine ourselves to a strictly 
mathematical method, our science must remain a science 
of abfitiactions and not of actual things as they exist. 

Leibniz, then, admits the value of the mechahical view 
as regards phenomena;, considered in abstraction from the 
realities of which they are the phenomena, but he returns 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBKIZ’S PHILOSOPHY igo 

to the older philosophy for an explanation of the realities 
themselves. Descartes has done well in clearing away 
the great mass of forms, which explained nothing, and in 
accounting for all the changes in nature by legardiiig 
them as due to variations in the distribution of one 
constant quantity of motion. But* motion is not a deep 
enough principle to explain reality. It is entirely apparent, 
phenomenal, on the surface ; and therefore it cannot 
explain that which is half-hidden, which comes and goes, 
which i)asae8 from potentiality into actuality. But this 
is the characteristic of every real thing, every res cotrtpleta. 
In so fai* as it exists, and is not merely possible, it has 
come into being ; it is its nature to pass from potentiality 
to actuality. We cannot have a bettor example of this 
than the human soul, in which we find continuous process 
along with unity and self-identity. Thus it seems to 
Leibniz that real things or substances are to be conceived 
as analogous to the human soul, as forms or living prin- 
ciples in a sense deeper than that of the later Scholastics, 
who had, indeed, almost entirely emptied the term 
‘form ’ of signification. Going back to the source of these* 
views that had so degenerated, Leibniz finds the nearest 
approach to what he is seeking in Aristotle’s ‘entelochy,’ 
the principle of a thing in the sense of its implicit perfect 
realization, what it is in the thing to be or become. Thus 
Leibniz supplements the Cartesian physics by the idea 
that mere body or matter is an abstraction, existing 
nowhere, and that every real existence has a soul or living 
])rinciplo. And in this way the Monad ology restores to 
philosophy, with neW force and meaning, the infinite 
number of forms which was the chief feature of the 
Peripatetic philosophy. 

Leibniz’s relation to Atomist philosophy is for the most 
part a negative one, and it is hardly necessary to add 
anything to what has incidentally been said regarding it. 
He is on the side of modern science in rejecting the idea 
of an absolute vacuum. And when he sometimes speaks 

INTRODUCTION 

l6o . 

of the Monads as atoms his object is probably to show 
that the Monadology expresses clearly what the atomists 
are groping for. His leading thought in this connexion 
is that a real whole presupposes a real unit, that is to say, 
a unit which is essentially connected with the whole, 
representative of it, and not in a merely accidental or 
indeterminate relation to it. The atomists are right, he 
would say, in insisting upon a reid unit, but, on their 
view of reality, it is impossible to find any such unit *. 

Leibniz's ‘ Su fficient Iteason ’ in relation to the * Cause ’ 
of Descartes and Sinnoza. 

When we loc^k, not at what Leibniz was himself aware 
of doing hut at what he actually did without clearly 
knowing it, we may regard his use of the principle of 
sufficient reason as a development of what was implied in 
the use which Descaitos and Spinoza made of the notion 
of ‘causes’ Descartes, as we have seen’*, develops his 
system under the guidance of the principle of contradiction 
alone. But in order to pass from the subjectivity of the 
])iire Ego to an objective, external reality, he finds it 
necessary to have recourse to the principle that everything 
must have an efficient cause which is at least as real as the 
effect (and may be more real than it). This principle he 
assumes witliout any attempt to demonstrate its validity, 
and it is the real basis of his proofs, in the fii*st place, of 
the existence of God, and in the second place, of the 
existence of an external world *. Tlie proofs of the 
existence of God form the keystone of Descai-tes’s system. 
Their function is to make up for the inevitable imper- 
fections of a logic based solely on the principle of contra- 
diction. Clinging, as he does, to the dualism of mind and 

* Cl this Introduction, Part il. pp. 97 sqq. 
» 'Phis r ■ 

I Introduction, Part ii. pp. 58 aqq. 

Gf. Meditation III and tho matliematically arranged arguments 
in the Roponses oucb DeuxOfmo Ohjtchom, 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBMIE'e PHILOSOPHY " l6l 

ak 

matter, of thought and external existence, Descaiiies coiihl 
not rest satisfied with the idea of a most perfect being. He 
must ^t beyond the idea to the reality ; he must justify 
not one or another idea but thought itself. In the charac- 
teristics of * clearness * and ‘ distinctness ’ in ideas he had 
found a criterion for the coijsistency of thouglit with itself. 
A clear and distinct idea completely satisfied thought, but 
it still lemained to be showm that such an idea has 
objective validity ; that there actually exists that wliich it 
represents. Now according to Descartes, it is the truth- 
fulness, the consistency, the goodness of an actually 
existing God (who would not l>e perfect had He not these 
qualities) that as.sure to us the validity of our clear and 
distinct ideas. ‘ Even the principle,' says Descartes, 

* which I have already taken for a rule, namely, that all 
the things which we clearly and distinctly conceive are 
true, is ceiiain only IxH'ause God is or exists, and l)e(*ause 
He is a perfect Being, and l>ecause all that we possess is 
derived from Him. ... If wa did not kn(»w that all which 
we possess of real and true procts^ds from a pei'fect and 
infinite Being, however clear and distinct our ideas might 
be, we should have no ground on that account for tlie 
assurance that they possessed the perfection of being true 
Accordingly, as regards real existenc^o (apart from that of 
the pure Ego), everything in Descartes’s system ultimately 
turns upon this unexphuned piincipie of cause, by means 
of w’hich he proves the existence of God, and which he 
again employs in establishing the reality of the worhl. 
God must exist, for otherwise no adequate cause can be 
assigned for the oxi.stence of tlys idea of God in us. And 
again, we must postulate the real existence of external 

* Method, Part iv. (Vcitcli’s Tr., p. 8o). Ct, Meditation IV: ‘It i« 
impossible that God should ever deceive me ; since in all fnnul 
and deceit one meets with some kind of imperfection ; and 
although it may seem that to be able to deceive is a mark of clever- 
ness or of power, the wish to deceive always indicittes, withr^ni 
a doubt, feebleness or malice ; and accordingly such a wish cannot 
exist in God.’ Of. Hegel, Geachichie der Phil. iii. p. 319. 

M 

INTRODUCTION 

162 

things as the cause of certain ideas in us^ unless we are to 
suppose that God deceives us ^ 

Spinoza takes the one substance, God, as his startings 
point of absolute certainty, and accordingly proofs of the 
existence of God have for him no meaning. Nevertheless, 
he does not altogether dispense with the notion of cause, 
dstensibly he reduces the relation of cause and effect to 
a logical connexion, like that between a geometrical figure 
and its properties. But ho makes use of the notion of 
cause to introduce variety into the perfect unity of sub- 
stance by describing it as cause of itself (causa sui). And 
in his distinction between natura naturans and natura 
naturata he endeavours, by a further application of the 
notion of cause, to bridge the gulf which his logic has set 
between the infinite (as purely indeterminate) and finite 
or determinate existence. Natura naturans is substance 
expressed in att ributes or ^God as the free cause of all that 
is.’ Natura naturata is ‘ all that follows from the necessity 
of the Divine nature or from any one of the attributes of 
God, i, e. all modes of God’s attributes, considered as 
things which exist in God, and without God can neither 
exist nor bo conceived In short, causa sui or substance 
is luialyzed into two moments, cause (natura naturans) and 
effect (natura naturata) ; but both of these are ultimately 
the same thing. Apart from this distinction without a 
difierence it would be impossible for Spinoza to identify 
his infinite substance with the actual world. And yet, 
in spite of it, for Spinoza the finite, as finite, remains 
unreal. 

Now this notion of cause, which Descartes and Spinoza 
employ without attempting to explain or justify it, is, in 
a more general form, acknowledged by Leibniz as an 
independent logical principle, that of sufficient reason. 
There must be, not merely an adequate cause but a 
sufficient reason for the existence of each individual thing. 

^ Of. Meditation VJ, passim. 

* Part i. prop. 29, Schdliwn, 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBKlz’s PHILOSOPHY 163 

And as we have seen the suifioiency of the reason rests 
ultimately on the nature of God as perfect in wisdom, 
goodness, and power. Manifestly there is here a working- 
out of what is more vaguely implied in Descartes’s 
repeated references to the perfection of the character of 
God as our warrant for the reality of things. And the 
argument of Spinoza (however inconsistent it may be) i# 
based on the conviction that eveiy iinite thing must find 
its place in the one all-embracing system, that is to say, 
must follow from the nature of God in whom are all 
perfections. Thus the addition of the principle of suffi- 
cient reason to that of contradiction is not an entirely 
novel suggestion on the part of Leibniz, but is an out- 
growth of what w^as already involved in the rc^onings of 
his immediate predecessors. It is a stop towards the 
reconciling of their incoiisisb'ucios by bringing into clear 
consciousness a principle wdiic*h they blindly and imper- 
fectly employed. 

The VhUosophy of Wolff, 

The philosophy of Leibniz suffiu'od grievously at the 
hands of his imnn^diate disciples 'K Probably this was 
inevitable. Few of his writings were published in his 
lifetime, and his philosophical opinions were dispersed 
through masses of manuscript which might well be the 
despair of his friends. And the philosophical system 

* This Introduction, Part ii. p. 66. 

^ *It has boon with I^cibniz as with sovoral philosophors of 
antiquity, who might havp said : **May God preserve ys from our 
friends ; as for our enemies, wo our^lves shall be able to prot«^ct 
ourselves from them.”* Kant, Entdeckung nach der aVe neve Krihh 
dcT reinea Vernun/t durch eine dltere entbehilieh Qcmacht ifferden sufl. 
Rosenkranz, i. 478 ; Hartenstein, iii. 390. Gf. Wallace, Logic of 
Ilegd (,and cd.) ; Prolegomtruif ch. 17. Kant himself in one of his 
earlier writinj^ {Trduim eines Geisiersehers, &c.; Rosenkranz, vii. 45 ; 
Hartenstein, iii. 58) speaks of 'J^ibniz's amusing idea, ocrording 
to which we might perhaps swallow in our coffee atoms destinetd 
to become human souls.* And a naturalist of the end of last 
century, Otto F. Miiller, thought that he had discovered Monads 
under the microscope I 

M 2 

INTRODUCTION 

164 

itself must have seemed as broken as was the expression 
of it. The two principles of contradiction and sufficient 
reason stood side by side, and there was no clear account 
of the relation between them. A system with two 
independent principles can have no stability, and this 
defect must somehow be removed. On the other hand, 
Newton had triumphed in the long controversy, and his 
fame had led to Leibniz’s discredit. Leibniz’s metaphysics 
soemed in some points incompatible with the Newtonian 
physics, and must therefore to some extent l>e modified. 
This systematizing and modifying of the philosophy of 
Leibniz were accomplished by Christian Wolff (1679- 
I754)» who himself, however, strongly objected to being 
^called a mere disciple of Leibniz, or joi ela)>orator of the 
Leibnitiaii ])hilosoj)hy. 

Wolirs position may be regarded as in some respects 
a return to the Cartc\sian attitude of mind. His solution 
of the difficulty arising from the supposition of tw^o co- 
ordiiiate first principles is to make the principle of sufficient 
reason a logical inference fn)m that of coiiti’adictioii, and 
thus to make the law of contradiction the one supreme 
law of thought. He liolds that the difference l)ehveeii 
something’ and ‘ nothing’ is absolute, ‘ wmething’ l>eing 
that of w'hich there is some notion, wdiile ‘ nothing ’ is 
that of w'hich there is no notion \ Thus everything must 
have a sufficient reason, i. ©. some reason why it exists 
rather than does not exist, for otherwise something would 
proce<Hl out of nothing. But cx nihilo nihil fit : there is 
no middle term between ^something ’ and ‘ notliing^.’ So 
in Wolff* the antithesi.s of being anfl not-beiiig is supreme, 
to the exclusion of the notion of becoming. ^ The impos- 
sible is nothing.’ And on the other hand, ^the possible 
is always something^.’ It ought logically to follow that 
everything possible is actual, and that there is no distiuc- 
tioR between essence and existence. But at this point the 

* Ibid. 70. 

^ OntoloffiOf 57, 59^ 

* Ibid. loi, 103 . 

E&riMATE OF Leibniz’s philosophy 165 

Leibnitian influence reasserts itself, and Wolff becomes 
confused. His ruthless logic gives way. ^Besides the 
possibility of a being, something else is still needed for 
its existence/ * Existence or resility is the complement of 
possibility’/ As an illustration of what he means he 
takes the case of a tree which is potentially in the seed, 
but which requires for its actual development (its exis- 
tence as a tree) the co operation or complement of otjjier 
existing things. Tims Wolff returns to the Leibnitian 
distinction between the ‘possible’ and the ^ com possible,’ 
after he has emptied of all moaning the* principle of 
sutficiont reason, on which the distinction rests. To put 
it otherwise, if the actual existing ‘something’ IkS more 
than a merely possible ‘something’ fas Wolff’s position 
here implies), then there must be a middle tenn between 
the actual ‘something’ and ‘nothing.’ And this, of 
course, is flatly contradictory of WollFs original princi])lc. 

Thus while Wolff makes a show of logical coinpleteness 
and system, ho is really Jiacking in j)iuces the philosophy 
of Leibniz. He is fascinated by its individualist element, 
the self-suflicienoy and inuiiml exclusiveness of the Monads, 
which we have seen to be connected, in the thinking of 
Leibniz, with the survival of a narrow intorprebition of 
the principle of contradiction ^ Wolff carrias to an ex- 
treme this tendency (which, after all, is not the suj)remo 
power in Leibniz’s thought), and gives us, as the outc'orne 
of the bare principle of contradiction, an abstract indi- 
vidualism, just as Spinoza had already from the same 
principle developed an ah^itract iiniversalism or pantheism. 
It is bec^iuse of the essentially dogmatic charabter of the 
principle that such extremes can eocli be represented as 
flowing from it. As employed by Spinoza and by Wolff 
the principle can legitimately yield nothing but the bare 
self-identity of the data or assumptions with which each 
begins his work. Accordingly (as in this cas^)) if the 

‘ Ontologia, 173 , 174 . 

^ This Introduction, Part ii. p. 68. 

i66 

INTRODUCTION 

presup{>osition9 are in complete opposition to one another, 
we may have two contrary philosophical systems, both 
apparently flowing from the same first principle. 

Wolfl*, then, rejects the la\v of continuity and returns 
to a position which has some analogy with that of 
De8cai*t#\s. Ostensibly his philosophy is a Monadology ; 
really it is a kind of combination of Monadology with 
A^inism \ The Cartesian dualism is restored in the form 
of a distinction between spiritual and physical Monads. 
The spiritual Monads alone, in Wolff’s opinion, deserve 
the name of Monads. The others are ‘ elements of things,’ 
atomi naturae- These physical atoms or unconscious 
Monads are no longer regarded as living mirrors, repre- 
senting or perceiving the whole universe. They are still 
automata, hut they are no longer souls. They have 
nothing in <‘ommon with the spiritual Monads except the 
characteristics of unity, simplicity, and activity. Thus 
the whole of L('ibni//s hypotheses regarding unconscious 
thinking, })etites percept ionb\ &c., are thrown aside, and we 
have, in plac^e of Descartes’s two substances (thought ami 
extonHion\ two sots of independent particular substances, 
th<^ plienoniena of the one set being thoughts and of the 
other set motions. As an inevitable consequence of this, 
the system of pre-established harmony, as Leibniz con- 
ceived it, disappears also. Wolft‘ retains the name, but 
he regards the harmony not as a hypothesis by which to 
exphtin the relations of each independent particular sul>- 
staiice to every other, hut merely as an explanation of the 
connexion between soul and body, between spiritud atoms 
or Monads and corporeal atoms. * According to Leibniz 
there could be no real interaction between Monads. But 
WolfTs * atoms of nature,’ being purely physical, do 
really influence one another. He sees no difficulty in 

^ Cf. Scliolling, f^mmtliche Werhf', vol. vi. p. ii6: ‘As often 
hail{»ens, the immediate successors of Leibniz set aside the really 
spe<nilative part of his doctrine, the Monadology. For example 
the most celebrated of them, Wolff, admits it into his system only 
in the guise of a hypothesis.' 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 167 

holding that motion can be transferred from one to 
another His difficulty is the original Cartesian problem — 
How can a purely thinking substance influence an abso* 
lutely non-thinking substance, or how can motion pass 
into thought? And the pre-established harmony is, in 
Wolff’s view, preferable to Occasionalism merely bocause 
it means one large and comprehensive initial miracle 
rather than an endless series of miraculous interventions 
of God. 

The natural, physical Avorld is thus, according to Wolff, 
entirely subject to mechanical laws. There is, indeed, a 
realm of final causes, but the ends of things are com- 
pletely external to the things themselves. The final cause 
of a physical substance is not, as in tho view of Leibniz, 
to be found in the nature of tlio substance itself, in its 
tendency towards aelf-roalization, but in a law imposed 
upon it from outside. Thus the Wolffian teleology 
becomes almost childish, and suggests at timcvs the naive 
explanations of things which are to be found in hucIj 
writers as Bernardiii do St. Pierre, who tells us that the 
melon is made large in comparison with other Miits to 
indicate that it ought to be eaten not in solitude but cn 
famille, and that tho cow with only ono calf has four teats 
because tho human race is fond of milk. Wolff hardly 
rises to this height, but he regards tho stare ns existing to 
give us light at night, and he points out that ‘ the light 
of day is of great advantage to us ; it enables us to carry 
on comfortably certain works which comparative darkness 
would make impossible or difficult, and also more expen- 

‘ Here again WolflTs* position is glaringly incoifsistont. HiK 
physical atoms or Monads are supposed to have a unity like that 
of the Loibnitian Monads. Yet he denies to them that which, for 
Leibniz, is the principle of this unity, viz. a suul difforing not in 
kind but in degree from tho conscious and rational soul. Tlio nionu 
naturae are, in short, neither atoms nor Monads, but a contradictory 
jumble of tho characteristics of both. Wolff regards the atomi 
naturae as Mn themselves indivisible,' and thus distinguishes them 
from atomi materialeef which are ‘in thi^mselvos divisible,’ but which 
cannot be actually divided by any natural power. BiK) Cosmolagia, 
$$ i8a sqq., 186 sqq. and 239, 

i68 

INTRODUCTION 

6iye This doctrine of final causes is a most essential 
part of the Wolffian system. For, according to Wolff, 
although nature is ultimately explicable by purely 
mechanical laws, we cannot actually reduce it to* its 
ultimate elements, and consequently, in explaining 
physical phenomena as they are presented to us, we must 
continually have recourse to final causes. So also, while 
Wolff, adopting the phrase of Leibniz, speaks of God as 
freely choosing to create ^ the best of all possible worlds,’ 
he takes ‘ best ’ as meaning not ‘ best on the whole,’ but 
rather ‘best for mankind.’ Thus the optimism of Wolff 
is as shallow and arbitrary as his teleology, and it is not 
surprising that Kant, even in the early years when he 
followed Wolff on most points, desei-ted him in this 
matter, and turned back to views more akin to the greater 
thoughts of Leibniz. 

Udation of the IViilosophif of Leibniz to that of Kant 

In the earliest writings of Kant (who, through his 
teacher Knutzen, was bred a Wolffian), questions regard- 
ing space •are discussed -— questions, for instance, as to the 
reason wliy our space has three dimensions and as to the 
possibility and reality of other spaces having more than 
three dimensions. Kant was evidently already some- 
what dissatisfied with the current Wolffian view of space 
and was beginning the coume of inquiry that ultimately 
led to the doctrine of the Transcendental Aesthetic, a doc- 
trine more in harmony with the view of Leibniz than 
with that of Wolff®. According to Wolff, ‘real’ sjmce 
must be distinguished from ‘ inuigiqary ’ space, although 

* Vcmibi/tigt'i Gedankm von den Abaichtrn der natitHichm Dinge. Cf. 
Aus/ibiiiiche NdchncM von mnen eigenen Schri/ten^ §§ i86 sqq. 

* ‘Loibniz 8 doctrine of sense confused thou^lit — confused in 
such a way ns to make us n'prosent the world as an order of things 
in space and time — though Kant explicitly rejects it, is in fact 
rather elaborated than superseded by his do<^triue of space and 
time^ forms of sensibility, under which alone expeiience is 
possible, but which prevent what is true of phenomena from being 
true of things in themselves, and knowledge from reaching the 
totality which it seeks.* T. H. Oreen, Works, vol. iii. p. 135. 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 169 

the reeults obtained from consideration of the notion of 
' imaginary’ s^^ace may justifiably be applied to *real’ 
space \ ^Real ’ space is the order of co-existing things* 
an<f is inseparable fi*om the things themselves, God 
alone can have a perfectly adequate notion of it and can 
thus actually perceive its continuity. But we can form 
an abstract or ‘ imaginary ’ notion of space, by thinking 
it as distinct from (or indifferent to) the co-existing things 
of which it is an ‘ order ’ ; and this imaginary space is, 
of 0001*86, homogeneous and continuous. The space of 
mathematics and physics is thus ‘ imaginary space ’ ; but 
it is such that the laws of mathematics and physics are 
valid in relation to ^ real ’ space. Manifestly we have hori» 
neither the view of Leibniz nor that of Newton, but a 
doctrine which points to a possible reconciliation between 
them. On the one hand, space is not merely confused 
j.>erception. As space it htis reality : it is a real order in 
which physical things exist. But, on tho other hand, 
this real space is not the space of the mathematician. 
He deals with a kind of projection or symbol of it, and 
thus the Newtonian position also is without WolfTs 
assent. It might easily be shown that the Wolffian 
doctrine of sj>ace is riddled with inconsistencies, of a kind 
similar to those which have been noticed in WolfTs 
account of individual substances. But the matter of 
main interest is that Kant received tho problem of space 
in the form which Wolff had given it ”, and that through- 

* Ontdogia^ 599. 

* In analogy with tinao which is ‘the order of siicccHHive things 
in a continuous series,’ tipace is definod as ‘the order of simul- 
taneous things, in so far as they co-exlst.' Oniotogia, 589. Of. 
Coffmdogiay 56. 

* "Kant’s criticism of Leibniz illustrates this. Cf. Fortfifilintte tier 
Metaphynk seit Lvibnia und Wolff (Rosenkranz, i. 516; Jliirtcnstuin, 
iii. 441): ‘The principle of the identity of indiscoriiihh*s fpnnci~ 
pium identiiatis indiscemib ilium) is that, if from A and which, in 
rcmpoct of all their internal characteristics (of quality and of 
quantity) are entirely alike, we make a concept as of two different 
things, we are in error, and we ought to have taken them for one 
and the same thing (numcro eadem:. Leibniz could not admit that 

INTRODUCTION 

170 

out the writings of his pre-critical period, we find Kant 
working towards a view of space in which the Leibnitian 
and Newtonian positions shall be reconciled. Although 
he does not himself express it in this way, his problem 
might fairly bo regarded as that of finding a single con- 
ception of space which can take the place both of the 
‘real 'and of the imaginary ' space of Wolff. In what 
sense can space bo regarded as at once real and ideal ? 
Not in the Wolffian sense ; for that practically involves 
a circulus in dcjinierfdo : ‘ simultaneous or co-existing ' 
physical things presuppose sjiace. Nor is the Newtonian 
view more sjitisfactorj", for, while it recognizes that space 
is prior to actual cases of spatial existence and while it 
maintains the reality of space, it implies that the whole 
uni verso is sot in space and that the spatial system of 
relations has a real existence independent of the things 
Isolated, Accordingly, through a course of thinking which 
yve need not here trace Kant arrives at the position which 
he expounds in the Critique of Pure licason, namely, that 
space is a form presupposed in the possibility of our 
sense-experience. It is not in any way given ah extra ; 
l)ut it is the condition of there being externality for us. 
It is not a thing in itself a real object ; but as it is a per- 
fectly pure perception, free from all the contingent detail 

wo ooiiUl Rtill distinguish ttiom through their places in space (as it 
IS possible to perceive quite similar and equal spaces outside of one 
another without being able to say thatythoy are one and the same 
space, for otherwise we could ]»ut the whole of intlnito space into 
a cubic incli or loss). Leibniz could not admit this, for he re- 
cognizes no other distinction among things than that which is made 
through notions [Bcfft und refuses to aillow any way of repre- 
sentation s}.>ecifically distinct from this* such as intuition [/1 m- 
9chaumig\ and more especially intuition a priori. On the contrary 
he thought that this must be reduced to ]>ure notions of 

co-existence or succession, and thus ho sot himself against common 
sense, .which will never bo persuaded that the existence of a drop 
of water in one place makes it impossible for a perfectly similar 
and equol drop to exist in another place.' 

* Bor a full account see Caird's OritKal Philosophy of Kant, vol. i. 
Introduction, ch. 5, especially pp. 164-168 and 178-183. Also 
hk. 1 . ch. a, pp. 304, 305. Cf. Hutchison Stirling, Text-Book to Kant, 
pp. 34-43 ttud 366 sqq. 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBKIZ'S PHILOSOPHY 1 71 

of sense, it satisfies the requirements of Newtonian 
mathematics even better than if it were an independent 
entity. On the other hand, while it belongs to perception 
or direct intuition and is therefore not, as Leibniz an<l 
Wolff held, a relation or order among things which aro 
prior to it, yet it is subjective or ideal, it belongs to our 
minds, and accordingly the difficulties inseparable from 
the Newtonian view of space (as expounded by Clarke, 
for instance) are avoided. 

But mere sense-perception under the forms of space 
and time is not, according to Kant, a complete experience. 
It requires the complement of conception, which is tho 
function of the undei*standing. Hero Kant Vjelieveil him- 
self to ho in complete opposition to Leibniz, and yet it 
may well be doubled whether the opposition is really 8(» 
great as Kant supposed it to be. In the Critirpic of Pure 
Jleason Kant does draw a much 8hai*per line betwH^on per- 
ception and conception than Leibniz did. Kant may be 
said to regard the dillerence as one of kind, while for 
Leibniz it is a difference of degree. Leibniz, as wo have 
seen, gave to perception an exceedingly wide meaning, 
a meaning which includes conception and representation 
of every kind, whether conscious or unconscious. But 
Kant's ‘perception^ is limited to sonse-roprosontation. 
Nevertheless Kant’s ‘ perception ’ is avowedly abstract, 
and the confused perception, which is Leibniz’s name for 
sense- know ledge, is abstract also, though in a somewhat 
different way. In fact, for Kant the distinction between 
perception and conception is a distinction between abstract 
elements in a conc*rete whole of exponenc^, while the 
corresponding distinction in Leibniz is a distinction be- 
tween degrees of perfection in one quality or function. 
Thus for Kant sense-perception is abstract, because its 
reality always implies a complementary element, while 
for Leibniz it is abstract because it is imperfectly deve- 
loped, because it contains the potentiality of greater 
perfection. The weakness of the Kantian position is its 

INTRODUCTION 

172 

tendency to over-sharpen the distinction between percep- 
tion and conception by ignoring the idea of development, 
while the defect of Leibniz is his inclination to define the 
common quality or function (‘perception') by its lowest 
rather than its highest terms, to interpret it, not as essen- 
tially self-consciousness, which is its most perfect develop- 
ment, biit as mere representation or multiplicity in unity, 
to which consciousness and self-consciousness are added 
characteristics \ Yet while Kant makes an advance from 
the position of Leibniz, they are on similar lines, and wo 
can read their reconciliation in Hegel 

Leibniz does not give any clear accoupt of the relations 
between the principle of contradiction and that of suffi- 
cient reason, as he uses them in his philosophy ; but it is 
evident that he considered them to be, in some way, 
ultimately in harmony. The tendency of Kant, on the 
other hand, is to emphasize the distinction between them, 
while treating each, apart from the other, as abstract. 
The course of Kant's pre-critical thinking makes this clear. 
He begins with the Wolffian view that the principle of 
sufficient reason is reducible to that of contradiction ^ and 
accordingly, that the principle of contradiction is the sole 
ultimate principle of knowledge. But gnuhially ho comes 
to see that the principle of contradiction has to do with 
nothing but the form of thought and that it yields merely 
a self-consistent system of knowledge, based on dogmatic 

^ In this, I think, thoro is to bo found the exphinntion of the 
sopuiation (nlniosl, nmounting to h distinction of kiiid) l>et\voeii 
rational souls and tlio other Monads, which Ijtubniz makos with 
such apparent ineoiisistoncy. Cf. this Intrbduction, Part iii.p 116. 

® ‘The doctrines tif Leibniz formed the permanent atinosphero 
of Kant’s mind. His reading of Hume in middle life no doubt 
helped to datermino the mode in which he absorbed and trans- 
formed them ; but it was upon them, as we find in the (Jrifique no 
less than in his earlier writings, that his mind constantly worked, 
and there would 1ms a tK'tter case, at any rate, for describing him 
as a corrected and developed Leibniz than for putting him in such 
a relation to any one else/ T. H. Green, IPorAs, vol. lii. p. ,134. 

* Cf. Principitjrum primtrum coffHUi<mUt metaphyskae tma dilucidalio 
^1755) (Rosenkranz, i. 4; Hartenstein, iii. 4). ^ 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 1 73 

presuppositions. It ensures order and necessary con- 
nexion in thought, but it is inadequate to reality. It 
gives the logical ground of things {logiscke Grund) but 
not the ground of their reality ilieal-gnmd) \ Thus the 
principle of contradiction is insufficient when treated as 
the ultimate ^principle of metaphysics. Kant develops 
this position in connexion with the problem of proving 
the existence of God. He rejects, as a begging of the 
question, the Cartesian demonstration which maintains 
that existence is necessarily involved in the perfection of 
the most perfect Being. Existence, Kant says, cannot be 
a pi-edicate. That is to say, you cannot take out of any 
subject more than is contained in it : the principle of 
contradiction will never entitle you to pass from any * 
mere idea to the reality of that idea. Pure thought, 
determined by the principle of contradiction, always 
presupposes somothiiig 'given,’ and thus reality must 
ultimately lie outside of pure thought. Thus, for example, 
the real e^iuse of anything is always more than a mere 
reason : a causal connexion is not a mondy logical con- 
nexion. It is this line of thinking that leads Kant to 
emphasize the distinction between logical understanding 
and empirical sense, and to lay stress pn ^ ex])erience ’ (un- 
rationalized and unexplained) as the ground of reality y 
in a way that recalls the j>osition of Locke. Thus, while 
admitting the certainty of mathematics, Kant protests 
against the use of a purely mathematical method in deal- 
ing with metaphysics or with the theory of knowledge, 
on the ground that such a method is * merely synthetic,’ 
that is to say, on the ground that it does hot analyze 
actual experience but deduces from (or builds upon) arbi- 

^ Cf. Der eineig mbglicke Beweisgmnd su einer Demonstration dss 
Daseins GoUes (1763) (KoHonkraiiz, L 161 ; HartenHtein, vi. ii). Kniit 
makes advances towards this position in the Essay on Die falschc 
SpOs^flndigkeit der tier syllogistischen Figuren (1762} (^Rosenkranz, i. 55 ; 
Hartenstein, i. i), and in the Versuch den Begriff der negathcn 0r(>8Hen 
tn die WdlweUkeit ehm^/Uhren (1763) (Kosenkranz, i. 113; Harten- 
atein, i. 19). 

INTKOBUCnON 

174 

trary or at least mind-made presuppositions \ Finally in 
the Critique of Pure Beasonvio have Kant’s solution of the 
problem as to the relations between a priori and aposterioriy 
thought and experience. And his contention is that the 
a priori is not merely that which is self-evident and can 
be expressed in an analytic judgment, bul that which 
experience universally and necessarily involves as the 
condition of its possibility. 

This, after all, is but the working out of what is out- 
lined by Leibniz, when he insists on ‘ compossibility,’ or 
necessity arising from the system of things, as the ground 
of reality. For ‘Leibniz the real is the ‘fitting,* that 
which has its place in the beat possible system or world : 
•for Kant the real is that which is in an orderly exixjrionce 
constituted by principles w'hich are the logical a priori 
conditions of its possibility. In the philosophy of Kant, 
accordingly, we have a more thorough application of the 
principle of sufficient reason, which Leibniz had imper- 
fectly applied. Leibniz’s explanation of the existence of 
the actual system of things iis the result of a choice among 
all possible worlds is duo to the inconsistency in his posi- 
tion which comes from working with two co-ordinate first 
principles. The totality of possible worlds is at once a 
system and not a system. If it were a system, the choice 
by God of the best possible world would be determined 
by the nature of the whole system x)f possibles. The best 
possible world would be the best world in that system, 
and thus the problem of Leibniz would not be solved by 
the ‘ choice,’ but would merely be carried a stage farther 
back. On the other hand, if the' totality of possible 
worlds were not a system, the choice of God would prac- 
tically be arbitrary : at least it would be grounded on no 

* Cf. VmterfMciiung uNn* die Deuttichkeit dir Orundftdtse der natHrlicken 
lliedogjiB vnd der MareU ( 1764 ") (Rosenkranz, i. 75 ; Harteastein, i. 63 ). 
See alHo Kant's Inau^ral Thesis on biM^oming Professor in KOnigs- 
berg. De mundi ssnsibUiN atqwt inteUigihilis forma et principiis ( 1770 ), in 
which the distinetion between sense and understanding is brought 
to the sharpest point. (Rosenkranz, i. 30 Z ; Hartenstein, iii. 133 .) 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIZ’S PHILOSOPHY 1 75 

reason intelligible to us. God would choose the best 
possible world ; but it would be the best possible for no 
other reason than that He chose it. Thus the totality of 
possible ideal worlds has the appearance of being a system, 
while really it is not It is this ambiguity that conceals 
the fundamental inconsistency of Leibniz — the incon- 
sistency of regarding God as both within the system of 
things and quite outside of it (as the Creator), making 
Him at once the source of the whole system of mutually 
exclusive Monads and the highest Monad of the series, 
without whom the system would itself be incomplete. 
The principle of sufficient reason, rightly understood, in- 
volves the supposition of one all-embracing system ; but 
though Leibniz had certainly an inkling of the truth 
of this, his individualistic tcndc^ncy and his dread of 
Spinozism prevented him from fully realizing it. 

For Kant there is hut one system of exi)erience, that 
which actually exists. The sup])osition of a choice among 
possible worlds is no part of liis philosophy. But in 
Kant’s doctrine the ‘ thing-in-itsolf ’ ))erforms very much 
the same function as did the ‘ choice ’ in Leibni/Zs scheme 
of things. Each is a way of allowing for a possible reality 
other than the actual system, although the tieed of this 
arises from one cause in Leibniz, and from another in 
Kant. Leibniz wishes to avoid a doctrine of blind neces- 
sity : Kant is afraid of a pure relativity. They both feel 
that the ultimate ground of the system of mutually related 
things must be sought in some principle outside the 
system itself ^ The dogmatism of Leibniz appears in his 

^ Cf. Critique of Pure Heasortf lioBcnkraiiz, ii. 524 ; IlarfenHU)iiif 
ii. 513 (Moiklejohn’B Tr., p. 414) : ‘The riotionn of reality, of Bub- 
siancct, of causality, of necessary cxistonco have no bigiiili* 

canco in deteruiining any object, beyond their ub& in making 
possible the empirical cognition of a thing. They may thus be 
used to explain the possibility of things in the world of scns4‘, but 
they cannot be used to explain the possibility of the umurne 
since in this case the ground of explanation must lie outside thc^ 
world, and can therefore be no object of a possible experience. 
Now, relatively to the world of sense, 1 may admit such an incom- 
prehensible being, the object of a mere idea ; though I may not 

INTRODUCMOX 

lj6 

making this principle a real and independent ^oonatitutive ’ 
ground of the world, and he glofises over the difficulty of 
explaining its relation to the world by metaphors such as 
the ^ Divine choice ’ and the producing of created Monads 
by continual ‘ fulgurations of Divinity.' The e|iticism of 
Kant, on tho other hand, leads him to interpret this 
ultimate principle negatively, as a merely ‘regulative' 
idea, of the absolute nature of which the speculative 
reason can say nothing. Its reality, however, is assured 
to uB by the practical reason, and in it we must suppose 
that'^there is a reconciliation of necessity and freedom, 
of tho kingdom of nature and the kingdom of grace, of 
niechauLsin and teleology. We cannot give a completely 
satisfactory account of the phenomenal world as a system 
governed by final causes, for we have no speculative 
knowledge of tho ultimate intelligence and the ends it 
sets before itself. We may guess at final causes ; but 
we cannot understand their producing anything, apart 
from mechanical causes. And on the other hand, while 
we cannot help regarding the phenomenal world as a 
mechanical system, ‘ absolutely no human reason (in fact 
jio finite reason like ours in quality, however much it 
may surpass it in degree) can hope to understand the 
j)roduciion of even a blade of grass by mere mechanical 
causes We must, in certain ciises, postulate adaptation 
to ends. Dut w e can quite conceive an intelligence which 
itan think the world, not discursively from part to part as 
we do, but immediately and completely, from wdiole to 
part, and for such an intelligence, final and efficient 
cause, freedom and necessity, wcfuld be harmonized. 
For it to know and to ci*eate the world would be the 

admit its existence in itself. ... It is only a something in general 
which I know not in itself, but to which, as a ground of systematic 
unity in cognition, 1 attribute characteristics analogous to tho 
notians of the understanding in the empirical sphere.* 

‘ Kant, Critiqu 4 f qf Judgmenty Part ii. div. ii. § 77 (^Bosenkranz, iv. 
301 ; Hartensteln, vii. aM ; Bernard’s Tr., p. 396). See the whole 
[kSMsage. 

ESTIliATE OP XaEIBNlZ’S PHILOSOPHY I77 

same thing : creation would be its thought. Thus Leib- 
niz and Kant are at one in placing the ultimate synthesis 
of things, the sufficient reason of experience, in some- 
thing that is beyond experience itself, and that is related 
to experialke in a way which stands in need of further 
explanation. Leibniz, however, falls into a contradiction 
which Kant avoids. For Leibniz i*egards God as at once 
the highest of the Monads (the ultimate term in the 
series) and the Creator of the Monads, i. e. the sufficient 
reason of the world W'hich they constitute. But if jGod 
is one of the series of Monads, it seems impossible to 
regard Him as their sufficient reason, as choosing to 
create the system of which He is an element. And on 
the other hand, if the essence of the Monads is to repre- 
sent the universe, and if He f actuff purus) perfectly realizes 
the univors’ within Himself, having perfectly clear and 
distinct peix option, what place is th(u*e for a system of 
Monads apart from Him ? Kant avoids the difficulty by 
the sharp distinction he draws between experience and 
the thing-in-itself. Ho can thus regard (3od as related 
to the world in a way which we may attempt to describe 
as causal, creative, or otherwise, but which it is impossible 
for us ever with certainty to define ’. In short, so far as 
our theoretical knowledge of things is concerned, the 
account we give of the relation of God to the world is 
simply a useful hypothesis, by means of which we may 
give unity to our knowledge, and avoid the fallacies of 

* Cf. Critique of Pure Bmm>n (Hartenstoin, ii. 508 Rqq. ;.,Roscnlcrnii7, 
ii. 519 sqq.^, Meiklojohn, pp. 410 sqq. : ‘The notion of a Kiiprorno 
intelligence ih a mere ideal, that is to Hay, its ohjectivo reality 
not consist in its bedng immediately refenibie to an object lor 
in this sense wo cannot establish its objective validity) but it iu 
merely a schema of the notion of a thing in general, a (•cbemn 
constructed according to the conditions of the greatest unity of 
reason, and serving only to produce the greatOHt wystematio unity 
in the empirical use of our reason, inasmuch as we deduce this or 
that object of experience from the imagined obje-ct of tbiH idea as 
the ground or cause of the object of experience.* €f. also Koseu* 
krauz, ii. 598; Hartenstein. ii. 581 ; Meiklejohn, p. 471. 

N 

INTRODUCTION 

178 

dogmatism \ Yot, while Kant thus escapes the contra* 
diction in Leibnizes view, he cannot be said to give us 
a satisfactory solution of the difSculty^ 

The Influence of Leibniz on Fichte*^ 

In the modern idealism which fii*st took shape in the 
writings of Ficlite, there may be traced the Influence of 
certain leading ideas in the philosophy of Leibniz, to 
which Kant had inevitably done less than justice. The 
work of Fichte is generally regarded as an endeavour to 
give systematic unity to the philosophy of Kant by get- 
ting rid of the thing-in-itself, regarded as entirely outside 
of experience. Indeed, until Katit repudiated his inter- 
pretation, Fichte regarded himself as an expOvsitor of the 
true Kantian view, and a defender of the critical philo- 
sophy against the misunderstandings of its unintelligent 
disciples. Fichte’s main idea is that experience (in the 
Kantian sense) lias its basis in a self-consciousness (an 
Jch-heit) which is itself the root of the distinction between 
the empirical ego and the empirical non-ego, between 
subject and object. Both subject and object are logically 
involved in the original self-consciousness, out of which 
all experience, both in its matter and in its form, may 
be deduced. Thus all reference to a reality beyond 
experience becomes unmeaning as well as unnecessary. 
The unity of the universe is maintained W'ith pantheistic 

* D. Nolon (la CYHif/ue (te Kant et la Metaphysique de Leibniz, pp. 331 
et Bqq.) regards the Monadology as a iiegessary oomplement to the 
‘CritJoism * of Knnt. It seems to him that the * thing-in-itsolf * has, 
in the philosophy of Kant, a function similar to that of the 
‘possible thing* or ‘essence* in the system of Leibniz. An 
ingenious attempt has also been make by Otto Riedel (Die Afonodo- 
htgischen Sestimmungen in Kants Lehre com Ding an sich) to show that 
the thingB-in-themselves, in so far as they are ooiiceiwd as positive, 
have the ohoraoteristios of Monads. There is a hint of the same 
vie# in Ueberweg*B Commentary on the two editions of the Oiiigue 
qf Pure Keaaotu 

* For Kant’s account of his own relation to Leibniz see Appendix 
£, p. aoS. 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 1 79 

completeness ; and the system of Fichte has 'well been 
described as * Spinoza in terms of ELant 

Now the need of a thing-in-itself^ such as Kant postu- 
lates, ai*ises from Uie thoroughness of his separation 
between perception and conception, between sense and 
understanding. They are correlative ; yet they are treated 
by him as if quite independent, so that the result of 
their combination is a merely phenomenal world. Per- 
ception cannot evolve from itself the forms of the under- 
standing, through wdiich alone it loses its blindness ; and 
conception cannot produce for itself the matter of sense 
and experience, without which it is empty. But this 
dualism indicates, in a negative way, the necessity of a 
noumenal world, however completely such a world may 
he beyond tlie r<«ich of our intellectual comprehension 
or proof. It is in revulsion from dogmatism that Kant 
holds this position. And thus he is continually pointing 
out that the great error of Leibniz is that of reganling 
experience as a system of concepts, which may constitute 
an internally self-consistent whole, but which has no cer- 
tain contact with reality. Such a dogmatism, Kant holds, 
has no answer to scepticism, and thus to give up the 
sharp distinction l)etween perception and conception is 
to lose our grasp of reality and truth. 

Accordingly it is not surprising to find that, in setting 
aside the thing-in-itself (as Kant understood it), Fichte 
goes back to the doctrine of Leibniz and proceeds to 
develop, under new conditions, some of its leading ideas'^ 

^ Adamson's Fichte (Blackwood's Philosophicni Classic.H), p. 130. 

* ‘The time is come for reviving the philosophy of Leibniz. . . . 
Nothing is further removed from the thought of Leibniz than the 
Kpoculativo droam of a world of things-in-themselves, which no 
mind comprehends or knows, but which nevertheless acts upon us 
and produces all our ideas, llie first of his thoughts, that which 
he makes his starting-point, is, that the representations of external 
things arise in the soul in virtue of its own laws, as in an isolated 
world, and as if nothing were present in it except God (the Infinite) 
and the soul (consciousness of the Infinite). ... In thus expressing 
himself Leibniz spoke for philosophers. But now-a-days people 
will insist on philosophizing, even when philosophy is the last 

N 2 

l8o INTRODUCTION 

Leibniz, in antagonism to the dualist position of Descartes, 
does not lay stress on the distinction of subject and object, 
but conceives the universe as an infinity of subjects, each 
aelf-sufhciont and *in the sea of life enisled.’ For Kant, 
the distinction of subject and object is all in all. Fichte 
still gives full weight to the distinction, but conceives it 
jis overcome in the unity of self-consciousness, or rather 
as flowing necessarily from that unity in its most abstract 
and indefinite form, and being lost in that unity in its 
highest and most ]>erfect form. Thus, according to 
Leibniz, the whole succession of a Monad’s states, all its 
|>ercoptions of the universe, pnxiced spontaneously from 
within itself, *as if there wei-e only God and itself in the 
world*’; and every created Monad contains within its^df 
both niattor and form, which am in reality degrees of 
one power or function. Similarly, tlie ego of Fichte, the 
j)riinttl self-consciousness, is a perfectly spontaneous force, 
producing from within itself the empirical ego and non- 
ego, subject and object, making its own external world, 
projecting that world through the power of imagination, 
and continually striving towards the ultimate overcoming 
of this distinction between outer and inner in a pure 
‘ iiitcdlectual intuition.’ Accordingly Fichte throws down 
the barriers wliich Kant had raised between perception 
and conception, and returns to the position of Leibniz 
that nil knowledge is one great process of development, 
though, of course, he gives a very different account of 
this development from that which we find in Leibniz ^ 

thiriR nro fitted for. If anyone tolls n» that no idea [Var. 

Mturuj] can arise in us from an oxtornifi acliuti, there is endless 
aatonishnieut. To he a philosopher one must b<dievo that the 
Monads have windows, through which things como and go." 
(Schelling, Sdnimtlichu WerkCy vol. i. ao. hin'n zu enter Philosophie der 
NatuTy commended by Fichte, IFerAe, i. 515 note ) 

* Leitrei a Foueher (1686), ^G. i, 38a). Cf. New System $ 14. 

* *The final notion of Fichte*» philosophy, expressed more clearly 
in Uie later works than in the Wiasmschajtslehre^ is that of the 
divine or spiritual order of which finite spirits are the manirestation 
or realization, and in the light of which human life and its 
surroundings a]»pear as the continuous progress in ever higher 
stages towards realization of the final end of reason. Under this 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY l8l 

The reality of the world of sense is for Fichte a result of 
the activity of imagination. Our mind creates our s^uisa- 
tions; but it creates them unconsciously, and thus our 
imagination attributes them to things outside of us, 
objectifies them. Yet imagination does not give us mere 
illusions, but truths more or less |>erfectly expressed. * If 
it be shown, as the present system should show, that 
upon this activity of imagination rests the poasibility of 
our consciousness, our life, our being for ourselves, that 
is to say, our being as e^o Seyn als Ieh\ this 

activity of imagination cannot cense, unless we are to 
make abstraction from our ego, which would involve a 
contradiction, since that which makes abstraction cannot 
iiiako abstraction from itself. This activity of imagina- 
tion, then, does not deceive us, but gives us truth, the 
only possible truth*.’ There are, as it were, two sides 
to our knowledge of things. In so far as it is sensuition 
(that is to say, an idea unconsciously created by the mind) 
it is a product of the non-ego, the object ; while in so far 
as it is an idea consciously ‘ projected ’ by us or referred 
to something, it is a product of the ego, the subject. 
But the action of ego and non-ego is reciprocal, and they 
both have their source in the original .sGlf-c!orisciousnGHS 
from which they nocessuirily proceed*. 

It is, of course, beyond the scope of our intention 
to consider the many essential differences between the 
systems of Leibniz and of Fichte : to have indicated their 
connexion is sufficient. And the words of Schelling may 

roncA^ption, the oppiiHitions of thou;;;ht which play so imporiunt 
a part in philosophy — being and thought, mind anct nature, soul 
and body, fret'dom and law, natural inclination and moral effort, 
mechanism and teleology — are reconciled. They appear in their 
duo plaoe aa different aspects of the several stagoM in and through 
which the spiritual order is realized.’ Adainson, Ftchie^ pp. 319, 

330 . 

* Fichte, Sdmtniliche Werke^ i. 337. 

* *The ego, as understood in common unscientific language, 
posits neither the external ohject nor itself, but both are posited 
through genera] and absolute thinking, and through this the 
object is given for the ego, as well as the ego for itself.’ Fichte, 
Wsrks, iL 56a. 

INTRODUCTION 

182 

be taken ae showing that this connexion was from the 
first fully realized. ‘Since Leibniz," he says, ‘if we set 
aside secondary doctrines which do not count, we see 
that the real, the finite, is generally placed in the region 
of the ideal. The whole real world has no existence in 
itself, but only in the representations \yorstellungrn] of the 
soul. . . . Fichte takes up this idealism which i^ a denial 
of the independent being of the real, and, in this regard, 
he does not go beyond Leibniz. The only difference 
l)etw(‘en them is this. Leibniz cannot explain why the 
soul or the Monacl is subject fo affections which produce 
in it finite representations ; or, if he trios to find the cause 
of this, he is obliged to place it in God, in the Infinite, 
which involves him in inevitable contradictions. Fichte, 
on the other hand, finds tlmt the finite nature of the soul 
has its explanation in the absolutely free activity of the 
soul itself and results from this, that the soul by its oivn 
act posits itself for itself as finite, as separated from the 
absolule all, and consequently imposes on itself the ne- 
cessity of contemplating no longer this absolute all, but 
only the negations, limihitions, bounds of its infinity 
Accordingly it may be said generally that in the philo- 
sophy of Leibniz will and intelligence (appetition and 
perception) are co-ordinate principles of things (the will 
of God, for instance, not being prior to His understand- 
ing nor His understanding to His will), while the 
philosophy of Fichte is essentially a praeiical idealism, 
ill w hich will (in however undefined a form) is ultimate 
and pi'edominant. The ‘principle of the best' (the ten- 
dency to rejilizo the inoml order which is the expression 
of the infinite good will) is with Leibniz the determining 
principle of actual, as distinct from merely possible 
existence, while with Fichte it is the ultimate ground 
of all reality, of tlie one system of things ^ 

' ^'helling, Prapaedeutik zur neuerm Werke, vol. i. 

p. 185. 

* An excellent account ef Fichte's historical position is given in 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 183 

SchopcftJmmr. 

As regards the main principles of his philosophy, 
Schopenhauer (however unconsciously) follows Fichte*. 
His starting-point is the Kantian distinction between the 
intelligihlc or noumcnal and the empirical or phenomenal 
character of a real subject *. As in the philosophy of 
Fichte, the ultimate reality is will. The Mntolligible 
character’ is a will, which is the source of the 'empirical 
character’; and in general will is a pure activity which 
is the source of the system of phenomena. Thus tlie 
world is will + idea (i. e. Vorsteflung, representation, phe- 
nomenon). The absolute is the purely practical activity 
of will, which gives rise to the relative or mutually 
conditioned, in a way which is beyond explanation, 
for our understanding cannot pass tho limits of the 
conditioned, the phenomenal world. But this ultimate 
will is essentially destitute of anything that can fairly 
be described as ethical character. Tho world is not a 
progress towards the realization of the host, but rather 
an unfortunate episode in the existence of tho eternal 
will, and the highest good is to be attained not by allow- 
ing this will or striving {will to live) to have free courw 
in us, but by suppressing it as much as possible. The 
expression, ‘the wwld as will and ^ idea,’ recalls the 
Leibnitian view of substance as essentially appetition 4 - 
perception. But Schoj)enhauer, like Fichte, gives to 
will a metaphysical priority, which is not attributed 

Wallace's Logic of Jlegely Prolegomena (2iid ed.), cli. ii. Sen also 
ohs. la and 13 for an aoccAint of Sclielling with HUggestWo referenc€*H 
to Leibniz. In ch. 13 there is a lucid explanation of the variouH 
meanings of the teim ‘ Evolution,* as it is used by Leibniz and by 
later writers. Cf. vol. ii. p. 424. 

‘ * Except his pessimism, which is no necessary consequence of 
the system, there is absolutely nothing in Schopenhauer’s philo- 
sophy which is not contained in the later works of Piebte.* 
Adamson, Fichte, p. 219. Though this is tho statement of an expert, 

I venture to think it a little too sweeping. 

^ Critique of Pure Jf?«asrm, Rosenkranz, ii. 422 ; Hartenstein, ii. 4ac ; 
MeikJejohn, p. 333, 

INTRODUCTION 

184 

to it by lioibniz. Again, Schopenhauer, reducing the cate- 
gories of Kant to causality (interpreted in a wide sense), 
gives great importance to tlie principle of sufficient reason 
which (in one or other of four different forms) he regards 
as the governing principle of the phenomenal world. 

‘ All our ideas [ Vorsiellungen] stand to one another in a 
regular | gcsetzmdssig] connexion, which os to its form is 
determinable a priori^ and on account of which nothing 
self-sufficient and independent, nothing separate and de- 
tached, Clin become an object for us. It is this connexion 
which the principle of sufficient reason, in its univer- 
sality, exj)re8ses The principle of contradiction is 
ostensibly subordinated to that of sufficient reason, it 
being regarded as one of the general laws of thinking, 
discovered by induction and used as a judgment ^ meta- 
logically true,’ which may be the ground or sufficient 
reason of otlu^r judgments®. But here there is clearly 
an inconsistency between Schopenhauer's logical theory 
and his metaphysic. His absolute, the ultimate will, is 
(however far he may be from acknowledging it) really 
determined by the principle of contradiction, in its 
abstract form, for the will is conceived as that which 
absolutely «s, that which is apart from, all relation, that 
which may, in some mysterious way, produce a system 
of differonces, but which has an identity that is perfectly 
independent of them. Accordingly, while Schopenhauer 
indicates the deeper and moi'e comprehensive interpreta- 
tion of the principle of sufficient reason as underlying 
that of contradiction, he does nut allow it to mould his 
system. « 

Ilerhart. 

Another thinker who owes something to Leibniz and 
something more to Kant and to Fichte, is Herbart (1776- 
1841). He is not content to subordinate the principle of 

' die tia/ache TV urret StUsea vom zureichmdm OrundB^ ch. 3, 

{ 16. 

* Op. Uebtr dU vierJitcKa fVursd, &c,, ch. 5, § 33. 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIZES PHILOSOPHY 185 

RufficieDi reason to that of conti-adiction, but he practically 
endeavours to do without the former principle as far tut 
possible. The task of philosophy he regards as that of 
eliminating the contradictions that appear in common 
consciousness by transforming the ideas which are given 
in it *. This transformation, for Herbart, practically 
means abstraction. Every bit of experience, being given, 
lias something real in it But its reality is that which 
it is, apart from conditions or relations to other things. 
The real is always something, a quale, a ^ this ’ or ' that * 
of some kind. But it is absolute po.sf7/on (in the Fichtean 
s^mse) or affirmation without negation ; it has absolute 
self-identity, so that it is perfectly simple and not, like 
the Monad of Leibniz, a substance involving in its unity 
a plurality of qualities ; and it is pum quality, without 
any quantitative element or aspect, so that it is neither 
a divisible totality nor an unbroken continuum. These 
* reals,’ like the Monads, are infinite in number, and each 
is different from every other. But they are absolutely 
unalterable, they have no characteristic analogous to the 
perception of Leibniz, and they are not impenetrable, for 
any number of them may equally l)e thought as occupying 
or as not occupying the same point in space. Like the 
Mona<ls, no one * real ’ can act upon anqtlier ; otherwiwi 
they would cease to be absolute. And eatdi * real ’ is the 
immediate cause of one and only one phenomenon of 
experience, so that the static variety of the world is due to 
the power of ‘self-preservation’ {Selhstcrhaltung ) in each 
‘ real.’ The actual changes which we find in experience 
are duo to the different aspects in which the ‘ reals ’ api)6ar, 
when they are in different relations to one another, 
although their true natures remain unchanged (as in the 
]>henomena of colour contrasts). And these different 

* * Mere uncritical experience or merely empirical knowlodge 
only offers probUnta ; it suggests gaps, which indeed further re- 
flexion serves at first only to deepen into contradictions.' Wallace, 
JJegel's Philosophy <(f Mind, p. Ixiii. 

* * Wievlel Scheiii, soviol Hindeutung auPs Soin." 

i86 

INTRODUCTION 

relations of the * reals ’ to one another are, again, due to 
the possibility of conceiving the ^ reals ’ as both together 
in one point and apart from one another. Accordingly 
the soul, being a ^ real,’ must not he represented as having 
in itself powei*s, faculties, qualities, Ac. It is absolutely 
simple, and has nothing but ‘self-preservation,’ which 
apparently is little more than a permanent possibility of 
relation to other ‘reals.’ None of the functions and 
characteristics of mind belong to it intrinsically. They 
are to be ascribed to other things, quite as much as 
to tho mind or soul itself. They are merely names 
for the phenomena or aspects of certain ‘ reals ’ (one of 
which is the soul) in certain relations to one another. 
These phenomenal (of course, not real) interactions of 
the ‘ reals ’ admit of mathematical calculation, and 
accordingly Ilerbart is the father of those who apply 
mathematical methods in emipirical psychology \ This 
is natural in one whose thought is so completely 
dominated by tho abstract use of the principle of contj‘a- 
diction. And, in short, if we leave out of account the 
influence of Fichte upon his psychology, we may regard 
Herbart’s work as a remodelling of that of Leibniz, on the 
supposition that the principle of suificient reason is to be 
d replied. 

IlcgcCs Solution of the Dualism in Ijitlnh. 

In the philosophy of Hegel we have a solution of the 
dualism between the principle of contradiction and that 
of auflicicnt reason, as they are used and conceived by 
Leibniz. The problem indicated by this dualism under- 
lies the whole course of German speculation from the 
time of Leibniz onwards. Wolif, in a negative way, gave 

^ His Application of mathematicjil inethods, however, differs 
ontii*ely from that which occurs in the psycho-physics of the 
FtH-'hner School, and in modern physiological psychology. For 
a fulj^oxplanation, see Wallace, Heg«l*s l^hUosophy Mindf pp. Ixviii 
sqq. It may also be noted that Leibniz’s theories regarding un- 
conscious and petUss perceptions ai*e developed and applied in the 
psychology of Herbart. 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 187 

precision to the problem by suggesting the most superficial 
possible solution, reducing the principle of sufficient 
reason to that of contradiction. This (though Wolff 
perhaps did not realize it) was little better than telling 
Leibniz that he had discovered a mare's nest. Kant, on 
the other hand, gives positive precision to the problem by 
the sharpness of his distinction between the absolute and 
the relative, while Fichte and Schelling, in different ways, 
endeavour to make explicit the unity to which the Kantian 
divisions point. Their re-employment of the principle of 
development or progressive self-realization, which is so 
impoi-tant a feature of Leibnizs thinking, brings us to the 
verge of HegeFs solution of the pix>blein. Hegel practi- 
cally reverses the procedure of Wolff, by showing that the 
principle of contradiction presupposes that of sufficient 
reason, and tliat each by itself is an abstract expression 
of the princij)le of self-consciousness*. The real is not 
merely in se (as it would be if the abstract principle of 
contradiction were ultimate), nor is it merely in aUo (as it 
would be if the abstract principle of sufficient reason were 
ultimate, wdiich, of course, no one maintains). But the 
real is that which becomes itself through being in alio^ 
through being not itself. There is no such thing as a 
purely analytic or a purely synthetic judgment; but 
when we attribute any quality to a subject, we attribute 
to it not merely a difference from other things but a 
oneness with that from which we differentiate it®. The 
universe is a system of such perfect unity that the oi)po- 
sites it contains are all contraries and never contradictories. 
Absolute contradictoHes or absolute difference are ab- 
stractions. To say, as did Leibniz, that no two things are 
exactly the same implies that no two things (not even the 
most extreme opposites) are entirely different. A must 

' See Caird's Hegd (Blackwood's Philosophical Classics', chs. 7 
and 8. Also Wallace, Prolegomena to the Logic oj Hegd ^and ed.), 
ch. 30. 

’ Of. Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant^ vol. U. pp. 64 sqq. 

i88 

INTRODUCTION 

liave something in common with not-A, if their opposition 
is to have any meaning. ^ The other stands over against 
its other That is to say, their diiference must have 
some ground, some underlying unity. And on the other 
hand, every identity, even the identity of a thing with 
itself, impli(»s some difference. There is no pure ground, 
no absolute first principle, independent of a sufficient 
reason. Hegel regards the universe as itself one absolute 
system. The world we know is the only world, and it 
is not a merely phenomenal system, the expression of 
something heterogeneous with it (like the arc electric 
light between two opposite points of carbon , nor is it an 
inexplicable product of something other than itself, such 
as an unconditioned wdll, nor yet is it the production of 
some noumenal absolute. It hangs upon nothing ; it 
needs nothing to hang upon. The universe is one system 
of endless mutual determinations, yet not a merely static 
system nor a system of cyclical revolutions, endlessly 
repeated, which would involve the supposition of an 
external absolute as the source or support of all. It is 
rather an evolution of that whose end is in its beginning, 
that w'hose development is free, because, being all-com- 
prehensive, it is perfectly self-dehu-mined. 

Thus Hegel points out that ‘ it is the notion which 
Leibniz had in his eye when he spoke of sufiicient ground 
and urged the study of things binder its point of view.’ By 
the notion Hegel means ‘a content objei^tively and intrin- 
sically doh^rmined and hence self-acting.* This would 
suificiontly describe the Monad of Leibniz if we keep out 
of view the Monad’s absolute particularity, its isolation as 
one of an infinite series of indejlendont units, or, in other 
words, if W'o omit from the conception of the Monad all 
that is due to the principle of contradiction, interpreted 
abstractly as a principle of pure or immediate self-identity. 
Thi» isolation, of course, is an essential element in 

^ Hegol, Logic^ § 1x9 (Wallace's Tr., and ed., p. aaa). See the 
whole passage, and also pp. aa4 sqq. 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 1 89 

L^^ibniz’B conception of the Monad, and the result is that 
while his speculation points to a view of the universe as 
one system in which the elements are intrinsically and 
not externally combined, he does not go far enough to 
secure this metaphysical position, just as he does not 
push his logical analysis far enough to reconcile the 
principles of contradiction and sufficient reason. The 
Hegelian ^ notion ’ is thus the completion of what is 
vaguely shadowed forth in the Monad of Leibniz, and 
more especially in the Monas Monaduniy in which all is 
(however unsatisfactorily) brought to unity. For tlie 
notion implicitly contains all in itself, and all is realized 
through its logical (not temporal) development. Like 
the Monad, the notion is not in time any more than it is in 
space ; it comprehends both. The difference is that by 
Leibniz the developiiH?nt is conceived as 11 continuous 
growth or increase in a certain fundamental quality 
(clearness and distinctness of perception), wliile by Hegel 
it is represented as a dialectic movement from that whicli 
is I’elatively abstract, through its correlative aUstraction 
(or its ‘ negation ’) to that which, comprehending or 
uniting both, is relatively concrete. For Ijeibniz deveJo])- 
ment is from small to great (witness, for instance, his 
petites perceptions; ; for Hegel development is from frag- 
ments to wholes, or rather from the vague and undeter- 
mined to the definite and determined. 

Accordingly what Leibniz inc^ans by saying that the 
Monad (or its qualities) cannot go out of itself and cannot 
be entered or influenced from outside, would by Hegel be 
expressed as the doctrine that thought or self-cohsciousnesK 
is reality, the universe, and that accordingly it can neither 
go beyond itself nor have anything beyond it. It may 
sunder itself ideally, but it cannot really go out of itself, 
for there is no * out of itself.’ In the same way the Monad 
may ideally be sundered into active and passive elements 
(entelechy and matericr prima\ but it can really give 
nothing and it can really receive nothing. The difference 

INTRODUCTION 

190 

at this point between the attitude of Hegel and that of 
Leibniz is due to the fact that while Leibniz interprets 

* perception ’ as that which it is in its lowest form (mere 

* representation * or ^ expression and regards conscious- 
ness and self-consciousness as developments from it by 
increase or addition, Hegel interprets ‘ representation * or 
relation in general as being essentially that which it is 
in its highest form (self-consciousness), and regards the 
lower forms as ‘ abstract * or incomplete foreshadowings, 
uiidevelo|)ed expressions of it. For Hegel as for Leibniz 
the universe is organic throughout. No part of it is 
actually other than self-determined, for the unity of the 
whole and its parts is absolutely complete, so that no i>art 
can be conceived iis having any reality by itself. Leibniz 
holds that the Monads must be conceived on the ‘analogy' of 
the soul. Hegel insists on a unity which is closer than mei*e 
analogy, and which, at the same time, expresses itself in 
the greatest possible variety ; ho regards Bolf-consciousness, 
explicitly or implicitly, as the reality of every part, every 
member or organ, of the whole. In short, it may be 
said that in Ijoibniz s account of simple substance we have 
the first suggestion of the transition from substance to 
subject (as the ultimate reality of things), which is brought 
to completion by Hegel *. 

Loizcs llcconsiruction of the Hypotheses of Leibniz. 

It seemed to Lotze that the ‘ bold Monism * of Hegel 
‘undertook far more than human powers can achieve,' 
although ‘its leading idea by no means loses its value 
through the great defects in its execution This ‘ leading 
idea ’ was in Lotze s opinion tlie ‘ reconciliation of oppo- 
sites,’ tlie overcoming of the contradictions in thought by 
bringing all knowledge to systematic unity. But Lotze’s 
♦ 

* Cf generally Caird, Critical PhUosophtf of Kant^ vol. ii. bk. i. 
ch. 19 , especially pp. 69 sqq. See also Monadologyf i 30. 

* LoUe, Mtiag^ynCf bk. L ch. 7, § 88 (Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. 906). 

ESTXMATE OF LEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY 19I 

interpretation of ‘thought* is very different from that of 
Hegel. Although he expressly repudiated the suggestion 
that he is to be counted as a follower of Herbart, Lotze’s 
position as regai*ds thought and the reconciling of its 
contradictions is more akin to the view of Herbai-t than 
to that of Hegel. Like Herbart he regards thought as 
essentially analytic, as interpreting rather than constituting 
reality, and the work of science or philosophy is thus not 
that of laying down an absolute all-comprehensive system, 
expressing the whole evolution of reality, but that of 
unifying our knowledge, resolving the contradictions that 
appear in common experience. Thought cannot pierce to 
the inner nature of things, cannot understand them so 
thoroughly that it could make them. To use a distinc- 
tion which has become a commonplace among writoi*s on 
natural science, thought ran de^icrihc but it cannot 
It can give an account of wdiat happens, can express in the 
form of general laws the relations between tilings, so as to 
be able to calculate occurrences, and can possibly reduce 
these laws to one general system ; but it cannot tell what 
the things themscdves really are, how they originally came 
into being, and why they are so and not otherwise. In 
short, thought is governed solely by the jirinciple f>f 
contradiction ; the principle of sufficient reason (in 
Leibniz’s sense) is beyond it. ‘ Reality is infinitely richer 
than thought. . . . We know that in fact the nature of 
reality yields a result to us unthinkable. It teaches us 
that being and nobbeing are not, as wo could not help 
thinking them to be, contradictory predicates of every 
subject, but that there is an alternative between them, 
arising out of a union of the two which we cannot construct 
in thought. This explains how the extravagant utterance 
could be ventured upon, that it is just contradiction 

* For a fuller account of this distinction, see Merz, Hiaiory of 
European Thought in the Nineteenth Century ^ vol. i. pp. 337, 382, 383, notes. 
Venn {Empirical Logic, ch. 21) minimizes the distinction, holding 
explanation to be generalization. 

INTRODUCTION 

192 

which coiiBtituteft the truth of the real. Those who used 
it regarded that as contradictory which was in fact 
superior to logical laws — which does not indeed abrogate 
them in Iheir legitimate application, but as to which no 
sort of positive conjecture could possibly be formed as 
a result of such application*/ 

The revolt of Lotze against the idealism of Fichte, 
Hchelliiig, and Ilegol was due to the bud treatment which 
I he ‘Philosophy of Nature* had received at their hands. 
The self-confidence of a thought which had found itselt 
absolute resulted in a Nnturphilosophie which despised 
facts ; and J^otzo, as a scientist, felt it necessaiy to bring 
down tliought from ‘the high horse of idealism,’ and 
assign to it the humble work of observation and descrip- 
tion. ‘ The study of medicine, which I had chosen as my 
life-work, made it necessary for me to acquire a knowledge 
of natund science, and hence (in brief) I came to see how 
completely untenable is a groat part of the views of 
Hegel, or rather the whole of them, in the form in which 
they are put ^* It was to a large extent through his 
medical studies that Lotze arrived at one of the chief 
doctrines of his philosojdiy, viz. the universality of mecha- 
nism as an account of the relations between phenomena. 
‘The father of modern physiology", ’ Johannes MUller 
(1801-1858), had changed the whole aspect of biological 
science by extending the conception of mechanism to all 
the phenomena of life \ Lotze took a furtlior stop in the 
same direction when he deiined mechanism as ‘ the con- 
nexion of all those universal laws, according to which 
every individual in the created world acts upon every 
other The sphere of mechanism is thus extended so as 

^ Lotze. Mctctphync, bk. i. ch. 6, § 76 (Eng. 'IV., vol. i. pp. 178, 
179). the wbolo chapter, in which tlie views of lioihniz and 
Uorbnrt aro disscusacd. 

• Lotze, SireiUtchr\fty p. 7. 

• Merz, History qf European Thought in the Nintfemth Century^ vol. i. 

pp. ai6 sqq.; cf. Lotze, Metaphysic, bk. ii. ch. 8, 334 sqq. (Eng. 

Tr., vol. ii. p. ia8j. 

• Streitschrift, p. 57. 

ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIZ’s PHILOSOPHY I 93 

to include the phenomena not merely of inorganic and 
organic bodies, but also of mind. ‘ The function of 
mechanism in the construction of the world is, without 
an exception, universal in its extent The conception of 
mechanism governs all science, for the princiide of all our 
thinking is the principle of contradiction, which can 
only accept what is given in experience and sysiematizo 
its laws. 

But Lotzo jirotests strongly against the view that 
mechanism gives us a final explanation of the reality of 
the world. The laws of science are laws of phenomena ; 
they do not account for the things themselves. We may 
say that the essence of a thing is to stand in relations to 
other things. But the thing itself is more than the 
relation.^, and mechanism gives us an account of the rela- 
tions only. Thus while ‘ the function of mechanism in 
the construction of the world is universal in its extent^ it 
is entirely subordinate in its wqwrtance V As mere 
thought is by itself inadequate to reality, so mechanism 
(the system of laws which it is the work of science to 
discover and express) is not an eternally necessary system, 
constituting the very nature of things, but is merely the 
way in which the ultimate idea, the good, has freely 
cho.een to realize itself ^ Not thought, but goodness is 
ultimate, and * the establishing of mechanism is the first 
ethical deed of the Absolute. The fact that there is 
a kingdom of universal laws appears to me to bo compre- 
hensible only in a world wlio.se ultimate principle is an 
ethical one ; another world (if I were to try to form for 
myself the notion of >t, which is for me absurd) might, it 

‘ Kleifve Schriftmy iii. 310. 

• Loc. cit, cf. Microcosmus, Introduction (Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. xvi'. 

* * Mechanism is but the collection of all iho instrumental forms 
in which Ood has willed that created beings shall net on one another 
with their unknown natures, and that all their states shall be 
welded into the endless chain of a world-history. This view 
explores the sphere of means, not the sphere of ends to which these 
minister.* Microcosmua, *bk. iii. Conclusion. (Eng. Tr., vol. 1 . 
P. 3p5.) 

O 

INTRODUCTION 

194 

appears to me, have arisen — a world without this thread 
of consecutiveness, without this veritas in the sense of the 
old metaphysic Accordingly for Lotze the ultimate 
reality is a personal Ood, who sets before Himself the 
highest moral ends, and has established the ^absolutely 
valid system of laws which rules the world ' as the best 
means of securing these ends. Thought is a means of 
attaining to complete experience ; mechanism is a means 
of realizing the best. ^ There is no nature of things” 
outside of God,’ limiting the sphere of His choice. But 
on the other hand, Ilis choice is not arbitrary, but is 
governed by His perfect idea of what is absolutely 
best. 

In this the influence of Leibniz is so manifest that it 
does not surprise us to find Lotze writing to the younger 
Fichte : * I went Avillingly through the splendid gateway 
which he [ Herbart] is convinced that he has been able to 
erect as an entrance to his metaphysic ; the gateway of 
the Leibnitian Monad-world*.’ Thus, according to Lotze, 
we are constrained to conceive the real world as a world 
of Monads, which are ultimately one in nature. In addition 
to mechanism, or the system of laws governing (or ex- 
pressing) the relations between things, there are the things 
themselves, the facts, which may be conceived as Monads. 
And both of these (the laws and the facts) presuppose 
a universiil and all-pervading substance, which is merely 
a poftitulate of thought, but is a reality for feeling, and 
which (being intelligible only through the idea of a 
personal Deity) realizes the highest moral ends in the 
sphere of the facts by means of the* laws. Things are to 
be thought of as Monads, because nature is to be con- 
ceived as animated throughout; all things are endowed 
with ^ modes of sensation and enjoyment Otherwise 

' StrtiUichriftf p. 57. 

*^bicL p. 7. 

* MicrocosmWf bk. iii. ch. 4| § 3 C£ng. Tr., vol. i. p. 360). Of. 
Lotze’s early writing — J^ens^es d'un ldio(e sur Descartest Spinoza et 
(Kleine Schn/tzn, vol. iii. p. 564.) 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIZ’s PHILOSOPHY .195 

we should have to regard all nature as merely machinery 
for the drama of human consciousness — a view which 
could never satisfy our longings’ and * cravings.’ But 
this monadology or ^hypothesis of unextended atoms’ can 
never, for Lotze, be more than a hypothesis. Thought 
can never determine its truth, because it is a hypothesis 
regarding the nature of things, and thought has to do 
only with their relations. The monadology is ^ a concep- 
tion of whose essential truth we are convinced, yet to 
which we can hardly expect any further concession than 
that, among the dreams of our imagination, it may be 
one of those which do not contradict actual facts 

Lotze is here manifestly more in harmony with Kant 
than with Leibniz ^ And he further differs from Leibniz 
in maintaining that the Monads are not completely isolated 
from one another, so that each contains its own relations 
within itself. If Leibniz’s doctrine be true, ‘while none 
of the members [of the real world J condition each other, 
eveiy thing goes on as if they all did so ; accordingly, 
while it does not really form a whole, yet to an intelli- 
gence directed to it, it will have the appearance of doing 
so ; and, in one word, its reality consists in a hollow and 
delusive imitation of that inner consistency which was 
pronounced to be, as such, the ultimate reason why its 
realization was possible Accordingly for Lotze ‘every 
single thing and event can only be thought as an activity, 
constant or transitory, of the one existence, its reality 
and substance as the mode of being and substance of this 
one existence, its nature and form as a consistent phase 
in the unfolding of the same*.’ The pre-established 
harmony of Leibniz is thus set aside by Lotze \ Its place 

* MicrocosmuSf bk. iii. ch. 4. § 3 (Eritf. Tr., i. 360 ; cf. i. 363;. 

* For an excellent account of the general relation of Lotze to 
Kant, see Jones, Philosophy qf Lotze j pp. 64 sqq. 

■ MetaphysiCy bk. i. cb. 6, § 79 (Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. 184). Cf. the 
whole context. 

* loc. cit. 

® ‘Only if the course of all, even of the most trivial, events 
were fixed by immutable predestination, could the assumption of 

INTRODUCTION 

196 

is taken by the conception of mechanism, through which 
we describe the relations in which things are for thought. 
Such relations as those between the phenomena of the 
soul and the phenomena of the body can be described on 
purely mechanical principles : that is to say, the condi- 
tions of their connexion can be stated as laws. And the 
theory of a pre-established harmony is not required (not 
to say that it is insufficient) to explain how the phenomena 
of the soul have any connexion with those of the body — 
how, for instance, physical nerve-motion passes into 
psychical sensation. It is impossible for our thought to 
explain this ; but it is just as impossible for our thought 
to explain how one physical phenomenon is invariably 
connected with another physical phenomenon —how, for 
instance, the burning match is connected with the explod- 
ing gunpowder \ In neither case can thought do more 
than describe a connexion invariable in our expermnce. 
Science must be content with a ‘ practical occasionalism ’ 
as distinct from the ^ theoretical ' (i. e. absolute ontological) 
‘ occasionalism ’ of the Cartesians 
Thus in Lotze wo find the principles of the philosophy 
of Leibniz modified by Kantian infiuences. Like Leibniz, 
Lotze in his application of the principles of contradiction 
and of sufficient reason keeps them sharply apart from 

u pro-estHblij<l»od harmony — not, indeed, eorplain anything, but— 
tolerably well descrilfe the facta. ... It is only if individual things 
do not float independent or loft to themselves in a vacuum across 
which no connexion can reach — only if all of them, being finite 
individuals, are at the same time only parts of one single infinite 
substance, which embraces them all and cherishes them all within 
itself, that- their reciprocal action, or whbt wo call such, is possible.' 
W(roc<k^mtiSy bk. ix. ch. i, § 5 (Eng. Tr., vol. ii. pp. 597, 598). 
Of, MetaphysiCf bk. i. ch. 5, §§ 63 sqq. (Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. 150). 

^ ^ As in our life we see the physical motions of external nature 
employed as stimuli to excite that in ourselves which is far 
higher — conscious sensation : so, we think, throughout the universe 
mechanical events are but the external tissue of regularly crossing 
stfhiuli, designed to kindle at innumerable points, within in- 
numerable b^in^s, the true action of a more intelligent life.' 
Mierocosmus^ bk. iii. Conclusion. ^Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. 399.) 

* 8(reitecAf(/t} P« 

ESTIMATE OF LEIBMIz’s PHILOSOPHY I97 

one another. But, unlike Leibniz, he regards the principle 
of contradiction as, indeed, universally applicable but 
completely subordinate in importance. According to 
Leibniz, mechanism in the real world is subordinate to 
teleology, efficient to final causes. But at least the co- 
ordinate priority of the principle of contradiction is secured 
by the conception of the ‘possible' things or ‘essences,' 
the realm of ideas, in the understanding of God. Lotze, 
on the other hand, does away with this realm of ‘ possi- 
bles,' making the ‘principle of the best' absolutely 
supreme, allowing the choice of God to bo independent 
even of the principle of contradiction, independent of all 
save the ideal of absolute ethical worth. A violation of 
the law of contradiction is an absurdity for us ; but God 
might conceivably (if it had been the most perfect means 
to the realizing of the best) have made a world in which 
the law of contradiction did not hold. But as Leibniz 
gave no clear explanation of the relations between the 
two principles of contradiction and sufficient reason, so 
Lotze does not explain the subordination of the one to 
the other, but maintains that any such explanation is 
beyond the roach of human thought. 

From early years Lotze was familiar with the works of 
Leibniz, and his writings continually suggest Leibnitian 
ways of looking at things. But, though an inheritor of 
Leibniz's ideas, he could not ‘ take over ' the philosophy 
as a whole. ‘ I have, indeed, in general never had the 
presumption to declare myself the successor of Leibniz, 
in the sense of being his heir . . . but 1 must ^have the 
presumption to admit that I could only have entered into 
possession of this inheritance cum ienefido inventariV,* 

Other Influences of Leibniz. 

It would be impossible briefly to indicate the full 
influence of the philosophy of Leibniz in other directions. 

^ Kleine ScAr(^m, Tol. iii. p. 342. 

INTRODUCTION 

198 

While the academic writers on philosophy missed much 
of his best thought, its spirit was felt in the literature of 
Germany through the works of Lessing and Herder ^ 
Nor was Leibniz's thinking altogether without effect upon 
English literature ; for, though the doctrine is sadly 
straitened into platitude, that sense of the varied whole- 
ness and harmonious system of things which pervades the 
Theodkee is cleverly expressed in the Essay on Man by 
the phrfises of which Pope was a master ^ Again, with 
regard to the influence of Leibniz upon natural science, 
reference may be made to the way in which his idea that 
the organism is a group of smaller organisms, has been in 
various forms developed by naturalists like Buffon ”, and 
has finally gained something like scientific verification in 
the cell-theory of Schwann. Johannes Mliller recognized 
this by giving to the cells the somewhat inappropriate 
name of ^ organic monads^.' Modern psychology also, in 
the attention it directs to ‘ sulvconscious ' processes and 
in its analysis of sensations and perceptions into elements 
which are individually unnoticed (e, g. the ‘ over-tones ' of 
Helmholtz and the * local signs ' of Lotze), owes much to 

' Soo Morz’H Leibniz (^Blackwood's Philosophical Classics), pp. 195 
sqq. There are also traces of the iolluence of Iieibniz iu the works 
of Schiller, who is said to have written his poem Die Freundschojt 
wlien hi a mind was full of ideas suggested by the reading of 
Leibniz. This is the poc.m from which Hegel in his Geschichte d. 
PhU.y vol. i. p. 91 (ed. 1840), quotes the well-known linos ‘ Freundlos 
tear dcr grosse WoltenmeisteTf* Ac. The poem belongs to Schiller's 
‘ First Period.’ 

See Introduction to the edition by Mark Pattison (Clarendon 
Press). BoHngbroke said of Pope that he wa.s ‘ a very great wit, 
but a very inditterent philosopher.* 

•* Cf. Buffon’s Wstoire NatureUe, &o. (17^7), vol. iv, p. aa : ^ Living 
beings contain a large number of living and active molecules. 
The life ot the animal or of the plant appears to be only the result 
of all the activities, of all the little individual lives (if I may so 
speak) of each of these active molecules, whose life is underived 
and appears incapable of destruction.' 

VWeismann regards the uuioellular organism as immortal. Cf. 
Esaays upon Heredity^ Ac. (Eng. ed. by Poulton, SchGnlan<^ and 
Shipley, pp. 95 and 97). For a good account of the relation of 
Leibniz*s philosophy to modern scientific thought, see Watson, 
Comte j Um and Spencer, pp. ia6 sqq. 

ESTIMATE OF liEIBNIz’s PHILOSOPHY I99 

Leibniz’s far-reaching suggestion of the unconscious petitcs 
perceptions. For this suggestion also (if for little else) 
Hartmann’s Philosophy of the Unconscious is indebted to 
Leibniz And further, in these days when we are so 
persistently assured that ‘the real is the individual,’ 
Monadology may be said to be in the air, and we need 
not be surprised to iind that, in one form or another, it 
has its adlierents in theologians like Dorner, philosophical 
teachers like Groom Kobertson, and expositors like Dill- 
mann. 

The fruits of the philosophy of Leibniz are as widely 
scattered as its roots were far spread. The materials of 
his philosophy were derived from every sphere of thought, 
from every generation of thinkers, and he gave to the 
future as liberally as he borrowed from the past. ‘ Nicht 
Vielwisser war er, sondern, soweit der Mensch es kanii. 
All- und Ganzwisser, und soin Erfassen, sein Erkeniien, 
war stets zugleich sch^ipferischer Act *. ’ 

' Se« Tr. by Coupland, vol. i. pp. x6 sqq. 

* * lie was learned not inendy in many things but, so far ns 
a man can be, in all and everything, and his very comprehending 
or acquiring of knowledge was also an act of creating/ E. Du 
Bois-Reymond, Leibnisnsche Oetlanken in der neueren NaturioiaBenschaftt 
in his Reden, Erste Folge, p. 33. 

200 

INTRODUCTION 

APPENDIX A. 

EXPLANATION OF THE PRE-ESTABLISHED HARMONY BY 
A SPECIAL INSTANCE. 

In a letter to Arnauld (1687) (G. ii. 113) Leibniz gives an 
account of the way in which hia theory may be applied to 
a particular case (that of the relation between a pin-prick 
in the body and pain in consciousness). ‘We have now to 
inquire how the soul is conscious of the motions of its body, 
since we can see no way of explaining by what channels the 
activity of an extended mass can piiss into an indivisible being. 
Ordinary Cartesians declare that no explanation of this union 
can be given. The authors of the hypothesis of occasional 
causes think that it is nodus rindice diynm, cut Dem ex Machina 
hitetrenire deheat. For luy part I explain it in a natural way. 
From the notion of substance or concrete [accompli] being in 
general, which declares that its present state is always a natural 
consequence of its preceding state, it follows that the nature of 
each individual substance, and consequently of every soul, is to 
express the universe. Each has been from the first created 
such that, in virtue of the laws of its own nature, it must 
happen that it is in harmony with what takes place in bodies, 
and especially in its own body. We need not then be surprised 
to find that it has the power of representing to itself the pin- 
prick, when this takes place in its body. And, to complete my 
explanation on this point, we have : — * 

State of the body at moment A. State of the soul at moment A. 
State of the body at the following State of tlie soul at moment B. 
moment B. 

(Pin-prick.) (Pain.) 

' then, the state of the body at moment B follows from the 
state of the body at moment A, so the state of the soul B is 
a consequence of A, the preceding state of the same soul, 
according to the notion of substance in general. Now the 

APPENDIX A 

201 

states of the soul are naturally and essentially expressions of 
the corresponding states of the world, and especially of the 
bodies which for the time belong to the soul. Accordingly, 
since the pin-prick is a part of the state of the body at the 
moment B, the representation or expression of the pin-prick 
(i. e. the pain) will be a part of the soul at the moment B ; for 
as one motion follows from another motion, so one representa- 
tion follows from another representation in a substance whose 
nature is to be representative. Thus the soul must needs be 
conscious of the pin-prick, when the laws of relation require 
it to express more distinctly a more observable change in the 
parts of its body. It is true that the soul is not always distinctly 
conscious of the causes of the pin-prick and of its coming pain, 
when these are still hidden in the representation of the state A, 
as when we sleep or in some other way are unaware of the 
approach of the pin. But that is because the motions of 
the pin at that time make too little impression, and though 
we are already in some way affected by all these motions and 
their representations in our soul, and thus have within ue tht* 
representation or expression of the causes of the pin prick, and 
consequently the cause of the representation of the same pin- 
prick, that is to say, the cause of the pain - yet we can unravel 
them from the multitude of other thoughts only when they 
become noticeable Our soul reflects only upon the more 
marked phenomena, which stand out from the others ; not 
thinking distinctly of any, when it thinks equally of all. After 
this explanation, I cannot imagine wliere anybody can find th(‘ 
least shadow of farther difficulty, unless he is prepared to 
deny that God can create substances which are so made from 
the beginning that each in virtue of its own nature is after- 
wards in harmony with the phenomena of all the others. Now 
nobody seems to deny this possibility, and since we see that 
mathematicians represent in a machine the motions of the 
heavenly bodies (as wiien 

Jura poll rerumque fidom legosque doorum 
Cuncta Syracosius transtulit arte .seiiex, 

which we can do to-day much better than Archimedes could in 
his day), why could not God, who excels them infinitely, from 
the beginning create representative substances in such a way 
that they express by their own laws, according to the natural 
change of their thoughts or representations, all that is to 

202 

INTRODUCTION 

happen to every body? This geems to me not only easy 
to conceive, but also worthy of God and of the beauty of the 
universe, and in a way necessaiy, since all substances must 
have a mutual harmony and conneicion and all must express 
in themselves the same universe and the universal cause, which 
is the will of their Creator, and the decrees or laws which He 
has established in order to make them fit into one another as 
well as possible. Thus this mutual correspondence of different 
substances (which, speaking with metaphysical sti-ictness, can- 
not act upon one another, and yet are in harmony as if one 
did act upon another) is one of the strongest proofs of the 
existence of God or of a common cause which each effect must 
always express according to its point of view and its capacity 
of expression. Otherwise the phenomena of different minds 
would not harmonize, and there would he as many systems as 
suhstanccs; or rather, it would he entirely a matter of chance 
if they were sometimes in harmony,' 

APPENDIX B. 

FORMATION OF THE IDEA OF SPACE. 

In § 47 of the fifth letter to Clarke, Leibniz gives an account 
of the origin of the idea of space. * I will here show how 
men come to form to themselves the notion of space. They 
consider that many things exist at once and they observe in 
them a certain order of co-exiatence, according to which the 
relation of one thing to another is more or leas simple. This 
order is their situation or distance. When it happens that 
one of those co-existent things changes its relation to a mul- 
titude of others, without their changing their relations among 
themselvea; and that another thing, newly come, acquires 
the same relation to the others as the former had ; we then 
say it is come into the place of the other ; and this change we 
call «a motion in that body, wherein is the immediate cause 
of the change. And though several, or even all the co-existent 
things should change according to certain known rules of 
direction and velocity, we can always determine the relation of 

APPENDIX B 

203 

situation which each acquires with reference to every other, and 
we can even determine the relation which any other [co-existent] 
would have [to this], or which this would have to any other, if it 
had not changed or if it had changed otherwise. And supposing 
or feigning that among those co-existents there is a sufficient 
number of them, which have undergone no change, then we 
may say that those which now have to those fixed existents 
a relation such as that which others formerly had to them, 
have the same place which these latter had. And that which 
comprehends all these places is called space, which shows that 
in order to have an idea of place, and consequently of space, 
it is siifiicicnt to consider these relations and the rules of their 
changes, without needing to fancy any absolute reality outside 
of the things whose situation we consider. And, to give a kin<l 
of definition : place is that which we say is the same for A and 
for B, when the relation of co-existence between B and 
C, E, F, (1, &c., is in perfect agreement with the relation of 
co-existence which A formerly hod with the same C, E, F, G, 
&c. ; provided that in C, E, F, G, &c., there has been no cause 

of change Place is that which is the same in 

difterent moments to different existent things, when the re- 
lations of co-existence between each and certain other existents, 
which are supposed to continue /ared from moment to moment, 
agree entirely together. fixed exittientu are those in which 

there has been no cause of change in the order of their co- 
exi.stence with others, or (which is the same thing) in which 
there has been no motion. In short, space is that which 
results from places taken together. And here it is right to 
consider the difference between place and the relation of 
situation which is in the body occupying the place. For the 
place of A and B is the same ; whereas the relation of A to 
the fixed bodies is not exactly and individually the same as 
the relation which B (that comes into its place) will have to 
the same fixed bodies : these relations are only in agreement. 
Fot two different objects, as A and B, cannot have exactly the 
same individual affection ; it being impossible that the same 
individual accident should be in two objects or pass from one 
object to another. But the mind, not satisfied with mere 
agreement, looks for an identity, for something which should 
be really the same, and conceives it as outside of the objects : 
and this is what we here call place and space. But this can 
only be an ideal thing, involving a certain order, in which 

204 INTRODUCTION 

the mind conceives relations to be applied/ (£. 768 a ; G. vii. 

400.) 

1 have made some slight alterations in Clarke's translation 
for the sake of clearness. As to other details of Leibniz’s 
doctrine of space, cf. Fraser’s ed. of Locke's Essay ^ vol. i. 
pp. 158 and 186. 

APPENDIX C. 

THE MEANING OF CAUSE. 

In a draft of a letter to Arnauld (1686) (G. ii. 68) Leibniz 
expounds his view of cause as follows: ‘The hypothesis of 
concouiitaiice is a consequence of my notion of substance. 
For, in my view, the individual notion of a substance includes 
all that is ever to happen to it, and it is in this respect that 
concrete things \ 4 tre 8 aecomplis = res completae VJ differ from 
those which are not so. Now, the soul being an individual 
substance, its notion, idea, essence or nature must include all 
that is ever to happen to it ; and God, who sees it perfectly, 
sees in it all that it will ever do or suffer and all the thoughts 
it will have. Accordingly, since our thoughts are nothing but 
the consequences of the nature of our soul and arise in it 
in virtue of its notion, it is useless to seek in it the influence 
of any other particular substance, besides that such an influence 
is absolutely inexplicable. It is true that certain thoughts come 
to us when there are certain bodily motions, and that certain 
bodily motions happen when we have certain thoughts; but 
that is because each substance expresses the entire universe 
in its own way, and that expression of the universe which is 
a motion in the body is perhaps a pain in relation to the soul. 
But we attribute activity [action] to that substance whose 
expression is the more distinct, and we call it cause. Thus 
when a body passes through water, there is an infinity of 
motions of the parts of the water, such as there must be in 
order Ahat the place which the body leaves may be filled up 
again by the shortest way. We say that this body is the 
cause of the motions, because by its means we can explain 
distinctly what happens ; but if we consider what is physical 

APPENDIX C 

205 

and real in the motion, we maj equally well suppose that the 
body is at rest and that everything else moves, in accordance 
with the hypothesis, since the whole motion in itself is only 
a relative thing, viz. a change of position [situation] which 
we do not know how to explain with mathematical exactness ; 
but wd do attribute it to a body by means of which all is 
distinctly explained* [i. e. so far suflSciently explained, though 
not with mathematical exactness]. ^And in fact, taking all 
the phenomena little and great, there is only one hypothesis 
which serves to explain the whole distinctly. And we may 
indeed say that, although this body may not be an efficient 
physical cause of these effects, its idea is at least, so to speak, 
their final, or, if you like, archetypal [exemplaini\ cause in 
the understanding of God. For, if we wish to find whether 
there is anything real in the motion, let us imagine that 
God wills directly to produce all the changes of situation 
in the universe exactly as if this vessel were ))roducing them 
in passing through the water ; is it not true that there would 
actually happen exactly the same thing? For it is impossible 
to assign any real difference. Thus, in metaphysical strict- 
ness, we have no more reason to say that the vessel compels 
the water to make this great number of ripi)le8 by means 
of which the place of the vessel is filled up, than to say that 
the water is compelled to make all these ripples and that 
it compels the vessel to move in conformity with it; but, 
except by saying that God has willed directly to produce 
so great a number of motions all tending to this one thing, 
we can give no reason for it, and as it is not reasonable to 
have recourse to God for the immediate explanation of matters 
of detail, we have recourse to the vessel, although actually, 
in an ultimate analysis, the agreement of all the phenomena 
of the various substances comes only from this, that they 
are all productions of one and the same cause, io wit, God ; 
and consequently eacli individual substance expresses the re- 
solution which God has taken with regard to the whole 

universe It is quite right to say that my will is 

the cause of the motion of my arm and that a nolutio conlinui 
in the matter of my body is the cause of pain, for the one 
expresses distinctly what the other expresses more confusedly, 
and activity [action] is to be attributed to the substance of 
which the expression is more distinct.' (p. 71.) 

2o6 

INTRODUCTION 

APPENDIX D. 

LEIBNIZ'S LOUIC. 

In the Nouveausc Eftsais, bk. iv. ch. 1 1, § 14 (E. 379 a ; G. v. 428), 
thc're is an inten-esting passage explaining in more detail a part 
of the logic of Leibniz. It cont-aiiiH some remarkable anticipa- 
tions of more modern views. ‘Propositions of fact also may 
become geiiciiil in a way, but it is by induction or observation ; 
so that it’ [the general proposition of fact] ‘is nothing but 
a multitude of similar facts, as when we observe that all 
quicksilver evaporates by the force of fire ; and this is not 
a perfect generality, because we <lo not see its necessity. 
General propositions of reason are necessary, although reason 
also furnishes some which are not absolutely general and are 
only probable, as for instance, when we presume that an idea 
is possible, until a more strict investigation reveals its contrary. 
There are, finally, mixed proposiiionsy which are drawn from 
])remi8eH, of which some come from facts and observations, 
while others are necessary propositions : and such are numerous 
geographical and astronomical conclusions about the globe of 
the earth and about the course of the stars, which conclusions 
are obliiined by combining the observations of travellers and 
nstronomei-s with the theorems of geometry and arithmetic. 
But as, according to the usage of logicians, the conchishu foUotrs 
the weaker of the premises j and cannot hav^» more certainty than 
they, these mixed propositions have only the certainty and 
generality which belong to obser\’ation3. As to eternal truths, 
it is to be noted, that at bottom they are all conditional and say 
in effect : Granted such a thing, such another thing is. For 
instance, when I say, Every figure which has three aides will 
also Khve three angles, 1 say nothing but this, that supposing 
there is a figure with three sides, this same figure will have 
three angles. 1 say this same figure, and it is in this respect that 
categorical propositions, which can be stated unconditionally 

APPENDIX D 

207 

(although fuudamentallj they are conditional), differ from 
those that are called hypothetical y such as the following : If 
a figure has thfve sides j its angles are eqml to two right angles. In 
this latter case we see that the antecedent (namely, the figure 
with three sides) and the consequent (namely, the angles of the 
three-sided figure are equal to two right angles) do not have 
the same subject, as they had in the preceding case in which 
the antecedent was — This figure has three sides, and the conse- 
quent — The said figure has three angles. Nevertheless the 
hypothetical might often be transformed into a categorical 
by a slight change in the terms, for instance, if in place of the 
preceding hypothetical I were to say : The angles of every three- 
sided figure are eqtuil to two right angles. The Scholastics have 
argued much de consiantia suhjectiy as they called it, that is to 
say, how a proposition regarding a subject can have a real 
truth, if the subject has no existence. The fact is that thei 
truth is only conditional and says that, supposing the subject 
ever exists, it will bo found to be Wand-so. Hut it will still 
be asked : On what is this connexion founded, since there is 
within it reality which does not deceive.? The reply will be. 
that it is in the connexion of ideas. Hut it will bo asked 
again : Where would these ideas be, if no mind existed, and 
what would then become of the real foundation of this certainty 
of eternal truths ? That leads us at last to the ultimate founda- 
tion of truths, namely, that supremo and universal spirit, which 
cannot but exist, whose understanding, to speak truly, is the 
region of eternal tiniths, as St. Augustine has recognized and 
says in a vivid way ^ And lest it should be thought unnecessary 
to have recourse to this, it is to be noted that these necessary 
truths contain the determining reason and regulative principle 
of existences themselves, and, in a word, the laws of the 
universe. ITius these necessary truths, being anterior to the 
existence of contingent beings, must have their foundation in 
the existence of a nec^'ssary substance. It is here that I find 
the original of the ideas and truths which are graven in our 
souls, not in the form of propositions, but as sources from which 
application and opportunity will produce actual statements.’ 

^ The reference may be to Augustine, De Genesi ad Littefam, bk. v. 
cap. 13 sqq. (Migne*a ed., iii. 331 sqq.), or to Enarrafio in Fsalmutn 
xlix. (Migne’s ed., iv. 576 sqq.), Cf. De diversis Quaeshontbu^f Q. xlvi. 

§ 9 (Migne’s ed., vi. 30). 

2o8 

IHTBODUCTIOJT 

APPENDIX E. 

KANT ON HIS BELATION TO LEIBNIZ. 

The WolfFians endeavoured to show that Kant's philosophy 
was merely a dej^enerate product of Leibnitian thought. In 
reply to Kberhard, Kant in 1790 wrote an interesting account 
of his own relation to Leibniz - Uber eine EnideeJeung, uach der 
nlle fieue KritiA' dn' reinen Vernnnft durch eine dltere enthehtiich 
gemacht iverden solL See Rosenkranz, i. pp. 478 sqq. ; Harten- 
stein, iii. 390 sqq. 

‘The metaphysic of Leibniz contains three great original 
principles: (i) the principle of sufficient reason, especially in 
HO far as it shows the insufficiency of the principle of contra- 
diction for the knowledge of necessary truths ; (2) the monad- 

ology ; (3) the doctrine of the pre-established harmony 

(i) Is it to be believed that Leibniz desired his principle of 
sufficient reason to be understood objectively (as a law of 
nature), when he attached a groat importance to this principle 
as an addition to the principles of earlier philosophy? It 
is indeed so universally known and (within proper limits) so 
manifestly clear, that the poorest intellect could not imagine 
it had made a new discovery in finding it. Thus it is that 
critics, who have misunderstood it, have greatly ridiculed it. 
But for Leibniz this principle was merely a subjective one, that 
is to say, a principle having reference merely to a critique 
of reason. For what is meant by saving that, in addition 
to the principle of contradiction, there must be other first 
principles? It is as much as to say that, according to the 
principle of contradiction only that can be known which is 
already contained in the notion [Begriff] of the object; but 
if ^ say anything more about the object, something must 
be added to this notion, and thus we must find a special 
principle different iVom that of contradiction, for our assertions 
must have their own special reason. Now propositions of this 

APPENDIX E 

209 

latter kind are now-a-daye called synthetic, and thus Leibniz 
means nothing but this: “In addition to the principle ot 
contradiction (as the principle of analytic judgments), there 
must be another principle, namely that of synthetic judgments. 
This was a new and remarkable suggestion of investigations 
in metaphysics which had not yet been undertaken (and which 

have actually been undertaken only recently) 

it to be believed that so great a mathematician as Leibniz 
held that bodies are composed of Monads (and consequently 
that space is made up of simple parts) ? He referred not to 
the corporeal world, but to its substratum imperceptible [i/wc/'- 
kennhar] to us, namely, the intelligible world which belongs 
merely to the idea of reason, and in which doubtless we 
must represent to ourselves as made up of simple substances 
everything which we think therein as compound substance. 
He likewise appears, like Plato, to attribute to the human 
mind an original, although at present only obscure, intellectual 
intuition \An8chanen] of these supersensible realities. Butin 
this he did not refer to the things of sense, which he attributes 
to intuition [Anschattuttff^ of a special kind, of which we an* 
capable only in relation to things we can really know [/iir mis 
mdgliche Erketnitniai^e], and he regards the things ot sense 
as mere phenomena (in the stpet use of the term), as specific 
forms of intuition peculiar to us. With regard to this we 
must not allow ourselves to be perplexed by his explanation 
of sensation as a confused kind of perception, but must rather 
substitute for it another explanation more in harmony with 
his main purpose ; for otherwise his system would be in- 
consistent with itself. To take this defect as a deliberate and 
careful speculation on the part of Leibniz (as copiers, in order 
to make their copy exactly the same as the original, reproduce 
its mistakes of form and language) can hardly be credited to 
the disciples of Leibniz a service done to the fan* of their 
master. Similarly, if it is taken too literally, a wrong inter- 
pretation is given to the view of Leibniz regarding the innate- 
ness of certain notions, by which he means a fundamental 
faculty to which the a priori principles of our knowledge are 
referable : he makes use of this idea merely as against Locke, 
who recognized no other than an empirical origin of these 
principles. (3) Is it possible to believe that, by his pre- 
established harmony between soul and body, Leibniz meant 
a mntaal conformity of two beings entirely independent of 

p 

210 

INTRODUCTION 

one another as regards their nature and incapable of being 
brought into connexion through their own forces? That 
would have been to proclaim idealism; for why should the 
existence of bodies in general be admitted, if it is possible 
to regard everything that takes place in the soul as the effect 
of its own powers, which it would exercise even if it were 
entirely isolated? The soul and the substratum (entirely 
unknown to us) of the phenomena which we call bodies are 
indeed two quite different beings, but these phenomena them- 
selves, as mere forms of their intuition \ Ansckauung\ depending 
upon the nature of the subject (the soul), are mere perceptions 
[Vor8telliin(jen\. Hence the connexion between understanding 
and sense in the same subject can be understood according 
to certain a prion laws, as well as the necessary and natural 
dependence of sense upon oxtornal things, without sacrificing 
external things to idealism. For this harmony between under' 
standing and sense, in so far as it renders possible a priori the 
knowledge of universal laws of nature, criticism has given 
as a reason that without this harmony no experience is pos- 
sible But we can give no reason why we have just 

such a kind of sense and an understanding of such a nature 
that through their combination experience is possible ; and 
further we can find no reason why they, as completely 
heterogeneous sources of kndwledge, always so completely 
harmonize in rendering possible experiential knowledge in 
general and more especially (as the Critigtie of Judgment 
shows) in rendering possible an experience of nature, under 
its manifold special and merely empirical laws, regarding 
which the understanding teaches us nothing o priori. Neither 
we nor any one else can explain how this harmony is as com- 
plete as if nature had been arranged expressly to suit our 
power of comprehension. Leibniz called the principle of this 
union (especially with reference to the knowledge of bodies 
and in particular of our own body ds a middle term in this 
relation) a pt'C'estahlished harmony. Manifestly he did not in 
this way give an explanation of the union, nor did he profess 
to explain it. Ho merely pointed out that we must regard 
the order established by the supreme cause of ourselves as 
well as of all things outside of us as involving a cei-tain 
conformity to end. This purpose is regarded as present at 
creation (pre-establiahed) ; yet as a pre-established agreement, 
not between things taken os outside one another, but only 

APPENDIX E 

2II 

between our mental powers of sense and understanding^, ac- 
cording to the special constitution of each in relation to the 
other. In the same way criticism teaches that, in order to 
a knowledge of things a prioH, these powers must stand in 
relationship to one another in the mind. That this was what 
Leibniz really meant, although he did not clearly develop it, 
appears from this, that he extends the application of the 
pre-established harmony beyond the relation between soul 
and body to the relation between the kingdom of mture and 
the kingdom of gmce (the kingdom of ends in relation to the 
supreme end, i. e. man under moral laws). Here the harmony 
is to be thought of las a harmony between what follows from 
our notions of nature and what follows from our notions of 
freedom, and thus as a harmony between two completely 
different powers in us, having completely dissimilar principles, 
and not between two different things taken as external to otu* 
another. And this harmony, as the Critique teaches, can in 
no way be comprehended from the nature of created things 
[WelUveseti] but, as it is for us an essentially contingent har- 
mony, it can only be understood by referring it to an intelligent 
cause of the world.* 

THE MONADOLOOY 

THE MONADOLOGY>. 1714. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

The Monadology is one of the latest of the works of Leibniz, 
having been written at Vienna in 1714, two years before his 
<leath. On this last visit of his to Vienna he hail met the 
soldier }>rince P]ugene of Savoy, who (probably through Queen 
Sophia Chai'lolte of Prussia) had heard of the one great work 
Leibniz had hitherto published, the which appeared 

in 1710. Having read the Theodicee^ Prince Kjjgene begged 
Leibniz to write for him a condensed statement of the main 
principles of his philosophy, and having obtained this, in the 
form either of what we now call the MonadoJogy or of the 
Vrinciples of Nature and of Grace^ he was so delighted with it 
that he kept it like a jewel in a case, so that his friend, Count 
lionneval, wrote to Leibniz, perhaps with a touch of humorous 
exaggeration : — ‘ He keeps your writing as the priests at Naples 
kee]) the blood of St. Januarius ; he lets me kiss it and imme- 
diately shuts it up again in its casket.’ (Guhrauer, ii. 287.) 

The Monadology was written in French; but it was not 
published in its original form until 1840, when Krdmann, 
who had discovered the MS. in the Royal Library at Hanover, 
printed it in his editicMi of the philosophical works of Leibniz. 
German and Latin translations of it appeared in 1720 and 1721, 
and ii was for a long time combined with the Principles of 

* Erdmann gave the name *La Monadologie* to this work wlien ho 
published it in 1840. Kohler published a German version of it in 
1730, under the title: Lekrsdtse uher die Monadologiej &c. Hutens 
gives a Latin translation of the German and entitles it : Vrindpia 
philoaophiae seu theses in gratiam Principis Eugenii, The original 
MSS. have no title. 

2i6 

THE H0NA1X>L00Y 

Natu^re and of Grace, there being some doubt as to which of the 
two was the treatise written for Prince Eugene. The two 
writings are similar in scope and intention, and were probably 
written about the same time. . Gerhardt holds that the work 
written for Prince Eugene was not the Monadology but the 
Frinciplee of Nature and of Grace. (See G, vi. 483 and prefatory 
note to the Princqdes of Nature and of Grace in this edition.) 
The Princijdes of Nature and of Grace certainly appears to be 
the earlier of the two. 

As to its contents, the Monadology is to be regarded, not as 
an introduction to the philosophy of Leibniz, but rather as a 
condensed statement of the principles expressed in many philo- 
sophical papers, and expounded, after a somewhat desultory 
fashion, in the Theodivee. Leibniz himself indicated this fact 
by putting on the margin of his manuscript of the Monadology 
a serioB of references to sections of the Thik)dic4e in which his 
views are more fully expressed. Thus, as Erdmann says, the 
Monadology is (in the German sense) an ‘Encyclopaedia’ of 
the philosophy of Leibniz, and the full understanding of it 
presupposes some general knowledge of his thinking. It is not 
possible rightty to understand it at a fii-st reading. 

The Monadology expounds a Metaphysic of Substanc^and it 
may for convenience be regarded as consisting of two main 
divisions, in the first of which an account is given of the essen- 
tial nature of all the substances, created and uncreated, which 
constitute the reality of the universe, while the second division 
explains the mutual relations through which they form one 
world. §§ I to 48 make up the first of these divisions, the 
second consisting of §§ 49 to 90. In the first division three 
principal parts may be discriminated; (a) §§ 1-18, in which 
the nature of Created Monads is explained; (&) §§ 19-30, in 
which three great classes of Created Monads are discriminated ; 
and (c) §§ 31-48, in which transition is made from the highest 
class of Created Monmls (the self-conscious) to the Uncreated 
Monad (God) through the two great pripciples of Reason, that 
of Contradiction and that of Sufficient Reason. Thus a philo- 
sophic view is taken of the whole universe, considered as 
a hierarchy of individual beings. The second division of the 
Monadology, in which the mutual relations of substances are 
more fully explained, may also be subdivided into three prin- 
cipal parts : (a) §§ 49-60, expounding the general principles 

THE MONADOLOGT 

2T7 

of the inter-relation of substances through the hypothesis of 
the Pre-established Harmony and the doctrine of *the best 
of all possible worlds’ (6) §§ explaining in more detail 

the relations of particular classes of substances to one another, 
and dealing with questions of organism and of the relations of 
soul and body, including birth and death, &c. ; and (c) §§ 83-90, 
in which the whole system of relations is brought to unity in 
God, the distinction' and harmony between efficient and final 
causes (which had been found to be the basis of the distinction 
between body and soul), 'being supplemented by an analogous 
distinction and harmony between the ‘ physical realm of nature 
and the moral realm of grace, that is to say, between God, 
considered as Architect of the machine of the universe and 
God considered as Monarch of the divine City of spirits.* This 
brief analysis is to be taken merely as a suggestion of the line 
of thought in the Monadology; the texture of the work is 
so close that it is impossible to make perfectly satisfactory 
divisions in it. 

The translation is made from the text given by M. Boutroux, 
who has collated the MSS. at Hanover and corrected some 
errors of Erdmann. The Monadology is given in E. 705 sqq. ; 
(i. vi. sqq. 

1. The Monad, of which we shall here speak, is nothing 
but a simple substance, which enters into compounds. 
By ^simple’ is meant ‘without parts.’ {Ilieod, 10.) 

2. And there must be simple substances, since there 
are compounds ; for a compound “ is nothing but a 
collection or aggregatum of simple things®. 

There is a slight but interostiiig difference between this and 
the corresponding passage in the Principles of Nature and of Grace 
p. 406). Leibni:^ speaks here of compound* in general {le com- 
pose) : in the other pasSage he uses the expi'ession * compound 
substance * {la composee). In both cases he must be understood to 
mean M^ody,’ which, he elsewhere tells us, is not a substance*, 
strictly speaking (Introduction, Part iii. pp. 96 and iii). Accord- 
ingly, the expression here is more exact than that in the Principles 
of Nature and of Grace ; but the difference illustrates the looseness 
of Leibniz's terminology in this connexion. 

® If the * simple things* are, like the Monads, non-quantitative, 
can we attach any intelligible meaning to ^compounds,* which are 
mere aggregates of them ? Does not an aggregate always imply 

2i8 

THE MONADOLOGY 

3. Now where there are no parts \ there can be neither 

extension nor form nor divisibility. These Monads 

are the real atoms of nature and, in a word, the elements 
of things \ 

4. No dissolution of these elements need be feared, 
and there is no conceivable way in which a simple sub- 
stance can be destroyed by natural means. (Tlieod. 89.) 

5. For the same reason there is no conceivable way in 
which a simple substance can come into being by natural 
means, since it cannot be formed by the combination of 
parts \compositmi\ 

ttlomontn which arc quantities, however small ? Leibniz elsewhere 
makes it perfectly clear that nothing quantitative can ever be 
absolutely siniplo, and thus there seems a woakness in his reasoning 
at this point. The difficulty is fundamental and affects the whole 
of Leibniz's Mysteiii : it is, indeed, the crux of every Individualist 
or Atoinist philosophy. lieibniz's hypothesis of a *li\ing [ funnel'] 
atom,' a * fertile simplicity,' a ‘centre which expresses (or repre- 
sents) an infinite circuinferenco ' aux Rifexhms de Bayle^ 

170a, E. 187 a ; G. iv. 56a), is the suggestion of a way out of 
Atomisin ; but it does not take us entirely out of the wood. We 
have still, in the spirit of much of Leibniz's philosophizing, to 
ask ourselves the question — ‘ Are not “ simple " and “ compound " 
purely relative terms, so that to st^arch for an absolutely simple 
thing is to explore blind alloys ? ' Kant shows us the blind alloys in 
his second Antinomy f'ntique of Pure Reabon^ Meiklejohn's Tr., p. 271). 
See also the interesting analysis and criticism of Kant’s arguments 
in Hegel's Wi>isensch<tftder Logik. bk. i. div. a, ch. i. sect. A, note. Cf. 
Uegel’s Gesehichtii der Philosophwy vol. iii. p. 525 (Eng. Tr., p. 449). 

* i.o. where there uixi no spatial distinctions. 

* Cf. New System^ § 3. Ordinary physical atoms have form and 
extension ; and, though they may not be physically divisible, yet 
they must bo ideally divisible ad mfniturny inasmuch as they 
occupy space. Thus for Leibniz all merely physical atoms are 
unreal. Cf. Lange's History of Maierialisni, bk. i. sect. 4, ch. iv, 
(Eng. Tr., vol. ii. pp. 124 sqq \ 

* According to Leibniz a thing is produced by nature only when 
it comes into being gradually, bit by bit. But the Monads, having 
no parts, cannot come into being by the adding of part to part. 
Yet it irtay be pointed out that every Monad has an m'emol 
development, which is gradual. It is not born perfect, fully 
realized. Why, then, should it not come into being by natural 
means ? 

THE MONADOLOGY 

2T9 

6. Thus it may be said that a Monad can only come 
into being or come to an end all at once ; that is to say, 
it can come into being only by creation and come to an 
end only by annihilation, while that which is compound 
comes into being or comes to an end by parts \ 

7. Further, there is no way of explaining how a 
Monad can be altered in quality or internally changed ** 
by any other created thing ; since it is impossible 
to change the place of anything in it or to conceive 
in it any internal motion which could be produced, 
directed, increased or diminished therein, altliough all 
this is possible in the case of compounds, in which 
there are changes among the parts \ The Monads 
have no windows, through which anything could come 
in or go out. Accidents cannot separate tliomselves 
from substances nor go about outside of them, as the 
‘ sensible species * of the Scholastics used to do Thus 

’ Consider, by way of analogy and contrast, wliat Spinoza says 
regarding the eternity of the human mind, EthieSy v. i)rop. 23. 
Spinoza dispenses with the idea of creation. But according to 
Leibniz there are created Monads, whose creation is, nevortlieless, 
not an event in time, for time and space have to do merely with 
phenomena, and the Monads are not in time and space, but con- 
dition them. Cf. § 47 and Introduction, Part iii. p. loi. 

® Tlio meaning is that by other things tlie Monad can neither 
be altered as to its nature, i.e. changed into somothing else, nor 
even affected in those changes of state which it can undergo 
without a chango of nature. 

• It is implied that all changes in bodies are roduciblo to trans- 
])osition of parts, and ultimatedy to clianges in the amount and 
direction of motion. SJpe Introduction, Part iii. pp. <69 sqq. 

^ Leibniz seems hero to have in view partly the doctrines of 
Thomas Aquinas and partly the scholastic theories which were 
based on the system of Democritus. The ‘species' are images or 
immaterial representations of material qualities. According to 
Thomas Aquinas, the accidents of things are known to us by 
means of sensible species, or particular images, while we know 
the essences of things by means of intelligible species or genera] 
images. The scholastic theory in general may he said to be that 
the sensible or intelligible ‘species’ in us have something in 
common with the accidents or essences in things, though there 

220 

THE MONABOLOGY 

neither substance nor accident can come into a Monad 
from outside". 

8. Yet the Monads must have some qualities, otherwise 
they would -not even Jbe existing things And if simple 
substances did not differ in quality, there would be 

is a considerable variety of more or less vague opinion as to the 
nature of the relation. Leibniz is evidently thinking of a theory 
(not that of Thomas Aquinas), according to which sense-perception 
means that particles are detached from the body perceived and 
pass into the percipient, in whom they are reconstructed into 
images or roprosontatioris of qualities in the thing perceived. 
Images of this kind were called €tSco\a by Democritus. Of. Ritter 
and Preller, Hiatoria Philoftophiae Graecae^ § 155. Atomists felt bound 
to explain the action of body upon soul by the suggestion of some 
kind of injlurm physicus. Descartes has a parallel passage to this 
of Leibniz, in wliich lie says that he *• desires to rid people’s minds 
of all these little images, Hying through the air, called intentional 
ttjwciea, which give ho much work to the imagination of philo- 
sophers.* Diqptri(p 4 ej Disoours 1 . Cf. other passages quoted by Veitch 
in liis Translation of Descartes's Method and Meditations^ note 2 — ‘ Idea.’ 

Kant pointed out that a thing may liave intensive* as well 
as ^oxtensivo’ quantity, i. e. quantity which is not divisible into 
spatial parts as well ns quantity which is so divisible. A stone 
descending from a height loses a certain * intensive quantity ’ 
without losing any of its spatial parts. And thus a simple sub- 
stance may, in a certain sense, lose and receive quality. Cf. 
Critique of Pure Reason (Hartenstoin, ii. 178; Ro&enkinnz, ii. 145; 
Meiklejohn’s Tr., p. 125). Kant argues that the simplicity of the 
soul (i.o. the absence of parts in it) does not necessarily prove its 
indestructibility, for, though it has no parts, it may lose con- 
sciousness and the rest of Its essential qualities (Hartoustein, ii. 
316; Rosonkranz, ii. 792; Meiklejohu’s Tr,, p. 245). Compare 
Kant’s ' intensive quantity’ with Leibniz’s degrees of Perception 
and Appetitioii. 

^ After this sentence Leibniz originally w^'ote, and then deleted, 
these words : * And if simple substances were nonentities 
compounds also would be reduced to nothing.' This emphasizes 
the point that a being without quality is Indistinguishable from 
nothing ; cf. Hegel’s Logic^ Wallace’s Tr., pp, 158 sqq. Quantity 
always presupposes quality ; see Introduction, Part ii. pp. 27 sqq.* 
Leibniz seems also to imply that each Monad must have more 
than one quality. On the other hand, Herbart 776-1841), whose 
Monadology owes much to that* of Leibniz, and who calls his 
Monads * primary qualities' (fJrgualitdien)y holds that a substance 
cannot be perfectly simple unless it has only one ultimate quality. 

THE MONADOLOGY 

221 

absolutely no means of perceiving any change in things. 
For what is in the compound can come only from the 
simple elements it contains^ and the Monads, if they had 
no qualities, would be indistinguishable from one another, 
since they do not differ in quantity Consequently, 
space being a plenum^ each part of space would always 
receive, in any motion, exactly the equivalent of what it 
already had, and no one state of things would be dis- 
cernible from another'*. 

“ Kant would any that they may differ in * intenaivo quantity* ; 
see note ii. Leibniz makes the distinction between quality and 
quantity as sliarp as the Aristotelian distinction between irofov 
and ir($(roK. Yet in some respects his Law of Continuity suggests 
a different view. 

** E. reads *one state of things would be indistinguishable from 
another.’ Cf. l^pisfola ad Dea (1706) (G. ii. 395) : *If we wore 

to admit, as the Cartesians desire, the plenum and the uniformity 
of matter, adding to these motion alono, it would follow that 
nothing would ever take place among things but a substitution of 
equivalents, as if the whole universe were reduced to the motion 
of a perfectly uniform wheel about its axis or, again, to the revolu- 
tions of concentric circles, each made of exactly the same materials. 
The result of this would bo that it would not be possible, even for 
an angel, to distinguish the state of things at one moment from 
their state at another. For there could bo no variety in the phe- 
nomena. Accordingly, in addition to figure, size, and motion, we 
must allow certain Forms, whence there arises a distinction among 
the phenomena of matter ; and I do not see whence these Forms 
are to be taken, if they are to be intelligible, unless it be from 
Entelechies.’ To avoid a possible misunderstanding, it should be 
noted that for Iioibniz, tlio Monads are not in space, which is a 
relation between phenomena ; seo Introduction, Part iii. p. lor. Cf. 
EpistoUi ad Des Bosses (171a) (E. 68a b ; G. ii. 450') : ‘Space is the 
order of co-existing phenomena, as time is the order ^of succc^ssive 
phenomena. There is no nearness or distance, whether spatial or 
absolute, among Monads, and to say that they are collected together 
in one point or dispersed throughout space, is to make use of certain 
fictions of our mind, by which we try to represent to ourselves in 
imagination what cannot bo imagined but only understood.' Kant, 
misled by the position of Wolff, docs not rightly interpret Leibniz's 
view of space, which he discusses in the Critique qf Pure Reason^ 
Hartenstein, iL 256 sqq. ; Rosenkranz, Ii. ai6 sqq. ; Moiklejohn'a 
Tr., pp. 191 sqq., especially p. 199. Cf. Introduction, Part iv. 
pp, x68sqq. 

222 

THE MONADOLOGY 

9. Indeed, each Monad must be different from every 
other. For in nature there are never two beings which 
are perfectly alike and in which it is not possible to find 
an internal difference, or at least a difference founded 
upon an intrinsic quality [denomination] 

10. I assume also as admitted that every created 
being, and consequently the created Monad, is subject 
to change, and further that this change is continuous 
in each '®. 

This is the principle of the ‘identity of indiscernibles * ; see 
Introduction, Part ii. p. 36. Cf. Nouveaux Essais^ hk. ii, cli. xxvii. 
§ 3 (1'-- 277 h ; (t!. V. 214). For Kant’s criticism soo Critique qf Pure 
Reason^ llartenstein, ii. 367 ; Rosenkranz, ii. 329 ; Meiklejohn’s Tr., 
p. 203. Probably tho first statement of the principle is to be found 
in tho writings of Nicholas of Cusa (1401 -1464). He says that 
‘there cannot be several things exactly tho same [aequalia], for In 
that case there would not be several things, but the same thing 
itself. Tlierefore all things both agree with and differ from one 
another.' {De Venatione Sapimliae^ 23.) Cf. De docta ignorantia, iii. 1 : 
‘All filings must of necessity differ from one another. Among 
several individuals of the same spocit^s there is necessarily a 
diversity of degrees of perfection. There is nothing in the universe 
which does not enjoy a certain singularity^ whicli is to be found in 
no other thing.’ His theories are full of suggestions of Leibniz. Cf. 
Falckenborg, History of Modern Philomphy, English Tr., pp. 20 sqq. 
RoforcuK'c may also bo made to a very interesting article by Zimmor- 
niann, Nicolaus Ousanus als Vorldufer Leibnitzens \^Wien. Akad. Sitzungs’‘ 
herichte, vol. 8, p. 306). There is no mention of Nicholas of Cusa in 
any of Leibniz’s philosophical writings ; but in a letter to tho Acta 
Eruditornm (1697) Leibniz refers to him as a mathematician (of. 
Dutens, iii. 345). — Intrinsic qualities are those which things have 
in themselves, e.g. figure, motion, &c., while eHrinsic qualities are 
those which arise from their relations to other things, e.g. their 
being perceived, <lesired, &c. Cf. Port-Royal Logicy part i. ch. ii. 
(Baynes’s Tr., p. 37) ; ‘ There are some modes which may be called 
intemaly because they are conceived to bo in the substance, as round, 
square ; and others which may be called arfmwii, because they are 
taken from something which is not in the substance, as loved, seen, 
desired, whicli are names taken from tlie actions of another — and 
this is what is called in tlie schools external denomination.* 

Thej^e is eonstant change in created substances, even though 
there may appear to be no change. What appears to us as absence 
of change is really a very small degree of change. We have here 
an application of tlie Law of Continuity. 

THE MONADOLOGY 

223 

II. It follows from what has just been said, that the 
natural changes of the Monads come from an internal 
principle^ since an external cause can have no influence 
upon their inner being. {Tlidod. 396, 400.) 

1 2 But, besides the principle of the change, there 
must be a particular series of changes [un detail de ce </ui 
change^ which constitutes, so to speak, the specifle nature 
and variety of the simple substances. 

13. This particular series of changes should involve a 
multiplicity in the unit [unite] or in that which is simple. 
For, as every natural change takes place gradually, 
something changes and something remains unchanged ; 
and consequently a simple substance must be affected and 
related in many ways, although it has no parts 

i. e. oUier than miracnloun ehanp^en or than siioJi chnngo as miiy 
bo implied in the creation or unnihilution of a Monad. 

** At the beginning of $ la Leibniz originally wrote : And gener- 
ally it may be said that force i» nothing but tlio priiiciplo of the 
change,’ He seems afterwards to have felt that forc,o waw not a deep 
enough notion to be an ad<>quate oxproHHion of the principle which, 
in §§ 14 and 15, he describes under the names of Perception and 
Appetition. 

The Law of Continuity. Evoi*ything is continually changing, 
and in every part of this change there is both a permanent and a 
varying element. Tliat is to say, at any moment everything both 
‘is* and ‘is not,* everything is becoming aomething else — some- 
thing which is, nevertheless, not entirely ‘ otlier.' 

In illustration of this and (he following sections, cf. R^jxmseavx 
Biflexions de Bayle (1702) (E. 186 b ; G. iv. 562) : ‘The state of tiie 
amZ, as of the atomy is a state of chnngo, a tendency. The atom 
tends to change its place, the soul to change its thought : each 
changes of itself in the simplest and most uniform way, that its 
state allows. Whence Monies it, then (I shall be asked), that there 
is 80 much simplicity in the change of the atom ' [which is taken 
as being always motion in a straight line at u uniform speed] ‘and 
so much variety in the changc.<9 of the soul ? The reason is that the 
atom (as it is supposed to be, for there is no such thing in nature;, 
although it has parts, has nothing which causes any variety in its 
tendency, because it is supposed that these parts do not change 
their relations; while on the other hand the soul, tliough it is 
perfectly intliyisible, has a composite tendency, that is to say, it 
contains a multitude of present thoughts, of which each tends to 

THE MONADOLOGY 

224 

14. The passing condition, which involves and repre- 
sents a multiplicity in the unit [unite] or in the simple 
substance, is nothing but what is called Perception 
which is to be distinguished from Apperception or 
Consciousness, as wUl afterwards appear. In this matter 
the Cartesian view is extremely defective, for it treats as 
non-existent those perceptions of which we are not 
consciously aware”. This has also led them to believe 
that minds [esprits] alone are Monads, and that there are 
no souls of animals nor other Entelechies. Thus, like the 
crowd, they have failed to distinguish between a prolonged 
unconsciousness and absolute death”, which has made 

a particular change, according to the nature of its content, and 
which all are present together in the soul, in virtue of the kouI’s 
essential relation to all the other things in the world. It is because 
they do not have this relation that the atoms of Epicurus have no 
existence in nature. For there is no individual tlung, which is 
not to be regarded as expressing all others ; and consequently the 
soul, in regard to the variety of its modificaiwnsy ought to be likened 
to the universe^ which it represents according to its point of view, 
and even in a way to God, whose infinity it represents ^niYe/y, because 
of its confused and imperfect perception of the infinite, rather than 
to a matarial atom/ Cf. Appendix F, p. 272. 

Cf. Epistola ad Des Boasen (1706) (E. 438 a; G. ii. 31 1) : ‘Since 
perception is nothing else than the expression of many things in 
one, all Entelechies or Monads must necessarily be endowed with 
perception.* Also Lettre 4 Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 112) : ‘Because of 
the continuity and divisibility of all matter, the least motion has 
its oflfeot upon neighbouring bodies, and consequently upon one 
body after another ad infinitum, in a gradually lessoning degree ; 
and thus our body must in some way be affected by the changes in 
all other bodies. Now, to all the motions of our body there corre- 
spond certain more or less confused perceptions of our soul, and 
accordingly our soul also will have some thought of all the motions 
in the universe, and in my opinion every other soul or substance 
will have some perception or expression of them.' See Introduction, 
Part ii. p. 33. 

Of. Method, Part 5, and Meditations, g and 6. See also Principia 
Pkilosophiae, i. 48, and cf. Introduction, Part iii. p. ia6. The Car- 
tesian vibw is that animals and plants are purely mechanical 
structures or living automata, parts of extension, entirely separate 
fl‘om thought. 

^ * Sleep, which is an image of death, trances, the burying of 

THE MONADOLOGY 

!225 

tliem fall again into the Scholastic prejudice of souls 
entirely separate [fn>m bodies], and has even confirmed 
ill-balanced** minds in the opinion that souls are moital**. 

a silkworm in its cocoon, the resuscitation of drowned ilies by 
means of a dry powder sprinkled upon them (when they would 
remain quite dead, if this were not done), the resuscitation of 
swallows which make their winter quarters among the reeds, 
where they are found without any appearance of life, the cases of 
men frozen to death, drowned, or strangled, who have been brought 
to life again ... all these things serve to confirm my opinion that 
these different conditions differ only in degree, and if we have not 
the means of bringing about resuscitation from death in other 
forms, it is either because we do not know what ought to be done 
or because, though we do know it, our hands, our instruments, and 
our remedies cannot accomplish it, especially when dissolution 
takes place too quickly and has gone too far. Accordingly wo 
must not content ourselves wdth the notions which the common 
people may have about life and death, when wo have both analogies 
and (what is more') solid arguments wliich prove the contrary. 
Lettro a Amatdd (1687) (G. ii. 123). 

E. reads mol touches ; G. and Boutroux, mal tourru’S, 

** Descartes reganls the immortality of tbo soul as ultimately 
dependent on the will of God. See the Abridge prefixed to the 
MMitations [Synopsis in Veitch’s translation]. Cf. lieponses aux 
Veuxihnes Objections^ 7. Leibniz thus criticizes the view of Descartes: 
‘The immoHality of the soul, as it is established by Descartes, is 
of no use and can give us no kind of consolation. For, granting 
that the soul is a substance and that no substance perishes, the 
soul then will not bo lost, as, indeed, nothing is lost in nature ; but, 
like matter, the soul will change in appearance and, as the mutter 
of which a man is made has at other times belonged to plants and 
animals, in the same way the soul may be immortal, indeed, but 
it ^ill pass through innumerable changes and will have no re- 
collection of its former states. But this immortality without 
recollection is ethically ^uite useless ; for it is inconsiatent with 
reward and punishment. What good, sir, would it do you to 
become king of China, on condition that you forget what you have 
been ? Would it not be the same as if God, at the moment He 
destroyed you, were to create a king in China? ' (G. iv. p. 300.) 

From his own point of view, however, Descartes can say: ‘Al- 
though all the accidents of the mind be changed — although, for 
example, it think certain things, will others, and perceive others, 
the mind itself does not vary with these changes ; wliilo, on the 
contrary, the human body is no longer the same if a change take 
place in the form of any of its parts.* Alrigc des Meditations, It 

226 

THE MONADOLOGY 

15. The activity of the internal principle which pro- 
duces change or passage from one perception to another 
may be called Ajppetition. It is true that desire [Vappetit] 
cannot always fully attain to the whole perception at 
which it aims, but it always obtains some of it and 
attains to new perceptions^®. 

16. Wo have in ourselves experience of a multiplicity 
in simple substance, when we find that the least thought 
of which we are conscious involves variety in its object 
Thus all those who admit that the soul is a simple 
substance should admit this multiplicity in the Monad ; 
and M. Bayle^® ought not to have found any difficulty 

(leems to mo not improbable that in the lant words of this section 
Leibniz may liavo in view, among others, the wandering Irishman, 
John Toland (1670 -1733), author of Vhriattanity not Mysterious, vf ho 
was in Berlin in 1703 and had a brief corrcspondonco with Leibniz, 
in which the question of the immortality of the soul is referred to. 
Leibniz writes to the Princess Sopliia Charlotte with something 
like a kindly contempt of Toland's readiness to take either side of 
a question. See C. vi. pp. 508 sqq. Of. l*rinciples qf lioXure and qf 
Grace, ( 4. , 

See Introduction, Part ii, p. 33. Cf. PrincipiJrs of Nature and of Grace, 
§ 2. In many of his writings Leibniz uses the word ‘ tendencies * 
(tendances) for ap()etitions. Force is a form of appetition or 
tendency, i. e. it is not merely what actually appears as motion, &c., 
but it includes sometliing jmtcrUial, And it is not really, but only 
ideally, an influence of one substance upon another. Gf. appetition, 
in respect of likeness and difference, with Spinoza's Conatus, 

Cf. Nouveaux Kssais, bk. ii. ch. a (E. 227 a ; G. v. 109). 

** Pierre Bayle, the son of a Protestant clergyman, was born, at 
Carlat in Languedoc, in 1647. He was educated at the University 
of Toulouse, where, under the influence of Jesuit teachers, he 
became a Roman Catholic. But his Roman Catholicism was not 
lasting and, having returned to his original faith, ho avoided the 
cen8Ui*es of the Church by going to Geneva. After some years of 
wandering he became a Professor of Philosophy in the University 
of Sedan (1675). But owing to the * free- thinking ' of Bayle and 
others Louis XIV summarily suppressed this Protestant University 
in x6fla, and Bayle went, as Professor of History and Philosophy, to 
a noifly established institution at Rotterdam. In 1684 he founded 
the Nouvdles de U lUpuhliquB des Lettres, a monthly review of new books, 
&o., to which there is* frequent reference in the writings of Leibniz. 

THE MONADOLOGY 227 

in this, as he has done in his Dictionary, article ^ Rora- 
rius 

1 7. Moreover, it must bo confessed that perception and 
that which depends upon it are inexplicable on mechanical 

In 1693, OBtensibly on political H'i well as tlioological grounds, he 
was doprivod of liis profestjorship, and he atterwards devotod him- 
self to his Dictionfiaire llistorique et Crttiquo (1695-96;, which was the 
precursor of the Encyclopaedias and the Encyclopaedist movement 
in the following century. Among other writings he also published 
a tract against religious pei*8oeution and a reply to Maimbourg's 
libels upon Calvinism. He died in 1706. The Thcodici'e of L'ibniz 
is to a large extent devoted to answering the arguments of Bayle, 
who maintained the impossibility of reconciling faith with reason. 
There is much dififerenoe of opinion ns to wbether Bayle was 
sincere in liis combination of philosopliical scepticism with an 
appeal to faith in matters of religion. Probably in this regard he 
meant to follow tho example of Descartes. Leibniz seems to have 
believed in tho sincerity of Bayle's religious fuitli. lie always 
writes of Bayle with the greatest respect, saying of him \T/ieoU. 
§ 174): * Ubi lenej nemo with ««,* and again, after his death: * We 
must believe that Bayle is now enlightened with that light, which 
is refused to earth, since, according to all appearance, ho has 
always been a man of good will.' 

” Like the greater part of Bayle’s Dictionary, the article 

* Korarius* may be said to consist mostly of foot-notes. Jerome 
Korarius (1485-1566;, an Italian, was Pupal Euncio at the Court 
of Ferdinand of Hungary. Ho was so gioat an admirer of tho 
Emperor Charles V tliat, on hearing a learned man speak of him 
as inferior to Otho and t<j Frederick Barbarossa, he was moved to 
write a troutise maintaining that men are less rational than the 
lower animals. This treatise {(Juod ammalia hruta ralwm utantur 
melius homino) was not published until about loo years after it was 
written, wlien Descartes's views regarding tho souls of animals 
were under discussion. Bayle accordingly makes the name of 
Korarius the occasion of a full consideration of the question, in tho 
course of which he expoarids and ciiticizes the opinions of Leibniz. 
Bayle thinks it a pity that the position of De8cai*tes is so di/Yicult 
to mui.itain and so unlikely to be true; for otherwise it w(iu]d be 
very helpful to the true faith. That is to say, tho Carte^jian view 
is regarded as confirming belief in tho immortality of the soul by 
making a very great distinction between man and Hlie brutes 
which perish.' But it seeing to Bayle that Leibniz (whom ho calls 

* one of the greatest minds in Europe ') has made some siiggC||l>tioiis 
(in regard to the solution of the genera] problem) which are worthy 
of being developed. These suggestions are contained in the New 

q 2 

228 

THE MONADOLOGY 

grounds, that is to say, by means of figures and motions. 
And supposing there were a machine, so constructed as to 
think, feel, and have perception, it might be conceived as 
increased in size, while keeping the same proportions, so 
that one might go into it as into a mill. That being so, 
we should, on examining its interior, find only parts 
which work one upon another, and never anything by 
which to explain a perception Thus it is in a simple 
substance, and not in a compound or in a machine, that 
perception must be sought for“\ Further, nothing but 
this (namely, perceptions and their changes) can be found 
in a simple substance. It is also in this alone that all 

Syatem^ which wna published in the Jawtnal des of June 27, 

*^95 (the your before the second vol. of Bayle's Dictionary appeared). 
Baylo H criticism is directed mainly against tho pre-established 
Imrmony and the spontaneous development of all their states by 
simple substances. Cf. Appendix F. p. 272. 

That is to say, even if wo had microscopes powerful enough to 
reveal to uh, on a largo scale, all the intricacies of nerve-cell and 
nervo-fibn^ in the bi’uin, wo should still never get beyond figures and 
motions. Cf. Commentatio de Anima Bruto)um (1710'^ 463 a ; O. vii. 

328) : • If in that w’hich is organic there is nothingbut mechanism, that 
is, hare matter, having difTerences of place, magnitude and figure ; 
nothing can bo deduced and explained from it, except mechanism, 
that is, except such differences as I have just mentioned. For 
from anything taken by itself nothing can be deduced and ex- 
plained, except diflereiices of the attributes which constitute it, 
Hoiico wo may readily conclude that in no mill or clock as such is 
thoio to ho found any principle which perceives what takes place 
in it ; and it matters not whether the things contained in the 
** machine are solid or fluid or made up of both. Further we know 
that theio is no esMcntlal difference between coarse and fine bodies, 
but only a diffoi'onco of magnitude. Whence it follows that, if it 
is inconceivable how perception arises iif any coarse “machine,” 
whether it be made up of fluids or solids, it is equally inconceivable 
how perception can arise from a finer “machine”; for if our 
senses were finer, it would be the same as if we were perceiving 
a coarse “machine,” as we do at present.* See also New Essays, 
Introduction, p. 400. (^G. v, 59 ; E. 203 a.) 

** M^hanism always means partes extra partes. This is character- 
istic of all compounds, but not of any simple substances. Thus it 
can never be said that matter thinks. Matter pre-supposes a 
thinking 6r at least a ^perceiving* principle. 

THE MONADOLOGY 229 

the internal activities of simple substances can consist. 
{Th4od. Pref. [E. 474 ; G. vi. 37].) 

1 8. All simple substances or created Monads might be 
called Entelechies for they have in them a certain per- 
fection ro cvTcXc?) ; they have a certain self-sufficiency 

{airrdpK€La) which makes them the sources of their internal 
activities and, so to speak, incoiporeal automata (TMod, 
87.) 

is probably derived from Iv riXei txtiVj to bo complete 
or absoluto. Leibniz’s use of the term differs considerably from 
that of Aristotle. IvTtXixtta in Aristotle is the state of perfection 
or realization in which kvipytta^ as a process, ends. roUvofui Ivipytta 
Xkytrai Hard t6 tpyov, koX (rvvTtiufi ivT€X€Xttav. Mvfaph. 0 , 8, 

1050* 23 . But the distinction between kvTfkix^ta and hipytia in 
Aristotle is not by any moans a sharp one. Thus ho defines the soul 
{ipvxrf) as kvrtXlx^*^ “h rrpurrj aiiparos <pvaiieov hvvdpu 
Anima, ii. i. But elsewhere ho calls it ovtria /cai kvkpytia (Tuparos 
Tivos. MetapK H, 3, 1043'' 35. First entolechy is related to second 
enteleohy as iiri<Trrfprj (implicit) is related to 0«vp€iy (explicit). 
Thus the soul is defined ns first or implicit entolechy becaiiso it 
exi.sts in sleep as well ns awako. Tlio ontelochy of Leibniz, how- 
ever, is to bo understood as an individual substance or force, 
containing within itself tho principle of its own changes. It is 
culled entelechy, n^jt because it is a state of jH'rfoct realization, 
but because it contains in germ an infinity of perfections, which 
it tends to develop. It is thus not so much tlio final developed 
condition of a thing, opposed to its potentiality {dvvapus or CX17), but 
it rather implies the tendency or virtuality, of which Leibniz 
speaks as something intermediate between tho bare potency (jmis- 
sanre) and the fully developed activity {acte) of the Scholastics. 
Of. Introduction, Taii; iii. pp. 91, 105. ‘The Forms of the Ancients 
or Entelechies are nothing but forces.’ Lettrc au Pere Bouvet, E. 146 a. 
Cf. Trendelenburg, Be Anima, pp. 295, 320. In the eighth book of 
Ai'istotle’s Metaphysics there is a remark of much interest, when 
considered in relation to Leibniz : ^ ovaia ovrw, dXX* ovx 
Xiyovai -rives oTov povds ns ovaa tniypcij, dXX* IvreXix^io. KnX cpvats ns 
ktedanj. H, 3, 1044'* 7. povds is, of course, used here in its original 
sense of a unit. 

That is to say, not merely machines, such as those made by 
man, but entirely self-moving machines or machines wliich contain 
within themselves the ground or principle of all their slates or 
conditions, in as complete independence of all else as if there were 
nothing in the universe but God and themselves. Monads alone 
are automata in this sense. Corporeal automata, in so far as they 

THE MONADOLOGY 

230 

1 9. Tf wo are to give the name of Soul to everything 
which has perceptions and desires [appMts^ in the general 
sense which I have explained, then all simple substances 
or created Monads might be called souls ; but as feeling 
\le sentiment] is something more than a bare perception, 
I think it right that the general name of Monads or 
Entelechies should suffice for simple substances which 
have perception only, and that the name of Souls should 
be given only to those in which perception is more 
distinct, and is accompanied by memory 

20. For wo experience in ourselves a condition in which 
we remember nothing and have no distinguishable per- 
ception ; as when we fall into a swoon or when we are 
overcorno with a profound dreamless sleep. In this state 
the soul does not perceptibly differ from a bare Monad ; 
but as this state is not lasting, and the soul comes out of 
it, the soul is something more than a bare Monad. 
(Theod, 64.) 

21. And it does not follow that in this state the simple 
substance is without any perception. That, indeed, 
cannot be, for the reasons already given ; for it cannot 
perish, and it cannot continue to exist without being 
affected in some way, and this affection is nothing but 
its perception. But when there is a great multitude of 
little perceptions, in which there is nothing distinct, one 
is stunned ; as when one turns continuously round in the 

are corporeal, cannot bo saiil to have this avrdpKtia. Cf. § 64, 
Spinoza speaks of the soul as * acting according to certain laws and 
AS if it were a kind of spiritual automaton.’ De Iniellectu^ Emenda- 
Uonef 85 ; Bruder’s ed., ii. 34. * 

Memory is thus the sign of consciousness as distinct from 
unconscious perception. This is in harmony with the view, em- 
phasized by modern writers, that conscious sensation pre-supposes 
memory, because we can know one sensation only when it has 
been brought into comparison with others. Leibniz in one of his 
early Writings suggestively remarks that body is ‘momentary 
mind, i. e. mind without memory’ (mens momentaneay seu carens 
reemrdatione), Theoria Motus Ahstraeti (1671) (G. iv. 230). 

Leibniz originally wrote ‘ Tariation.* 

THE MONADOLOOY 

231 

same way several times in succession, whence comes a 
giddiness which may make us swoon, and which keeps 
us from distinguishing anything Death can for a time 
put animals into this condition 

22. And as every present state of a simple substance is 
naturally a consequence of its preceding state, in such a 
way that its present is big with its future *'* ; (Theod, 350.) 

23, And as, on waking from stupor, wc are conscious of 
our perceptions, we must have had perceptions imme- 
diately before we awoke, although we were not at all 
conscious of them ; for one perception can in a natural 
way come only from another perception, as a motion 
can in a natural way come only from a motion {Theod. 
401-403.) 

24. It thus appears that if we had in our perceptions 
nothing marked and, so to speak, striking and highly- 
flavoured, wo should always be in a state of stupor. And 
this is the state in which the bare Monads are. 

25, Wo see also that nature has given heightened 
perceptions to animals, from the care she has taken to 
provide them with organs, which collect numerous rays 
of light, or numerous undulations of the air, in order, by 
uniting them, to make them have greater effect Some- 

Leibniz’s point is that in such states ns these wo are still mnni- 
festly ill certain peculiar relations to the externnl world, although 
consciousness has, for the time, become so slight as to be imper- 
ceptible. 

Cf. Monatlology^ § 14, note 23. Cf. §§78 an<l 79. 

In virtue of the principle of sufficient reason, every perception 
must have a cause, which can be nothing, but another perception 
(see § 17) ; and if the*antecedent jwreeption did not immediately 
precede the consequent, there would be a breach of continuity in 
the existence of the soul. Ultimately, of course, motions are them- 
selves perceptions ; but they are confused perceptions, of hucIi a 
kind that their relations to one another can be stated according 
to mechanical laivs, which, however, are abstract and pre-suppose, 
for their full explanation, the system of final causes or the laws of 
perception in general. 

^ Cf. Helmholtz, Popular Scientific Lectures, vol. i. p. 186. See also 
Principles qf Nature and qf Grace, ( 4 . 

THE MONADOLOGY 

232 

thing similar to this takes place in smell, in taste and in 
touch, and perhaps in a number of other senses, which 
are unknown to us And I will explain presently how 
that which takes place in the soul represents what happens 
in the bodily organs. 

26. Memory provides the soul with a kind of consecu- 
tivcness which resembles [imite] reason, but which is to 
bo distinguished from it. Thus we see that when animals 
have a perception of something which strikes them and 
of which they have formerly had a similar perception, 
they are led, by means of representation in tlieir memory, 
to exi)cct what was combined with the thing in this pre- 
vious perception, and they come to have feelings similar 
to those they had on the foiTner occasion. For instance, 
when a stick is shown to dogs, they remember the pain 
it has caused them, and howl and run away^^. {TMod, 
IJiscaiirs dc la Con/ormitCf &c., § 65.) 

2 7. And the strength of the mental image which im- 
presses and moves them comes either from the magnitude 
or the number of the preceding perceptions. For often 
a strong impression produces all at once the same effect 
as a long-formed habit, or as many and oft-repeated 
ordinaiy perceptions 

Cf. Lu))book, Bees ami Wasps^ ch. 8, especially pp. aao 

and 325. 

See §§ 61 and 6a. 

Consrcutwy concatonation or sequence of perceptions. Jjeibniz 
is referring to what would now bo called association of ideas. 
Cf. lyouveaux Essaisj bk. ii. ch. ii, § ii (E. 237 b; G. v. i3o\ and 
bk. ii. cli. 33 (E. 396 a ; G. v. 353). In the latter of these chapters 
(‘On the Association of Ideas’) he is thir/king mainly of a ‘non- 
nntural connexion of ideas,' as in the case of strange prejudices or 
superstitions. 

** Does Leibniz in this section, as some critics maintain, over- 
look his ^Pre-established Harmony* and unconsciously adopt the 
ordinary point of view, which implies that substances do really 
act upftn one another and are net each the cause of all its own 
experiences ? 

*'* Cf. Noiiveaux Essais, bk. ii. ch. 33 (E. 396 a; G. v. 353 V ‘And 
as the I’easons ' [of the connexion of things] ‘ arc often unknown to 

THE MONADOLOGY 

233 

28, In so far as the concatenation of their perceptions 
is due to the principle of memory alone, men act like the 
lower animals, resembling the empirical physicians^*, 
whose methods are those of mere practice without theory. 
Indeed, in three-fourths of our actions we are nothing 
but empirics. For instance, when we expect that there 
will be daylight to-morrow, we do so empirically, because 
it has always so happened until now. It is only the 
astronomer who thinks it on rational grounds 

29. But it is the knowledge of necessary and eternal 
truths that distinguishes us from the mere animals and 
gives us Reason and the sciences, raising us to the know- 
ledge of ourselves and of God **. And it is this in us 
that is called the rational soul or mind [rspr/Y], 

Ufl, we must attend to partioular instances in proportion to their 
frequency; for then tlio expectation or recollection of another 
perception, usually connected with the perception wo are ex* 
periencing, is reasonable ; especially in cases where wo have to 
take pi\ 3 cautioii 8 . But as the violence [rvhvimnce] of a very powerful 
impression often produces all at once as much effect as the fre- 
quency and repetition of sovoTal moderate impressions could have 
done in the long-run, it happens that this violeneo engraves in the 
fancy an imago as d^ ep and as vivid as long experience could have 
done. Whence it coinos that a chntico but violent impression 
combines in our memoi*y two ideas, which were already together 
there, and gives us the same inclination to connect thorn and to 
expect the one after the other, as if long custom had verified their 
connexion. Thus association produces the siime efl'ect, though the 
same reason does not exist. Authority and custom produce also 
the same effect as ox])crionco and reason, and it is not easy to free 
oneself from tliese inclinations.' Cf, Nc^c KssaySj Introduction, 
P- 364. 

Until the time of Galen (circa 150 a. d.), there were various 
sects of physicians. One of those was the sect of the Empirics, 
who laid stress upon observation of the * visible’ antecedc^nts of 
disease, &;c. In later times the name of empiric fell into disrepute 
and was given to physicians who despised theoretical study and 
trusted to tradition and to their own individual experience. 

Cf. New Essaysj Introduction, p. 365, note 39. 

The necessary and eternal truths are the first principles of all 
rational knowledge. They are innate in us. They are, in fact, 
the very principles of our nature, as of the universe, btjcause it is 
of our essence to represent the whole universe. Thus conscious- 

THE MONABOLOGY 

234 

30. It is also through the knowledge of necessary 
truths, and through their abstract expression, that we 
rise to acts of reflexion^ which make us think of what is 
called Ij and obseiwe that this or that is within us : 
and thus, thinking of ourselves, we think of being, of 
substance, of the simple and the compound, of the 
immaterial, and of God Himself, conceiving that what is 
limited in us is in Him without limits. And these acts of 
reflexion furnish the chief objects of our reasonings^*. 
(Theod. Pref [E. 469 ; G. vi. 27 ].) 

ness or knowledge of these truths is knowledge of ourselves, and 
it is at the same time knowledge of Ood, who is tho final reason of 
all things. Cf. Nouveaux Essnia^ hk; i. ch. i, § 4 (K. 207 b; G. v. 
72). pretty general agreement among men is an iiidicadon 
and not a demonstration of an innate prim iple ; but the exact .ind 
decisive proof of these principles consibts in showing that their 
certainty comes only from what is in us. ... It may be said that 
all Aritiiiiietic and all Geometry are innate and are in us in a 
virtual manner, so that we could find thorn by attentively con- 
sidering and arranging what is already in our mind, without 
making use of any truth learned by experience or by external 
tradition, as Plato has shoAvn in a dialogue’ [Meno, 8a sqq.] ‘in 
which ho introduces Socrates loading a child to abstruse truths 
by questions alone, without giving him any information.* Cf. 
Principles 0/ Nature and of Grace, § 5. 

Thus consciousness becomes self consciousness (reflective con- 
sciousness) when we realize the eternal truths as eternal, that is 
to say, as tho innate principles of our being and of tlie whole 
world. Substance is always a soul of some kind, because it must 
be something analogous to what we find in ourselves. Cf. Nouveaux 
EssatSy bk. i. ch. i, § 21 (E. 211b; G. v. 70). ‘Very often know- 
ledge of the nature of things is nothing but knowledge of the 
nature of our mind and of those innate ideas, which there 

is no need to look for outsido of it.* Cf. also § 23 (E. 212 b ; G. v. 
71): * Intellectual ideas or ideas of reflexion are derived from our 
mind ; and I should like very much to know how we could have 
the idea of being, wore it not that we ourselves are beings and thus 
find being in ourselves.* We see hero (in howover imperfect 
a form) the germ of the Kantian transition from ‘substance* to 
‘subject* as tho ultimate metaphysical reality. Cf. p. 190. 

Boutvoux finds in this passage the indication of a succession of 
stages in the progress of self-conscious reflexion. The nature 
of God is the truth or ultimate reality of our nature. Thus in 
‘ reflexion, that is to say, in the return *of the being towards its 

THE MONADOLOGY 

235 

31. Our reasonings are grounded upon two great princi- 
ples^ that of contradiction^ in virtue of which we judge 
false that which involves a contradiction, and true that 
which is opposed or contradictory to the false ; (Th 6 od. 
44, 169.) 

32. And that of sufficient reason^ in virtue of which 
we hold that there can be no fact real or existing, no 
statement true, unless there be a sufficient reason, why 
it should bo so and not otherwise, although these reasons 
usually cannot be known by us*’*. {Thcod. 44, 196.) 

33. There are also two kinds of truths^ those of reason- 

nourco, "whioli is God . . . wo first of all come upon the ogo, or the 
being which is in us, in so far as it is limited and distinct from 
other boings, and then upon being, suhwtanro and tlio immaterial, 
coming over nearer to the Divine Easonco itself. And finally, 
through perception which has thus bcconio reflective niul conscious, 
we reach the Infinite Being, whom, from tlio first, created boings 
are seeking confusedly and unwittingly. Then the circle, so to 
speak, closes upon itself: the created being identifies itself with 
the Creator in so far as Ho is in it ; the finite has done all that its 
nature allowed in the way of reproducing the infinite.* (Edition 
of La MonadulogiVy p. 156.) 

^ Cf. Introdiictio a. Part ii. pp. 58 sqq. Leibniz Homotimos 
distinguishes between the principle of contradiction and that of 
identity (A =- A). But ho recognizes that they are ultimately one. 
Cf. Noureatix E^sais^ bk. iv. ch. 2, § i (E. 339 a; G. v. 343'.. ‘The 
principle of contradiction is in general ; a proposUion is either true or 
false. This contains two true statements; (i) that tho tnio and tho 
false aro not compatible in tho same proposition or that a proposition 
cannot be true and false at the same time ; {a) that tho opposites or 
negations of tho true and tho false are not compatible, or that 
there is no middle term between tim true and tho false, or rather 
that it is impossible for a proposition to be neither true no% false.* See 
Aristotle, Metaph. r, 3, idbs** 19 and 7, 101 1** 23, 

In his earlier writings Leibniz calls the snfllcient rf*aaon the 
determining reason, meaning the reason which determines the exis- 
tence of tliis or that out of a number of possibilities, oacli of which 
involves no self-contradiction. As synonymous with tho ‘ principle 
of sufficient reason,' he also sometimes uses the phrase, ^principle 
of fitness [convenance] or of harmony,* He thus suggests that the 
sufficient reason of a thing is always to be found in its relations to 
other things, its place in the general system. Wo give tho sufficient 
reason of anything when we show its * compossibility * with other 

THE MONADOLOGY 

236 

ing and those of fact Truths of reasoning are necessary 
and their opposite is impossible : truths of fact are con- 
tingent and their opposite is possible When a truth is 
necessary, its reason can be found by analysis, resolving 
it into more simple ideas and truths, until we come to 
those which are primaiy (Theod, 170, 174, 189, 280- 
282, 367. Ahr6gc, Object. 3.) 

things in addition to its absti-act * possibility / The principle of 
sufficient reason is the principle of final cause. Leibniz's adoption 
of the word ‘sufficient’ is supposed to liavo been suggested by its 
use in Mathematics in a sense similar to that in which we say that 
a certain magnitude ‘satisfioH* a particular equation. 

*‘‘‘ Cf. tlio Scholastic ratio vjognosceyidi and ratio essrndi. 

Cf. TheodiceCf § 174 (E. 557 b ; C4. vi. 217). ‘It may be said of 
M. Bayle : THn bency nemo mclvuny though it could not be said of him, 
as it was said of Origtui: Uhi w«/e, nemo pejm. . . . Yet M. Bayle adds 
at the end ' [of a passage, quoted by Ixobniz in the previous section] 
‘words whicli somewhat spoil what he lias so justly remarked. 

Now what contradiction would there have been if Spinoza had 
died at Leyden ? Would nature have been less perfect, loss wise, 
less iK»wcrful V ” lie hero confounds what is impossible, because it 
involves a contradiction, with what cannot happen, because it is 
not well fitted to bo chosen. It is true that there would have been 
no contradiction in the supposition that Spinoza had died at 
Leyilon and not at the Hague : it was perfectly possible. Accord- 
ingly, as regards the power of God, the matter was indifferent. 
But it must not bo imagined that any event, however insignificant, 
can bo regarded as indifferent in relation to God’s wisdom and 
goodness.* 

Leibniz does not give us a very clear idea of the relations of 
the two principles to the two kinds of truths. This is probably 
due to his hesitancy regarding the relations of the two principles 
to one another. In the Appendix to the Thcndicee entitled Remarques 
mr le livra tic M. King, Leibniz says (E. 641 b; G. vi. 414): ‘Both 
principles must apply not only to neces.saiy, but also to contingent 
truths, and, indeed, that which has no sufficient reason must 
necessarily bo non-oxistent. For it may in a manner be said that 
these two principles are included in the definition of the true and 
the false. Nevertheless when, by analyzing a suggested truth, wo 
see that it depends upon truths whose opposite involves a contra- 
diction, we can say that it is absolutely necessary. But when, 
carrying our analysis as far as we like, we can never reach such 
elements of the given truth, it must bo said to bo contingent, and 
to have its origin in a prevailing reason, which inclines without 
necessitating.' But on the other hand, at a later date, Leibniz 

THE MONADOLOGY 

2237 

34* It is thus that in Mathematics speculative Theoretns 
and practical Canons are reduced by analysis to Definitions^ 
Axioms and Postulates, 

35. In short, there are simple ideas, of which no defini- 
tion can be given ; there are also axioms and postulates, 
in a word, primary principles, which cannot be proved, 
and indeed have no need of proof ; and these are identical 
propositions^^ y whose opposite involves an express contra- 
diction. {Theod. 36, 37, 44, 45, 49, 52, 121-122, 337, 

340-344.) 

36. But there must also bo a sufficient reason for com- 

tingent truiths or tmths of that is to say, for the 

sequence or connexion of the things which are dispersed 
thioughout the universe of created beings, in which the 
analyzing into particular reasons might go on into endless 
detail, because of the immense variety of things in nature 
and the infinite division of bodies There is an infinity 

■writes to Clarke ^:vrit de Leibniz, E. 748a; G. vii. 355V. ‘The 
prinojplo of contradiction is by itself sufficiont for tho demon- 
stration of the wliole of Arithmetic and Geometry, that is to say, 
of all mathematical principles. But in order to jiass from Mathe- 
matics to Piiysics, another principle also is needed, tho principle 
of sufficient reason.* Sec Introduction, Part ii. pp. 66 sqq. In the 
Monadology, Loibni/'s position is tho same us in tho earlier of 
the passages quoted. 

" The definition of an idea is, for Leibniz, tho statement of th«5 
elements ■which a complete analysis reveals in it. Cf. Mnditafiones 
de Cogiutionvy Veritatc rt /(Zm- (1684) 79 b; G. iv. 423). ‘When 

everything which is an element in a distinct idea, is in its turn 
distinctly known, or when aiialy.si8 has been completely made, 
knowledge is adequate. I know not whether human knowledge 
can supply a perfect instance of this : the knowledge •of numbers, 
however, approaches it.^ 

Leibniz uses the word monciation for enunciaiio, which is the 
usual Latin translation of Ari.stot]e*s diroqiavaii, or \ 6 yog dirotpaurinds. 

Truths of reasoning have their sufficient reason in tho self- 
evident, identical truths to which they may bo reduced by analysis. 
Truths of fact can find a sufficient reason only in God. 

^ Cf. Lotze, Microcosmus, bk. iii. ch. 5, § ? (Eng. Tr., i. 372). 
Leibniz says ‘infinite division* instead of ‘infinite dtvisibiliiy,* 
because bodies are infinitely divisible only as phenomena hene/undata 
and not as real beings. A real thing or substance must be indi- 

THE MONADOLOOT 

238 

of present and past forms and motions which go to make 
up the efficient cause of my present writing ; and there is 
an infinity of minute tendencies and dispositions of my 
soul, which go to make its final cause 

37. And AS all this detail again involves other prior or 
more detailed contingent things, each of which still needs 
a similar analysis to yield its reason, we are no further 
forward : and the suilicient or final reason must bo out- 
side of the sequence or series of particular contingent 
things, however infinite this series may 

38. Thus the final reason of things must be in a neces- 
sary substance, in which the variety of particular changes 
exists only eminently®*, as in its source; and this sub- 
stance we call God, (llicod, 7.) 

viaihlo ; it cannot consist of partes extra jtartes. And tlio ‘ infinite 
division* of bodies is merely another way of describing tJie in- 
finite 11 limber of particular substances or Monads. 

Sco Introduction, Tart iii. p. 107. Cf. § 6i, Iloro, in another 
form, urisefi llio difficulty as to the reintioii of Leibniz’s ‘principles ’ 
to one another. Apparently the efficient and the final cause 
(‘ombined make up the sufficient reason, neither by itself being 
enough. Yet elsewhere Leibniz represents efficient causes as 
ulti mutely depending on final causes. And efficient causes are by 
Leibniz usually identified with mechanical causes, whose principle 
is that of contradiction. Sec also Appendix F, p. 272. 

^ 'J'his is an argument on tlie same lines as that hy moans of 
which Aristotle infers a ‘prime mover.’ It depends on his prin- 
ciple, dvayKTj arT}yatj i. 0. we must come to a stop somewhere in the 
regress <if causes or conditions. Cf. Phys. H, 6, 237*^ 3 ; 0, i, 251“ 17 ; 

5 > 25^'' 13* Also Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, Transcendental 
Viulcctu-f bk. ii. ch. 2 and 3. 

Eminently in contrast with fontially. The terms are Scholastic 
and they were adopted by Descartes. Tlfomas Aquinas exprossc.^ 
the difierciice thus ; ‘ Whatever perfection is in the effect must 
also appear in the cau.se, after the same manner if the agent and 
the effect are of the .same kind {univocal) (thus man begets man), or 
in a more eminent, that is to say excellent, way, if the agent is of 
another kind {eguirocal)/ Descartes says : ‘ By the objective reality 
(fan thca, I mean the entity or being of the thing represented by 
the idea, in so far as this entity is in the idea ; and in the same way 
we may speak of an objective perfection or an objective design, &c. 
For all that we conceive as being in the objects of ideas is objectively 

THE MONADOLOGT 

239 

39. Now as this substance is a sufficient reason of all 
this variety of pai'ticulai's, which are also connected 
together throughout ; there is only one God^ and this God 
is sufficients'^. 

40. We may also hold that this supreme substance, 

which is unique, universal and necessary, nothing out- 

er by ropresentaiion in tlie ideas tkonisolves. The same are 

said to be formally in the objects of tiie ideas, when they exist in 
the objects just as we conceive them to exist ; and they are sard 
to be eminently in the objects, wlien they do not really exist as we 
conceive them, but when they are so groat that their excellence 
makes up for this defect.* llvponses aux Deuxihnes Objections, 
liaisons qui prourent Veiisiencc de Ditu^ iii. and iv., cf. 7 tote on this 
distinction in Weitch's Translation of Dtscarlts. * Fonnalhf as opposed 
to ^objectively' is almost oquivalcmt to our ^objectively* op])osed to 
^subjectively*) or ^really' (as opposed to ‘ui idea*). As op])Osed 
to eminently^ formally is secundum eandem formam d rationeinj while 
eminent y is gradu or modo eminentiori, 

** That is to siiy, all particular things are eonneetid together 
in one system, which implies one principle, one net^essary 
substance, one God. The argument is not merely from the 
oxistoiico of Older in the world to the existence of an intelligence 
which prodiK'Os (his order, but from tlie fact that the whole forms 
one system to tlio existence of one ultimate sufTicient reason of the 
wliolo. Otherwise there might be various * orders’ or ‘disorders’ 
in conflict with one another, each pre-hUi>posing its own first 
principle or * God.' This is Leibniz's form of the Cosmological 
proof of the existence of God. 

‘Universal* in the sense of being equally the cause or first 
principle of all things. The whole spirit of Leibniz's philosophy is 
opposed to the supposition of a universal substance or s]>irit, of 
whicli all particular substances are merely inodes'. Thus in the 
Considerations sur la Doctrine d*un Esprit l/nircrwZ ( 1 702) he endnavouj-s 
to refute the view that ‘ there is but one spirit, which is universal 
and which animates thf^ whole universe and all its* parts, each 
according to its structure and according to the organs it possesses, 
as the iume blast of wind produces a variety of sounds from 
different organ-pipes ’ or that * the universal spirit is like an ocean 
composed of an infinite number of drops, which are soiiarated from 
it when they animate some particular organic body and wbicli are 
reunited with their ocean after the destruction of the organism.* 
Tliis is ‘tjie view of Spidoza and of other similar authors, who will 
have it that there is only one substance, viz. God, who thinks, 
believes and wills one thing in me, and who thinks, believes and 
wills quite the opposite in some one else —an opinion the absurdity 

240 

THE MONADOLOGY 

side of it being independent of it, — this substance, which 
is a pure sequence of possible being, must be illimitable 
and must contain as much reality as is j^ossible 

41. Whence it follows that God is absolutely perfect; 
for peifection is nothing but amount of positive reality, 
in the strict sense, leaving out of account the limits or 
bounds in things which are limited. And where there 
are no bounds, that is to say in God, perfection is abso- 
lutely infinite. {Theod, 22, P/y/. (E. 469 a; G. vi. 27].) 

42. It follows also that created beings derive their 
perfections from the influence of God, but that their 
imperfections come from their own nature, which is 
incapable of being without limits. For it is in this that 
they differ from Ood®\ An instance of this original 
imperfection of created beings may bo seen in the natural 
inertia of bodies®'*. {TJieod, 20, 27-30, 153, 167, 377 sqq.) 

of which M. Bayle has well shown in several places in his 
di<5tionnry * (E. 178 a, r8i b, 182 a ; O. vi. 529, 535, 537). 

•* As God is the suilicient reason of all, nothiiii^ is independent 
of Him. But if His possibility were in any way limited, it must 
be by some possibility outside and independent of Him. Con- 
sequently His possibility cannot be limited. And unlimited possi- 
bility means unlimited reality and unlimited existence. For that 
which is posisible must bo real, unless there is something else with 
which it is not compossiblo, that is to say, unless there is some other 
possible thing, whose nature limits it. Cf. § 54 and Introduction, 
Part ii. p. 63. The argument in this and (ho following seetions 
will become clear if wo keep in view the idea which Leibniz seeks 
constantly to emphasize in every department of thought, namely 
that possibility or potentiality is never a mere empty capacity, 
a tabula rasa, a potentia aurfa, but always, in however small a degree, 
a tendency to realization, which is kept back only by other similar 
tendencies. This is what is meant by the ‘Claims’ and ^aspirations' 
of the Monads, mentioned in 51 and 54. 

•* Created beings must bo essentially limited ; otherwise they 
would not be created, but would he identical with God. In the 
Thiodicie Leibniz (following the Scholastic principle, hmum habet 
causatn efficimtem, malum autem defeientem), uses this as a hypothesis 
by wlucli to remove from God the responsibility for the existence 
of evil. The origin of evil is the essential imperfection of created 
substances ; and God is the cause only of the perfection or positive 
reality of ci’eated things. 

^ ^is sentence is not given by £. It seems to have been added 

THE MONADOLOGY 

241 

43. It is farther true that in Gk>d there is not only the 
source of existences but also that of essences^ in so far as 
they are real, that is to say, the source of what is real in 
the possible*^. For the understanding of God is the 
region of eternal truths or of the ideas on which they 
depend and without Him there would be nothing real 
in the possibilities of things, and not only would there 
be nothing in existence, but nothing would even be 
possible. {Theod. 20.) 

by Leibniz in revising the first copy of the Monadology. G. gives it 
in a foot-note. The natural inertia of a body is its passivity or 
that in it which limits its activity. So far as the passivity of the 
body is real (i.e. not a mere appearance to us), it consists of confused 
perception. But God is actus purus, entirely without passivity, and 
I His perceptions are all perfectly clear and distinct. 

^ That is to say, God is not only the source of all actual existence, 
but also the source of all potential existence, of all that ‘tends to 
exist. ^ What is real in the possible * is its tendency to exist. In 
a sense, * essences* or ^possible* things are independent of God. 
He does not create them as essences. They are the objects of His 
understanding, and * He is not the author of His own under- 
standing* {Theodicee, §380; E. 614 b; G. vi. 341^. The nature of 
essences or possibilities is determined solely by the principle of 
contradiction. And yet, in another sense, th(*y may bo said to be 
dependent upon God, inasmuch as they are all expressions of His 
nature in one or another aspect or with pnilicular limitations. 
His freedom, however, extends only to a choice of those which 
shall actually exist, and this choice is determined by His wisdom 
and His goodness, having regard ^o the nature of the * essences ' 
themselves. ‘Without Him there would bo nothing in existence^* 
for the existence of things is the result of His will, His choice. 
‘Without Him nothing would be possible* for nil thal^ is possible 
is the object of His understanding, and as His understanding is 
perfect (i.e. entirely free from confusion in its perceptions), its 
object mast be the ultimate nature of things, that is, the very 
essence of God Himself. Thus in § 44 Leibniz practically identifios 
‘essences’ or ‘possibilities* with ‘eternal truths.’ Of. Introduction, 
Part ii. p. 66. 

® Leibniz connects this part of his .system with Plato’s world 
of ideas. He mentions as one of the ‘ many most excellent doctrines 
of Plato ' that ‘ there is in the Divine mind an intelligible world, 
which I also am wont to call the region of ideas.’ Epistcia ad 
Hanschium (1707), E. 445 b. 

R 

THE MONADOLOGY 

242 

44. For if there is a reality in essences or possibilities, 
or rather in eternal truths, this reality must needs be 
founded in something existing and actual, and conse* 
quently in the existence of the necessary Being, in whom 
essence involves existence, or in whom to be possible is 
to be actual’®. {Th6od. 184-189, 335.) 

45. Thus God alone (or the necessary Being) has this 
prerogative that He must necessarily exist, if He is pos- 
sible. And as nothing can interfere with the possibility 
of that which involves no limits, no negation and conse- 
quently no contradiction, this [His possibility] is sufficient 
of itself to make known the existence of God a ^priori 
We have thus proved it, through the reality of eternal 
truths. But a little while ago we proved it also a poste- 
riori, since there exist contingent beings, which can have 
their final or sufficient reason only in the necessary Being, 
which -has the reason of its existence in itself. 

46. We must not, however, imagine, as some do, that 
eternal truths, being dependent on God, are arbitrary 
and depend on His will, as Descartes’*, and afterwards 

G. roads car, E. cependant. 

See Appendix G, p. 274. ’‘ §§ 36-39. 

Cf. Descartes, Lettre au Pire Mefrsmne (Cousin's od,, vol. vi. 
p, 109). * The metaphysical truths which you call eternal have been 
established by God and are entirely dependent upon Him, like 
all other created things. Indeed, to say that these truths are 
independent of God is to speak jof God as a Jupiter or a Saturn and 
to subject Him to Styx and the Fates. . . . God has established 
these laws in nature, just as a king establishes laws in his 
kingdom.* Cf. he. cit., p. 103. ‘We cannot without blasphemy say 
that the truth of anything precedes the knowledge which God has 
of it, for in God willing and knowing are one.’ Elsewhere he says' 
that God was perfectly free to make it untrue that the three angles 
of a triangle should be equal to two right-angles. As early as 1671, 
in a letter to Honoratus Fabri, Leibniz writes: ‘If truths and the 
natures of things are dependent on the choice of God, I do not see 
how knowledge [seten^ia] or even will can be attributed to Him. 
Fox^will certainly presupposes some understanding, since no one 
can will except in view of some good [sub ratione bont]. But under- 
standing presui^poses something that can be understood, that is 
to say, some natui'e. But if all natures are the result of will, 

THE MONADOLOOY 

243 

M. Poiret^‘, appear to have held. That is true only of 
contingent truths, of which the principle is fitness [ron- 
vcnancc] or choice of the hest^ whereas necessary truths 
depend solely on His undei*standing and 01*6 its inner 
object. {TJieod. 180-184, 185, 335, 351, 380.) 

47. Thus God alone is the primary unity or original 
simple substiince, of which all created or derivative 
Monads are products and have their birth, so to speak, 
through continual fulgurations of the Divinity from 

understanding also will be the result of will. How, thon, does 
will presuppose understanding?* (O. iv. 259). The point was 
much discussed by the Scholastics, with special reference to the 
question whether or not the moral law is independent of the will 
of God. Descartes’s view is in harmony with that of Duns Scotus, 
while Leibniz follows Thomas Aquinas. For Descartes, tlio Divine 
and the human understanding differ in kind : for Leibniz they 
differ rrn^rcly in <Uigreo. 

Pierre Poiret (1646-1719), a Calvinist minister, who held 
a charge in the Duchy of Zweibriickon, in the Rhine Palatinate. 
He was at first a Oaitosian and puhlislic^d a hook, Cogilatmirf, 
rationaJes de IkOj Anirna et Malo, which Bayle attacked. Afterwards 
he came under the infiuence of Antoinette Bourignon, the Dutch 
religious entliusinst, whose life he wrote and whoso views he 
expounded at very groat length. This influence led him to 
attack Cartesianism with much fervour, and lie is Jiow rornombored 
as a mystic rather than as a philosopher. 

By conrcnance is mount mutual conformity, of such a kind tliat 
things ‘ fit into ' one another in the most perfect way. Tims the 
principle of co/iuenoace or of the hest is wliat we sliould now call 
the idea of system. With Leibniz it is the same os the principle 
of sufficient reason, which is the principle of conditioned, ns distinct 
from U7ico7iditional reality or truth, Cf. note 85, 

That Is to say, ‘ flashings ' or ^sudden emanations.' ‘ God is tln^ 
primary centre from which all else emanates' (G. iv. 553'. Cf. the 
Stoic t6vos which Cleantkes calls a * stroke of fire ' ( yrvpuf), 

Frag. 76. The relation of God to the other Monads is the crux of 
Leibniz'f philosophy. He wishes to maintain both the individuality 
of the Monads and their essential unity with God. Thus ho seems 
to take fulguration as a middle term between creation and emana- 
tion, ^ Creation ' would mean too complete a severance between God 
and the other Monads ; * emanation * would mean too complete an 
identity between them. * Fulguration ' means that the Monad is 
not absolutely created out of nothing nor, on the other liand, 
merely a mode or an absolutely necessary product of the Divine 

B 2 

THE MONADOLOOY 

244 

moment to moment, limited by the receptivity of the 
created being, of whose essence it is to have limits, {Theod. 
382-391, 398, 395-) 

48. In God there is Tower ^ which is the source of all, 
also Knowledge^ whose content is the vaiiety of the ideas, 
and finally Will^ which makes changes or products 
according to the principle of the best^*. {Th^d, 7, 149, 

nature, but that it is a possibility tending to realize itself, yet 
requiring the assistance, choice or will of God to set it free from 
the counteracting influence of opposite possibilities. As a possibility 
it has essential limits (i. e. it is not entirely perfect, actus purwi)\ 
hut it is ready to spring or * flash ' into being, at tho will of God. 
If there were no choice of God, possibilities would simply counteract 
one another. But His choice means no more than the removal of 
hindrances to development, in the case of certain ^ elect* possi< 
))ilities. Creation adds no now being to the universe, and yot it 
is not emanation, in tlie sense of a mere modification of the one 
Ktemal Being. Thus the continual fulgurations * of Leibniz 
are to be distinguished from the * continual creation * of Descartes. 
According to I.ieibniz, conservation is not, as with Descartes, 
a miraculous renewal of the existence of things from moment 
to moment, an absolute re-creation constantly repeated ; but it is 
the continuance of the activity, choice or will of God, by which 
certain possible things wore set free to exist and through which 
alone they can persist. The successive states of any being are 
neither completely independent of one another, so that at each 
moment there is a new creation (Descartes), nor are they so 
absolutely dependent on one another that each proceeds from its 
predecessor by a logical or mathematical necessity (Spinoza), but 
they are connected together in a sequence which has its ground 
in tho nature of the being, so that each is automatically unfolded 
from its predecessor according to a regular law, provided that God 
chooses to allow this unfolding. The * continual fulgurations * are 
the continual exercise of God's will in aljowing the Monads of the 
actual world to unfold or develop their nature. Cf. On the ultimate 
Origination of Things^ p. 344. 

In the Th^icee (§ 150 ; E. 549 a ; G. vi. igq) Leibniz hints at 
a connexion between this characterization of God's nature and the 
doctrine of the Trinity. ‘ Some have even thought that there is in 
these three perfections of God a hidden reference to the Holy 
Triftfty : that power has reference to the Father, that is to say, to 
the Godhead [Divmite] ; wisdom to the eternal Word, which is 
<*aned K 6 yos by the most sublime of the evangelists ; and will or 
love to th^ Holy Spirit/ 

THE MONADOLOGY 

245 

150.) These characteristics correspond to what in the 
created Monads forms the ground or basis to the faculty 
of Perception and to the faculty of Appetition. But in God 
these attributes are absolutely infinite or perfect ; and in 
the created Monads or the Entelechies (or perfcctihdbiiie, 
as Hermolaus Barbaras translated the word there are 
only imitations of these attributes, according to the degree 
of perfection of the Monad. {TJieod, 87.) 

49. A created thing is said to act outwardly in so far 
as it has perfection, and to suffer [or be passive, pdtirl in 
relation to another, in so far as it is imperfect. Thus 
activity [action] is attributed to a Monad, in so far as it has 
distinct perceptions, and passimty [passion] in so far as its 
perceptions are confused.. {Tkeod, 32, 66, 386.) 

50. And one created thing is more perfect than another, 
in this, that there is found in the more perfect that whicli 
serves to explain a priori what takes place in the less 
perfect, and it is on this account tliat the former is said to 
act upon the latter 

• 

^ Loibniz does not elsewhere discriminate three elements in the 
created Monad, and we must not suppose that the ‘ground or 
basis' is anything in itself, apart from the two ‘faculties/ Leibniz 
wishes to emphasize the view that the Monad, whether created 
or uncreated, is essentially force or activity, manifesting itself in 
perception and appetition. 

Per/ectihabia (from perfecte and habeo) was formed to correspoiul 
to (from hr€\(us and ^x***')* Ct. note 3a. Hermolaun 

Barbarus or Ermolao Barbaro (1454-1493) was an Italian scholar 
who endeavoured, by means of translations of Aristotle and of the 
Aristotelian commentaries of Themistius, to make known the true 
Aristotelian doctrine as against the degenerate forms whicli 
Scholasticism had giVen* it. He came of a Venetiaii family and 
was Professor of Philosophy at Padua, where he lectured on 
Aristotl/s Ethics. 

Of course, no Monad really does act outside itself. This is 
merely Leibniz’s explanation of what wo moan when we speak of 
outward action, just as the Copernican system explains what we 
mean when we speak of ‘sunrise* and ‘sunset,* though the sun 
neither ‘ rises ’ nor ‘ sets. * 

^ Thus the explanation or reason of an event is its actual cause^ 
This connects itself with Leibniz’s view that the existence of 

THE MONADOLOOY 

246 

51. But in simple substances the influence of ond 
Monad upon another is only ideal, and it can have its 
effect only through the mediation of God, in so far as in 
the ideas of God any Monad rightly claims that God, in 
regulating the others from the beginning of things, should 
have regard to it. For since one created Monad cannot 
have any physical influence upon the inner being of 
another, it is only by this means that the one can be 
dependent upon the other*'. {Theod. 9, 54, 65, 66, 201. 
Ahreg^, Object, 3.^ 

52. Accordingly, among created things, activities and 
passivities are mutual. For God, comparing two simple 
substances, finds in each reasons which oblige Him to 
adapt the other to it and consequently what is active in 
certain respects is passive from another point of view ; 

a thing arUea solely from the liberating of its essential activities, 
and that the Monads claim existence in proportion to their per> 
foction, that is to s«y, to the distinctness of tlieir perceptions. 
Cause and effect are relative : every created Monad is both at 
once. God alone is pure cause or reason (oc/mr purus). Cause « 
relative activity - relative distinctness of perception. This may 
instructively be compared and contrasted with the views of 
Berkeley and Hume regarding cause and ‘necessary connexion.* 
See Introduction, Part iii, p. 105. Cf. also Spinoza, Ethics^ Part iii. 
Def. I and 2, and Prop, i, 2 and 3. 

Wo have here the principle of the Pre-established Harmony 
(further referred to in §§80 and 8i). It is a harmony or mutual 
compatibility in the very nature of things, anterior to their 
creation. Its perfection in the actual world is the ground of God’s 
(ihoiee of that \vorld ; and thus it is not in any sense a created 
liarmony. In this nwpect it differs from every form of Occa- 
sionalism. See Introduction, Part ii. pp, 39 sqq. 

No two simple substances are exactly ^he same, yet all represent 
the same universe. Therefore a perception which is comparatively 
distinct in one must be comparatively confused in another or 
others, and whatever changes take place in one must be accom- 
panied by corresponding changes in the others. Tlius each fits 
into the others. 

Ledbniz's expression here is point de emsideratim. But he 
genefhlly uses the phrase point de rue, which he introduced as 
a regular term in philosophical literature. It need hardly be 
remarked that the term has a peculiar importance in Leibniz’s 
philosophy. 

THE MONADOLOGY 

247 

active in so far as what we distinctly know in it serves to 
explain [rendre raison de\ what takes place in another, and 
passive in so far as the explanation [raison] of what takes 
place in it is to be found in that which is distinctly known 
in another. {Thdod. 66.) 

53. Now, as in the Ideas of God there is an infinite 
number of possible universes, and as only one of them 
can be actual, there must be a sufficient reason for the 
choice of God, which leads Him to decide upon one rather 
than another {TMod, 8, 10, 44, 173, 196 sqq., 225, 
414-416.) 

54. And this reason can be found only in the fitness 
[convenance], or in the degrees of perfection, that these 
worlds possess since each possible thing has the right 
to aspire to existence in proportion to the amount of per- 
fection it contains in germ*®. {TJieod, 74, 167, 350, 201, 
130- 352. 345 sqq-, 354-) 

Sco Introduction, Part ii. p. 65. 

See Monadoloffy^ note 74. God is not compelled by an absolute, 
metaphysical necessity, but ^ inclined ’ by a moral necessity to create 
the world which, as one harmonious system, is the Iwst. The 
distinction between moral necessity and absolute compulsion is of 
Scholastic origin. * Possible things are those which do not involve 
a contradiction. Actual things are nothing but the possible things 
wliich. all things considered, are the best. Therefoi*o things which 
are less perfect are not on that account impossible ; for we must 
distinguish between the things which God can do and those He 
wills to do. He can do everything, He wills to do the best.* 
Epistola ad BemouUium (1699), (G. Math. iii. 574). 

This aspiration to existence is the tendency to pass into 
existence and to proceed from confused to distinct perceptions, 
which makes the * possible’ things of Lf^’bniz real ^essen cos as 
distinct from purely indelenuinate capacities. Possibilities, accord- 
ing to Leibniz, are never quite empty : they are always realities in 
germ. Of. notes 64 and 67. * From the very fact that there exists 

something rather than nothing, we must recognize that in possible 
things, or in possibility or essence itself, thci’e is a certain need of 
existence exietmtiae] or (so to speak) a certain aspiration 

to exist, and, in a word, that essence by itself tends to existence. 
Whence it further follows that all possible things, i.e. things 
expressing essence or possible reality, tend with equal right to 
existence in proportion to the quantity of essence or reality they 

THE MONADOLOGY 

248 

55. Thus the actual existence of the best that wisdom 
makes known to God is due to this, that His goodness 
makes Him choose it, and His power makes Him produce 
it®\ (TMod. 8, 78, 80, 84, 1 19, 204, 206, 208. Ahr^gcy 
Object I and 8.) 

56. Now this connexion or adaptation of all create<l 
things to each and of each to all, means that each simple 
substance has relations which express all the others, and, 
consequently; that it is a perpetual living mirror of the 
universe**". {Theod. 130, 360.) 

57. And as the same town, looked at from various sides, 
appears quite different and becomes as it were numerous 
in aspects J^perspectivemcnt] ; even so, as a result of the 
infinite number of simple substances, it is as if there 
were so many different universes, which, nevertheless are 
nothing but aspects [per^ctives] of a single universe, 
according to the special point of view of each Monad"*. 
{TMod. 147.) 

contain or to their degree of perfection ; for perfection is nothing 
but quantity of esMcnce/ Ultimate Origination of Things, p. 340. 

” This section states briefly the principles of Leibniz's Optimism, 
which are fhlly expounded and defended in the TModicee, A world 
entirely free from evil would be indistinguishable from God 
Himself. The evil of the world arises entirely from the essential 
limitations of created things — their limitations as essences or 
possibilities. Consequently evil is not created by God ; but He 
creates the universe in which there is the least amount of evil that 
is possible in any system of things. 

Cf. Nicholas of Cusa, JHalogi de ludo globi ( 1454 - 59 ^ t 157 a : 
* The whole is reflected in all the parts ; all things keep their own 
relation [Jiahitudo] and proportion to the universe/ Also De docta 
ignoraniia (1440), i. ii : * Visible things are images of the invisible, 
and the Creator can be seen and known by the creatures as in 
a mirror darkly [gwosi in specula et aenigmate]/ 

•• The * point of view ' of each Monad is its body. But we must 
not give a spatial meaning to the expression, as if the Monad's 
point of view depended on its having this or that position in 
space. For the Monad is absolutely non-spatial, and the nature of 
its hbdy depends on the degree of confusedness (or distinctness) 
of its perceptions. Thus to say that the body is the point of view 
of the soul means simply that the particular way in which the soul 
represents or perceives tlie xmiverse is determined by the degree 

THE MONADOLOGY 

249 

58. And by this means there is obtained as great 
variety as possible, along with the greatest possible order ; 
that is to say, it is the way to get as much perfection as 
possible {Theod. 120, 124, 241 sqq., 214, 243, 275.) 

59. Besides, no hypothesis but this (which I venture to 
call proved) fittingly exalts the greatness of God ; and 
this Monsieur Bayle recognized when, in his Dictumai^ 
(article liorarius^^)^ he raised objections to it, in wliich 

of distinctness of its perceptions. Cf. Th^dide^ § 357 (£. 607 b ; 
G. vi. 337). * The projections of perspective, which, in the case of 

the circle, are the same as the Conic Sections, show that one and 
the same circle can be represented by an ellipse, by a parabola 
and by a hyperbola, and even by another circle, by a straight line 
and by a point. Nothing seems more different, nothing more 
unlike, than these figures ; and yet there is an exact relation 
between them, point for point. Thus it must be recognized that 
each soul represents to itself the universe, accoiding to its point of 
view and by a relation peculiar to itself ; but in this there always 
continues to be a perfect harmony.* 

^ For Loibniz the highest perfection is the most complete unity 
or order in the greatest variety. The Monads have the most 
complete unity, because the essence of each consists in representing 
the some universe, while they have the greatest variety, because 
the points of view from which tiiey represent it are infinitely 
various. ‘Fora world to be possible, it is enough that it should 
have intelligibility ; but in order to exist it must have a pre- 
eminence [prwal€nce\ in intelligibility or order ; for there is order in 
proportion as there is much to distinguish in a manifold [muUitude].' 
Lettre d Bourguet (171a ?) (E. 718 b ; G. iii. 558). 

See note 39. Bayle compares Leibniz's theory to the sup- 
position that a ship might be constructed of such a kind that 
entirely by itself, without captain or crew, it could sail from place 
to place for years on end, accommodating itself to varying winds, 
avoiding shoals, castii^ and weighing anchor, seeliing a haven 
when necessary and doing all that a normal ship can. He admits 
that the omnipotence of God could give such a power to a ship, but 
he maintains that the nature of the ship would make it impossibh^ 
for it to receive such a power. And * however infinite be the 
knowledge and power of God, He cannot, by means of a machine 
which lacks a certain part, do that which requires the help of that 
part.’ Thus Bayle argues against the possibility of complete 
spontaneity in the Monads, and consequently maintains that the 
Deus ex machina is involved in Leibniz's Pre-established Harmony 
quite as much as in Occasionalism. 

THE MONADOLOGY 

250 

indeed he was inclined to think that I was attributing too 
much to God — more than it is possible to attribute. But 
he was unable to give any reason which could show the 
impossibility of this universal harmony, according to 
which every substance exactly expresses all others through 
the relations it has with them. 

60. Further, in what I have just said there may be 
seen the reasons a priori why things could not be other- 
wise than they are. For God in regulating the whole has 
had regard to each part, and in particular to each Monad, 
wliose nature being to represent, nothing can confine it to 
the representing of only one part of things ; though it is 
true that this representation is merely confused as regards 
the variety of particular things ( 7 e deiail] in the whole 
universe, and can be distinct only as regards a small part 
of things, namely, those which are either nearest or 
greatest in relation to each of the Monads ; otherwise 
each Monad would be a deity. It is not as regards their 
object, but as regards the different ways in which they 
have knowledge of their object, that the Monads are 
limited In a confused way they all strive after 
[yont d ] the infinite, the whole ; but they are limited 
and differentiated through the degi'ees of theii’ distinct 
perceptions. 

61. And compounds are in this respect analogous with 

So G. E. reads * lias a regard ’ [a un egard]. 

^ If tlio Monads are nou-spatial, how can we speak of anything 
being nearest or greatest in relation to a Monad ? Every Monad 
has a body of some kind and this body is confusedly perceived as 
spatial in itself and in relation to other bodies, though really it is 
nothing but an aggregate of non-spatial Monads. When therefore 
it is said that certain things are near or great in relation to 
a Monad, what is meant is tliat they ai'e near or great in relation 
to the body of the Monad. 

^ That is to say, thought in the widest sense, conscious or un- 
conscious, is limited only by itself : there can be nothing that is 
not aif object of thought, more or lees adequate. Contrast with 
this the position of Kant. See Introduction, Part iv, pp. 178 aqq. 

Of. Nicholas of Casa, JHeUogus de Genssi (1447) 79 b : * All 
things seek the same^ which is something absolute.* 

THE MONADOLOQT 

251 

[symboliseni avee simple substanoes. For all is a plemm 
(and thus all matter is connected together) and in the 
plenum every motion has an effect upon distant bodies in 
proportion to their distance, so that each body not only is 
affected by those which are in contact with it and in some 
way feels the effect of everything that happens to them, 
but also is mediately affected by bodies adjoining those 
with which it itself is in immediate contact. Wherefore 
it follows that this inter-communication of things extends 
to any distance, however great. And consequently every 
body feels the effect of all that takes place in the uni- 
verse, so that he who sees all might read in each what is 
happening everywhere, and even what has happened or 
shall happen, observing in the present that which is 
far off as well in time as in place : crvfnrvota irdvray as 
Hippocrates said But a soul can read in itself only 

The expression * symbolize' suggests the ^calculus* idea which 
is so continually in Leibniz’s mind. As numbers are symbols of 
the things numbered, and we make accurate calculations without 
referring at every step to the particular things for which our 
symbols stand, so in general unanalyzod thoughts may bo symbols 
of their simple cdemonts. In the same way compound things are 
symbols of the simple substances which compose them. What is 
perceived confusedly in compounds is not a mere illusion but an 
imperfect representation or symbol of the real characteristics of 
simple substances. Thus, in this section, Leibniz would say that 
the spatial or material plenum (which is a confused 2)erception of 
ours) is a symbol of the infinite (or perfectly complete) series of 
Monads, which has no gaps, since the Monads differ from one 
another by infinitely small degrees. Similarly, the material action 
and re-action throughout the universe, such that a change at any 
one point affects every other, is a symbol of the Pne- established 
Harmony among the Monads. And, again, the fact that every- 
thing that happens, has happened or shall happen in the universe 
might be read in any one body is a symbol of the representative 
character of each Monad as ideally containing the whole within 
itself. It is because they are thus symbolic that the plienomona 
of the material world are phmomena bene /undata, 

Hvftwvoia (the noun) is probably a corruption from av/Avvoa (the 
adjective), Mn agreement,' lit. * breathing together,' cmspirantia, 
Leibniz makes the same quotation in the New EsBaya, Introduction, 
p. 373. He there translates the phrase by the words *tmU eat 

THE MONAIK)LOGY 

252 

that which is there represented distinctly ; it cannot all at 
once unroll everything that is enfolded in it^, for its 
complexity is infinite®®. 

comqnrant* The mistake may be due to an imperfect recollection 
of the phrase in Hippocrates : ^vppoia pua, (vfiirvota /ita, (vpi-iroBia 
ndvra, (JDe AlimentOf 4, Littr^, (Euvres d^HippocratCf vol. ix. p. 106). 
Cf. Plutarch, De fato, 574 £ : rb <f>vati bioiK€t<r0ai rdubt rby Kdofwv 
ffvfiwovvy leal avpimBfjf aiirbv atir^ 6vra, For a later statement of the 
same position, see Fichte, Werkcy ii. 178 sqq. * In every moment 
of her duration, nature is one connected whole : in every moment 
each part must bo what it is, because all the others are what they 
are. ... You cannot conceive even the position of a grain of sand 
other than it is in the present without being compelled to conceive 
the whole indehnite past as having been other than it has been, 
and the whole indefinite future other than it will bo. ... I am 
what I am because in this conjuncture of the great whole of nature 
only such, and no other, was possible ; and a spirit who could look 
through the secrets of nature would, from knowing one single man, 
be able distinctly to deislara what men had formerly existed and 
what men would exist at any future moment ; in one individual he 
would cognize cdl real individuals. My connexion, then, with the* 
whole of nature is that which determines what 1 have been, am, 
and shall be, and the same spirit would be able, from any possible 
moment of my existence, to discover infallibly what I had been 
and what I was to become.* [Trans, by Prof. Adamson, Philosophy 
qf Kanty p. aai.] 

E. mads ses r^les : G. reads ses replis. The latter phrase is used 
in the Principles 9/ Nature and of Grace, § 13. 

Cf. Leihnitiana, Dutens, vol. vi. Part i. p. 33a. * I admit that 

after death we do not at first remember what we were, for this is 
neither naturally right nor in accordance with the fitness of things 
[nt proprf ni hiemcant dans la nature], Nevertheless I believe that 
whatever has once happened to the soul is eternally imprinted 
upon it, although it does *not at all times como back to us in 
memory ; just as wo know a number of things which we do not 
always recollect, unless something sugge^s them and makes us 
think about them. For who can remember all things ? But since 
in nature nothing is futile and nothing is lost, but everything 
tends to perfection and maturity, each image our soul receives will 
ultimately become one [un fotdj with the tilings which are to come, 
so that we shall bo able to see all as in a mirror and thence to 
derive that which we shall find to be more fitted to satisfy us. 
Whence it follows that the more virtuous we have been and the 
more good deeds we have done, the more shall we have of joy and 
satisfaction.’ 

THE MOHADOLOOY 

253 

62. Thus, although each created Monad represents the 
whole universe, it represents more distinctly the body 
which specially pertains to it, and of which it is the 
entelechy and as this body expresses the whole uni- 
verse through the connexion of all matter in the plenum^ 
the soul also represents the whole univei*se in representing 
this body, which belongs to it in a special way. {Th 6 od. 
400.) 

63. The body belonging to a Monad (which is its 
entelechy or its soul) constitutes along with the ente- 
lechy what may be called a living being, and along with 
the soul what is called an animal Now this body of 
a living being or of an animal is always organic ; for, as 
every Monad is, in its own way, a mirror of the universe, 
and as the universe is ruled according to a perfect order, 
there must also bo order in that which represents it, i. e. 
in the perceptions of the soul, and consequently there 
must bo order in the body, through which the univeme 
is represented in the soul*®*. (Theod, 403,) 

See note 3a. The entelechy or soul is at once tlio final cause 
of the body and the power which controls it or the force whicli 
acts through it. As dominant Monad, the soul has more clearly 
the perceptions which are relatively confused in the Monads 
implied by the body. The soul is thus relatively the perfection of 
the body. And similarly, in the soul is to be rend tho reason 
(i. e. the distinct perception) of what takes place in the body, and 
it is therefore the activity or force of the body. Cf. Introduction, 
Part iil. p. no. 

See $ 19. Leibniz uses the term liviiig being not as including 
all beings which have life, but specifically with reference only to 
those whose dominant Monad is unconscious, while in the animal 
(as distinct from the Hving being) the dominant Monad has con- 
sciousness and memory. 

Thus order and organism are conceived by Leibniz under tho 
idea of an infinite series of elements, each differing from its 
neighbour to an infinitely small extent. Tho Monad-series of the 
universe, extending from God to the lowest of Monads, is refiected 
in the structure of the individual organism, extending from the 
dominant Monad downwards, and that again is reflected in the 
aeries of perceptions within each Monad itself, extending from 
tho most distinct perceptions to which it has attained down to the 
most obscure^ 

THE MONADOLOGY 

254 

64. Thus the organic body of each living being is a kind 
of divine machine or natural automaton, which infinitely 
surpasses all artificial automata. For a machine made by 
the skill of man is not a machine in each of its parts. 
For instance, the tooth of a brass wheel has parts or 
fragments which for us are not artificial products, and 
which do not have the special characteristics of the 
machine, for they give no indication of the use for which 
the wheel was intended. But the machines of nature, 
namely, living bodies, are still machines in their smallest 
parts ad infinitum It is this that constitutes the dif- 

i. e. not a machine made hy man» From another point of view, 
as a product of naUirCy it in (as this neetion sayw) a inaohino in its 
smallest parts, for in reality all bodies are living bodies. Thus the 
words ‘for us* in the next sentence of this section were added by 
Leibniz in a revision of his original manuscript, evidently in order 
to suggest that while the fragments of the wheel are not products 
of * human art,* they are yet products of * divine art.* 

Cf. Lettre a M. V/iveqm dc Meaivx (Bossuot) (169a), (Fouclier de 
Careil, i. 377; Dutens, i. 531). ‘ llie machines of nature are 

machinos throughout, however small a part of them we take ; or 
rather the least part is itself an inlinite world, which even 
expresses in its own way all that there is in the rest of the 
universe. That passes our imagination, yet we know that it must 
he so ; and all that infinitely infinite variety' is animated in all its 
parts by a constructive \archilectoniq[iui\ wisdom that is more than 
infinite. It may be said that there is Harmony, Geometry, Meta- 
physics, and, so to speak, Ethics [morale^ everywhere, and (what 
is surprising) in one sense each siibstanco acts spontaneously as 
independent of all other created things, while in another sense, all 
others compel it to adapt itself to them ; so that it may be said 
that all nature is full of miracles, but miracles of reason, miracles 
which becomt' miracles in virtue of their being rational, in a way 
which amazes us. For the reasons of tiling follow one another in 
an infinite succession \s'y pousse a un progr^s infini\ so that our 
mind while it sees that things must be so, cannot follow so as to 
comprehend. Formerly pt^ople admired nature without in any 
way understanding it, and that was supposed to be the right 
thing to do. Latterly they have begun to think nature so easy to 
underatand that they have developed a contempt for it, and some 
of the new philosophers even encourage themselves in idleness by 
imagining that they know enough about nature already.’ See also 
Introduction, Part iii. p. loB. 

THE MONADOLOGY 255 

ference between nature and art, that is to say, between the 
divine art and ours {Theod. 134, 146, 194, 403*) 

65. And the Author of nature has been able to employ 
this divine and infinitely wonderful power of art, because 
each portion of matter is not only infinitely divisible, as 
the ancients observed but is idso actually subdivided 
without end each part into further parts, of which 

Cf. Nicholas of Cusa, Idiolae Lilm quaiuor^ iii. 2, 82 a. ‘ Hutnmutr 
artes imagines Divhiae ariis.* 

Seo Aristotle, Phys.^ Z, 9, 239** 5. Ou aCyKeirai 6 xp^vos in 
rStv vvp dSioupirwy, wairep ov8‘ d\Xo piiytBof oMv, Cf. Phys.^ Z, i, 231*' 
18; Z, 4 (tA Si ptra^dWov iiirav dv&yKT) Siaipfrdy ; Be Caelo, T, 1, 

298** 33. Sc'o also Baylri*8 Dictinnanj^ article ‘ Zeno,* notes F and G. 

Cf. Reponse a la letfre dc M. Foncher (1693), ',E. 118 b.; G. i. 
416). ^ There is no part of matter which is not, I do not say 

divisible, but actually divided ; and consequently the smallest 
particle must bo considered ns a world filled with an infinity of 
different creatures.* The paradox in such statements as these 
arises from the way in which Leibniz speaks of mutter as composed 
of non-spatinl elements. Leibniz regards matter as a more nggregnf (‘ 
and as then^fore not ifstif a real substanco. But ho never explains 
what he moans by an aggregate of Monads, o.nch <»f which is non* 
quantitative. Again it may be asked whether a real whole win 
consist of an infinite number of real parts? Does not infiniU^ 
divisibility mean that it is impossible to bring to an end the 
enumeration of parts, because the relation of whole to parts is so 
indefinite that we have no moans of determining what exactly 
is a part? Thus the term ‘infinite* here moans that the process 
of division is <me which can never be completed. Consequently 
it seems self-contradictory to speak of things as ‘actually sub- 
divided without end* or infinitely. (Cf. Kant*s Crititiue of Pure 
Reasony First and Second Antinomies. Si^e also BoHanquot*H I/)gtCy 
vol. i. pp. 172 sqq.) It was Euler, the mathematician, who first 
brought this criticism against Leibniz, saying that IJlie existence 
of units in the shape of Monads implies the finite divisibility of 
matter, while Leibniz at the same time maintains its infinih^ 
divisibility, {Lettres a une Princesse (VAUemagne (1.761), Brewster’s 
Trans, vr»l. ii. pp. 30 sqq.) Euler's argument is directed mainly 
against the Wolffian adaptation of Leibniz's position. Leibniz 
might reply that matter as infinitely divisible, is a mere pheno- 
menon, resulting from an actual infinity of real Monads. But 
even in this explanation the idea of ‘ infinite * seems to be used in 
two opposite senses (i) as equivalent to ‘incapable of completion,* 
(9) as equivalent to ‘ absolutely complete.' 

THE MONADOLOaV 

256 

each has some motion of its own ; otherwise it would be 
impossible for each portion of matter to express the whole 
universe {Theod. PrMm., Disc, de la Cmform. 70, and 
1 95 -) 

66. Whence it appears that in the smallest particle of 
matter there is a world of creatures, living beings, animals, 
entelechies, souls. 

67. Each portion of matter may be conceived as like 
a garden full of plants and like a pond full of fishes. But 
each branch of every plant, each member of every animal, 
each drop of its liquid parts is also some such garden or 
pond. 

68. And though the earth and the air which are between 
the plants of the garden, or the water which is between 
the fish of the pond, be neither plant nor fish ; yet they 
also contain plants and fishes, but mostly so minute as to 
be imperceptible to us 

Tho * portions of matter,’ of wliich Leibniz her© speaks, are 
ultimately Monads, each of which must ideally contain the whole 
univoree. Tho Monads are infinite in number, and each, as it 
ideally contains all, must therefor© contain an infinity of * parts.’ 
Or tho argument which Leibniz implies may bo otherwise put 
thus: If tho ^portions of matter’ are not actually subdivided 
without ond, there must bo ultimate undivided atoms. But such 
atoms necessarily imply a void ; they are inconsistent with a plenum. 
And unless there is a plenum it is impossible for each portion of 
matter to ‘express’ or bo affected by all the rest. 

*“• Leibniz had a deep interest in the remarkable development 
of microscopic investigation, which took place during his lifetime. 
He frequently refers to the work of Leuwenhoek, the discoverer of 
spermatozoa, Swammerdam, tho entomologist, and Malpighi, who, 
among many other works, made a microscopic study of the physio- 
logy of animals and plants. In a Meditation sur la notion commune de 
la Justice (Mollat, p. 66), Leibniz says : * It is v©i*y necessary to 
advance our microscopical knowledge. Scarce ton men in the world 
are earnestly devoted to it; and though there were a hundred 
thousand, they would not be too many for the discovery of tho 
important wonders of this new world which is the inside of the 
worlS we know And which is capable of making our knowledge 
a hundred thousand times as extensive as it is. For this reason 
1 have often vnshed that great princes might be led to make 
arrangements for this and to support people who would devote 

THE MONADOLOGY 

257 

69. Thus there is nothing fallow, nothing sterile, nothing 
dead in the universe, no chaos, no confusion save in 
appearance somewhat as it might appear to bo in a pond 
at a distance, in which one would see a confused move- 
ment and, as it were, a swarming of fish in the pond, 
^thout separately distinguishing the fish themselves. 
{Th^od. Prcf, [E. 475 b; 477 b ; Gr. vi. 40, 44].) 

70. Hence it appears that each living body has a domi- 
nant entelcchy, which in an animal is the soul ; but the 
members of this living body are full of other living beings, 
plants, animals, each of which has also its dominant 
entelechy or soul 

theiiiFelves to it/ The view of Loibniz also suggests the coll- 
thedry of modern physiology ; but the analogy must not bo pushed 
too far. However numerous, for instance, may be the cells in any 
portion of an organism, they are not, like Leibniz's 'portions of 
matter,* infinitely subdivided in their turn. In fact, the cell- 
theory has in many ways a closer relation to tho mechanical view 
of things than to tho position of Leibniz. See Sandoman, Problems 
0/ Biology^ pp. 53 sqq. 

Of Epistola ad BemouUium (1699) {G, Math. iii. 565) ; *Ood, out 
of the infinite number of possible things, chooses by Ilis wisdom 
that which is most fitting. But it is evident that if there were 
a vacuum (and similarly if there were atoms) there would remain 
sterile and fallow place.s, in which, nevertheless, without prejudice 
to any other things, something might have been produced. But 
it is not consistent with wisdom that such places should remain. 
And I think that there is nothing sterile and fallow in nature, 
although many things appear to us to be so.* 

See Introduction, Part iii. p. iii. May not the whole world, 
then, be conceived as one body, whose dominant soul is God, the 
Monad of Monads? 

‘All are but parts of one stupendous whole, 

Whose body nature is and God the soul/ 

Pope, Essay on Mav^ Epistle i. 967. 

Yet Leibniz maintains that Gk)d has no body. Cf. Monadohgy, § 7a. 
The difficulty is a fundamental one. Loibniz repeatedly disclaims 
the doctrine of a ‘world-soul,* if it is understood as in any way 
destroying the independence of individual souls. ‘Although a soul 
may have a body composed of parts, each of which has a soul of its 
own, the soul or form of the whole is not composed of the souls 
or forms of the parts.' Lettre d Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 100). 

S 

THE MONADOLOGY 

258 

71. But it must not be imagined, as has been done by 
some who have misunderstood my thought, that each soul 
has a quantity or portion of matter belonging exclusively 
to itself or attached to it for ever***, and that it conse- 
quently owns other inferior living beings, which are 
devoted for ever to its service. For all bodies are in a 
perpetual flux like rivers and parts are entering into 
them and passing out of them continually. 

72. Thus the soul changes its body only by degrees, 
little by little, so that it is never all at once deprived of 
all its organs ; and there is often metamorphosis in 
animals, but never metempsychosis or transmigration of 
souls ; nor are there souls entirely separate [from 

The miHunderstandlng probably arose from a confnsien of 
materia prima, the passive element in the individual created Monad, 
which is inseparable from the active or soul elemi'nt, with materia 
secundat the changing body of a compound substance, which is 
phenomenal and not perfectly real, although it is founded upon 
reality. Cf. Introduction, Part. iii. pp. 95 sqq. 

The phrase is as old as Heraclitus, who, according to Plato, 

* likened things to the flowing of a river,* Cratylus, 40a A. Cf. 
Aristotle, Metaph.^ A, 6, 987“ 3a. See also Burnet, Early Greek Philo- 
sophy, p. 149. 

While soul and body are quite distinct from one another, 
their union is of the closest possible kind. Changes in the one 
correspond to changes in the other. But as the perceptions of the 
soul are clearer and more distinct than those of the body, the 
changes in the soul cause or explain the changes in the body. 
Transmigration of souls is inconsistent witli this, because it means 
that the body remains the same, though the soul is changed. 
Accordingly, in Leibniz’s view, the identity of any individual 
substance moans Hhe preservation of the same soul.’ Nouveaux 
Esaaia, hk. ii. ch. 27, § 6. (E. 278 b ; G. v^ 216.) He argues against 
Locke that identity is not fixed by time and place, and that the 
identity of plant, animal, and man does not consist in the possession 
of the sjune organic body. Thus, according to Leibniz, every soul 
or entelechy, whether conscious or not, has what he calls *real and 
physical identity ' (i. e. not a derived identity, but an identity 
bq^nging to its own nature, and is, in virtue of this, im- 

perishable (ince88able)f while the self-conscious soul has in addition 
a * personal’ or 'moral* identity, in virtue of which it is immortal. 
Neitlier continued consciousness nor memory is essential to the 
maintenance of this ' moral * identity. ' If 1 were to forget all the 

THE MONADOLOOT 

259 

bodies] nor unembodied spirits [g^nies sans cofy«]. God 
alone is completely without body {Theod. 90, 124.) 

73. It also follows from this that there never is absolute 
birth [gdft&aiion] nor complete death, in the strict sense, 
consisting in the separation of the soul from the body. 
What wo call births [gdndrations] are developments and 
growths, while what we call deaths are envelopments and 
diminutions. 

74. Philosophers have been much perplexed about the 
origin of forms entelechies, or souls ; but nowadays 

past, if I Lad even to be taught anew my own name and how to 
read and write, I could always learn from other people my life in 
former times, just as I should still retain my rights, so that it would 
not be necessary to divide me into two people and to make mo my 
own heir. No more is required to maintain the tnoral idmtilyy whicli 
constitutes the same person* (/oc. cit, § 9; E. aSo b; G. v. 319). 
*An immaterial being or a mind |cspn7j cannot he deprived of all 
perception of its past existence. It retains impressions of all that 
has formerly happened to it ; hut these feelings are usually too 
small to be capable of being distinguished and of being consciously 
perceived, although they may perhaps bo doveloi>ed some day. 
This continuing and connexion of perceptions makes the being really 
the same individual, but apperceptions — that is to say, when one is 
conscious [.s'opcrfoit] of past feelings — prove also a moral identity 
and make the real identity apparent' Qor, cit.^ § 14; E. 281 b; 
G. V. 323). Cf. New Essaysj Introduction, p. 373. 

* A soul without body (in the sense of materia secunda) would be 
a soul without any relation to other Monads. For a compound 
substance (i. e. soul and body"l consists ultimately in the relation 
of a dominant Monad to subordinahs Monads. * Creatures free or 
freed from matter would at the same time be separated from the 
universal connexion of things, and, as it were, deserters from the 
general order.* Considwations sur lee Principes de Vie (1705) (E. 432 b ; 
G. vi. 546). Again, a soul ^yithout body (in the sense of materiaprima) 
would be a Monad without passivity or confused perception, i. e. it 
would be aetuspurus or God. Kirchmann {Erl&uferungen zu Leibniz* 
Schriften) dismisses Leibniz's statement as ^ a more assertion, which 
indeed does not necessarily follow from Leibniz's own principles.*^ 
The difficulty is the same as that mentioned in note iii. 

The form is the life or vital principle in any organic being. 
Cf. Lettre h Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 116) : ^ I proceed to the question 
of forms or souls, which I hold to be indivisible and indestructible. 
Parmenides (of whom Plato speaks with veneration), as well as 
HelisgiM, maintained that there is no generation nor corruption 

26o 

THE MONADOLOOY 

it has become known, through careful studies pf plants, 
insects, and animals, that the organic bodies of nature are 
never products of chaos or putrefaction, but always come 
from seeds, in which there was undoubtedly some jprc- 
formation'^'^ \ and it is held that not only the organic 

except in appearance : Aristotle mentions this (De Caelo^ bk. iii. 
ch. fl). And the author of the De Diaeta, bk. i. (which is attributed 
to Hippocrates), expressly says that an animal cannot be engendered 
absolutely [tout de nouveau] nor completely [tout a fait] destroyed. 
Albeitus Magnus and John Bacon seem to have thought that sub- 
stantial forms wore already hidden in matter from the beginning 
of time. Fernel makes them descend from heaven, to say nothing 
of those who regard them as taken off from the soul of the world. 
They have all seen a part of the truth ; but they have not developed 
it. Several liave believed in transmigration, others in the traduc- 
tion of souls’ [i.o. in tl»e soul of the offspring being as it were 
begotten of the soul of the parent] * instead of transmigration and 
the transformation of an animal nlrt^ady formed. Others, not 
being able to explain otherwise the origin of forms, have admitted 
that they begin in a real creation, but while I allow that this 
creation takes place in time only in respect of the rational soul, 
and hold that all forms which do not think were created along 
with the world, they believe that this creation takes place every 
day when the smalioK>t worm is begotten.' Cf. New System^ notes 
43 and 44. 

‘ The living [animee] and organic seed is as old as the world.' 
Lettic a la Heine Sophie Charlotte vi. 517). Immediately before the 
time of Leibniz, the origin of life in tho individual plant, animal, 
or man was explained either by a theory of traduction or by 
a theory of eduction. According to tho theory of traduction, the 
‘form’ of the offspring comes from the parental ‘form’ or ‘forms* 
in the same way as the body of the offspring comes from the parental 
body or bodies. According to the theoiy of eduction, on the other 
hand, life comes from inorganic matter, from ‘chaos or putrefaction.* 
Eduction thus corresponds to what we now call ‘ spontaneous gene- 
ration.' According to the theory of preformation, adopted by 
Leibniz, the germ contains in miniature the whole plant or animal, 
point for point, and accordingly the ‘form * of tho plant or animal 
exists in the spermatozoon in a contracted or ‘enveloped* state, and 
it has existed since the beginning of time. For, as we have seen 
(5 65), there is no limit to the smallneibs of things, and even a sper- 
matozoon may contain an indefinite number of other living beings. 
This theory of preformation, which was based on the microsoopio 
investigations of Malpighi and Leuwenhoek, has now been entirely 
abandoned, as the result of moi-e thorough observations Cf, Sande- 

THE MONADOLOGY 

261 

body was already there before conception, but also a soul 
in this body, and, in short, the animal itself ; and t];uit by 
means of conception this animal has merely been prepared 
for the great transformation involved in its becoming an 
animal of another kind. Something like this is indeed 
seen apart from birth [^gen€ration\y as when worms become 
flies and caterpillars become butterflies. (Thdod, 86, 89. 
Vrdf. [E. 475l>; G- vi. 40sqq.j; 90, 187, 188, 403, 86, 397.) 

75. The animals^ of which some are raised by means of 
conception to the rank of larger animals, may be called 
^ermaiic, but those among them which are not so raised 
but remain in their own kind (that is, the majority) are 
born, multiply, and are destroyed like the large animals, 
and it is only a few chosen ones tliat jmss to a greater 
theatre. 

76. But this is only ludf of the truth and accordingly 

man, Problems of Biology^ p. 92. While rejecting traduction in itn 
ordinary form, Ltdbniz recognizes its affinity to his own view, which 
he describes ns ‘ a kind of traduction, more satisfactory | traitahle'] 
than that which is commonly taught.’ Theodicee^ § 397 (£. 6z8 b ; 
G. vi. 352). 

According to Leibniz, they are not entirely, but only ap- 
parently destroyffd. The statement is made in the form in which 
scientific observers of Leibniz’s time would liave put it, and it is 
subject to tho qualification made in § 76. Leibniz's point is that, 
just as thero is a visible world of larger organisitiB, so iliere is 
a microscopic world of spermatozoa, undergoing in miniature ail 
the changes which take place in the larger visible world. The 
larger organisms of the visible world are certain elect members of 
tho spermatic world which, ‘ by means of conception,' have been 
enabled to grow from microscopic minuteness to visibility. 

The scientific observers have only stated half of the truth ; 
but Leibniz thinks that t£ey would havo no objection to tlio other 
half. think that if this opinion had occurred to them, they 
would not have found it absurd, and there is nothing more natural 
than to believe that what does not begin does nut perish.’ Let be d 
Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 123). Cf. Plato, PhaedruSy 245 D : ’Eirf< 5 ^ di 
Ayivrjrdv iari, Koi dbtdtpBopov abrd dvdyntj dvai. Leibniz elsewhere 
speaks of the view of Plato ‘ that the object of wisdom is rd ovrof^ 
Syra, that is, simple substances, which are called by me' [Leibniz] 

* Monads, and which once existing always continue to exist, itpSrra 
ZftcTucd T^s {wjs, that is, God and souls, and of these the chief are 

262 

THE MONADOLOGY 

I hold that if an animal never comes into being by natural 
mean^ [naturellement], no more does it come to an end by 
natural means ; and that not only will there be no birth 
[generation], but also no complete destruction or death in 
the strict sense And these reasonings, made a posteriori 
and drawn from experience are in perfect agreement with 
my principles deduced a priori, as above (Theod. 90.) 

77. Thus it may be said that not only the soul (miiTor 
of an indestructible universe) is indestructible, but also 
the animal itself though its mechanism [machine] may 
often perish in part and take off or put on an organic 
slough [des depouilles organigues^^], 

78, These principles have given me a way of explaining 
naturally the union or rather the mutual agreement 
[conformitv] of the soul and the organic body. The soul 
follows its own laws, and the body likewise follows its 
own laws ; and they agree with each other in virtue of 

miuds, images of the Deity, produced by God/ Epistola ad lianschium 
(1707) (E. 445 b). Tiiis last passage involves a misunderstanding 
of Plato’s which aro universals, not Monads. Domocritus 

calls his atoms rd ov, 

VM I xiiero is always going on in the animal what goes on in it at 
the present moment ; that is, its body is in a continual change, like 
a river ; and what we call generation or death is only a greater and 
more rapid change than usual, such as would be the leap or cataract 
of a river. But these leaps are not absolute and such as 1 have 
refused to admit, as would be that of a body which should go from 
one place to another without going through intervening places 
Isans 2)asser jtar Ic milieu]/ Lettre d Jiemond (1715) (E. 734 a; G. iii. 635). 

Monadology, §§ 3, 4, and 5. This endeavour to show the agree- 
ment of a priori with a posteriori conclusions is specially characteristic 
of Leibniz. It illustrates his belief in the haimony of the physical 
with the metaphysical, the mechanical witJi the dynamical or 
final. 

^ Because the soul must always have a body of some kind, Which 
itself ultimately consists of imperishable Monads. Animals, how- 
ever, are not immortal. Immortality belongs only to rational souls 
or self-conscious Monads. 

* As a snake casts its old skin.* Lettre d la Prineesse Sophie (1696) 
(G. vii. 544). 

That is, in contrast to the Occasionalist theory, which accord- 
ing to Leibniz implies an endless series of miracles. 

THE MONAHOLOOY 

263 

the pre-established harmony between all substances, since 
they are all representations of one and the same uni- 
verse*'*. (Prif. [E. 475 a; 6* vi. 39] ; Theod. 340, 352, 
353, 358.) ' 

79. Souls act according to the laws of final causes 
through appetitions, ends, and means. Bodies act 
according to the laws of efficient causes or motions. And 
the two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final 
causes, are in harmony with one another 

80. Descartes recognized that souls cannot impart any 
force to bodies, because there is always the same quantity 

That is to say, the problem of the connexion between soul and 
body is a special case of the wider problem as to the relation of 
any one simple substance or Monad to another. 

They are in harmony, because ultimately the one is reducible 
to the other. When it is said that ^ souls act/ what is meant is 
that they puss from one perception to another, i. o. that they have 
appetition. When it is said that ‘ bodies act/ what is meant is 
that they change their state or their relation to other bodies, i. e. 
that they have motion. What we call the < state * of a body and its 
^relations to other bodies* ought in strictness to lx> called the 
(unconscious) perceptions of the Monads which constitute the, body. 
And similarly, the ‘ motion ’ of the body is really tho (unconscious) 
appetition of its constituent Monads. Thus tho difference between 
efiiciont and final causes, like that between tho unconscious and 
tlie conscious, is merely a difference of degree. Cf. Principles of 
Nature and of Orace^ § From a psychological point of view, 

Leibniz describes the parallelism of soul and body thus : * I have 
carefully examined this matter and I have shown that there are 
really in the soul some materials of thought or objects of tho 
understanding, which tho external senses do not supply, namely, 
the soul itself and its functions {nihil est in inteUectu quod nonfuerit in 
sensUf nisi ipse intellectus) . . . but 1 find nevertheless, that there is 
never an abstract thought which is not accompanied by some 
material images or marks [traces^ and I have made out a perfect 
parallelism between what passes in tho soul and what takes pla<'e 
in matter, having shown that the soul, with its functions, is some- 
thing distinct from matter but yet is always accompanied by 
material organs, and also that the functions of the soul are always 
accompanied by functions of its organs, which must correspond to 
them, and that this is and always will be reciprocal.* Considerations 
8 UT la Dodrins d*un Esprit Vniversel imique (170a) (E. 180 a ; G. vi. 

53a). 

THE MONADOLOGY 

264 

of force in matter. Nevertheless be was of opinion that 
the soul could change the direction of bodies. But that 
is because in his time it w£is not known that there is 
a law of nature which affirms also the conservation of the 
same total direction in matter Had Descartes noticed 
this he would have come upon my system of pre-estab- 
lished harmony {Pref, [E. 477 a ; G. vi. 44] ; Theod. 
22, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66, 345, 346 sqq., 334, 355-) 

8 1. According to this system bodies act as if (to 
suppose the impossible) there were no souls, and souls 
act as if there were no bodies, and both act as if each 
influenced the other 

Seo Introduction, Piirt iii. p. 89. Dosc;irtos * bolioved he had 
found u law of nature, to the effect that the same quantity of 
motion is conserved in bodies. Ho did not think it possible for 
tlie influence of the soul to break this law of bodies ; but he thought 
that the soul might novertholess have tlie power of changing the 
direction of the motions which take place in the body ; somewhat 
as a horseman, although ho does not give any force to the horse he 
rides, nevertheless guides it by directing its force in the way that 
he thinks right. As this is done by moans of bridle, bit, spurs, 
and other material aids, wo see how it can take place ; but there 
are no instruments which tho soul could employ for this purpose 
— nothing in soul or in body, that is to say, in thought or in mass, 
which could serve to explain this change of one by tho other.' 
Thmlicee^ § 60 (E. 519 b ; (h vi. 135% 

Tliat is to say, Descartes would have seen that neither soul 
nor body has any influence whatever upon the other, and that they 
must therefore bo regarded ns acting merely in harmony. 

* All that ambition or any other passion brings to pass in the 
soul of Caesar is also represented in his body, and all the motions 
of those passions come from tho impressions of objects combined 
with interna] motions. And the body is so constituted that the 
soul never makes any resolution without fhe motions of tho body 
agreeing with it. This applies even to the most abstract reasonings, 
because of the characters >vhich represent them to the imagination. 
In a word, everytliiiig takes place in bodies, as regards the par- 
ticular series of their phenomena, as if the evil doctrine of 

those who, like Epicurus and Hobbes, believe that the soul is 
ma^Erial, were true ; or as if man himself were only a body or an 
automaton. . . . Those who show the Cartesians that their way of 
proving that the lower animals are only automata amounts to 
justifying him who should say that all men, except himself, are 

THE HONADOIiOOT 

265 

82. As regards minds or rational souls^ though 

I find that what I have just been saying is true of all 
living beings and animals (namely that animals and souls 
come into being when the world begins and no more 
come to an end than the world does), yet there is this 
peculiarity in rational animals, that their spermatic 
animalcules, so long as they are only spermatic, have 
merely ordinary or sensuous souls; but when 

those which are chosen so to speak, attain to liuman 

nature through an actual conception, their sensuous souls 
are raised to the rank of reason and to the i>rerogative of 
minds {Theod. 91, 397.) 

also more automata, have said exactly what I need for tliiit half of 
my hypothesis which concerns body. But, apart from tho prin- 
ciples which niako it certain that there are Monads, of which com- 
pound substances are only tho results, the Epicurean doctrine is 
i-efuted by inner experience, by our consciousness of tho Ego which 
consciously perceives tho things which take place in the body ; and 
as perception cannot bo explained by figures and motions, the other 
half of my hypothesis is established, and wo are obliged to recognise 
that thoro is in us an indivisible substancey which must be itself the 
source of its phenomena. Consequently, according to this second 
half of my hypotho-sis, everything takes place in the soul as if there 
were no body ; just ns, according to tho first half, everything takes 
place in the body as if there were no soul. . . . Whatever of good 
there is in the hypotheses of Epicurus and of Plato, of tho greatest 
Materialists and the greatest Idealists, is combined hero.* Eejxmse 
mix Reflexions de Bayle (1702) (E. 185 ; (I. iv. 559'). 

This elevation of the merely sensuous soul to tho rank of 
reason might, says Leibniz, * be attributed to the extraordinary 
operation of God.* But ho ‘prefers to dispense with miracle in flui 
generation of man as in that of the other animals,* and says that 
‘among the great number of souls and animals (or nit least living 
organic bodies) which are in the seed, only those souls which are 
destined some day to attain to human nature contain in germ 
\mveloppenl] the reason which will some day appear in them, and 
that only the organic bodies of these souls are preformed and pre- 
disposed to take the human form some day, tho other animalcules 
or seminal living beings, in which nothing of this kind is pre- 
established, being essentially different from them and containing 
only what is lower.' ThMicesy § 397 (E. 618 a ; G. vi. 352). Hiis 
question of the relation of rational to sub-rational souls is treated 
by lioibniz in a very unsatisfactory way. If we follow out Leibniz's 

266 

THE MONADOLOGY 

83. Among other differences which exist between 
ordinary souls and minds [espriis]^ some of which 
differences I have already noted there is also this : 
that souls in general are living mirrors or images of the 
universe of created things, but that minds are also images 
of the Deity or Author of nature Himself, capable of 
knowing the system of the universe and to some 
extent of imitating it through architectonic ensamples 
\echaniilhns^''^\ each mind being like a small divinity in 
its own sphere. (Thread. 147.) 

84. It is this that enables spirits [or minds — to 
enter into a kind of fellowship wdth God, and brings it 
about that in relation to them He is not only what an 
inventor is to his machine (which is the relation of God 
to other created things), but also what a prince is to his 
Mubjects, and, indeo<l, what a father is to his children 

Jiiuin priiiciplo8, it ought to be impoHsiblo to draw a »hnrp lino 
botwcon those two classes of souls. Yet, while not regarding as 
absolute the distinction between the rational and the merely sen- 
suous, Leibniz is afraid of ininitnizing this distinction and of thus 
putting in jeopardy the pro einiiionce of man and the immortality 
of the soul. In the draft of a letter to Ariiauld (1686) lie speaks of 
this que.sti(»n as *a special point [une parftcularitv] about which 
1 have not light enough ' (G. ii. 73). Of. Introduction, Part iii. 
p. 116. 

§§ 19-30. 

‘Tlie diflerence between Intelligent substances and those which 
are not so, is as great as the difference there is between a mirror 
and him who looks therein.* Paper without a title (1686; (O. iv. 

4bo). 

139 That is, subsidiary creations or imitative constructions. Man 
can nut merely express in himself the * machine * of the universes, 
but ho can also make for himself small ‘ iintchincs,* constructed on 
similar principles. Cf. § 64 ; also PritKiples of Nature atui of Grace, 
4 14. An dpxiTiKTvu is literally a * master of works.' 

>3* ^ Concerning the human soul J dare not assort anything aa to 
its origin nor as to its state after death, because rational or intelli- 
gent souls, such as ours is, having been so fashioned that they have 
a peculiar relation to the imago of God, are governed by very dif- 
feixmt laws from those to which souls without understanding are 
subject.* Epieiola ad Bernoutlium (1699) (G. Math. iii. 565). * Spirits 
alone are made in Ills image, and are, as it were, of His 

THE MONADOLOGY 

267 

85. Whence it is easy to conclude that the totality 
[assemblage] of all spirits [c^nY^] must compose the City 
of God that is to say, the most perfect State that is 
possible, under the most |ierfect of Monarchs. {Th 6 od» 
146 ; Ahr^gcy Object 2.) 

86. This City of God, this truly universal monarchy, 
is a moral world in the natural world, and is the most 
exalted and most divine among the works of God and 
it is in it that the glory of God really consists, for He 
would have no glory wei’o not His greatness and His 
goodness known and admired by spirits [c^pnYs*®^]. It is 

i*aco or like children of the house, since they alone can serve Him 
freely and act, with knowledge, in imitation of the Divine nature : 
one single spirit [wpni] is worth a whole world, since it not only 
expresses the world but also knows it and governs itself in the 
world [/t/ gouverne] after the manner of God/^' l*apor without title 
(1686) (G. iv. 461). 

The reference* is to the citutas Iki of St. Augustine ; but the 
difference of meaning is very great. St. Augnstine’s civitatf Dn is 
the Christian Church as opposed to the cwitas terrma or earthly 
state. Leibniz's City of Qod, on the other hand, Is not set in 
opposition to an earthly state, hut is the moral order of the 
universe, ns di8ti\ict from its natural ordt^r. Thc3 City of God, 
according to Leibniz, includes not Christians alone, V>ut all men. 

Cf. Fichte, DarstelUmg der W issensdioftslchre {Weikc, ii. 35) : 
*The ground of the universe is . . . spirit itself. . . a kingdom of 
spirits and absolutely nothing c*lse.’ Also Werkp, v. j 88 : ^ It is 
in no way doubtful, or rather it is the most certain of all things, 
and indeed the foundation of all c<*rtitude, the sole absolutely 
indisputable objective reality, that there is a moral order in the 
universe ; that each rational individual has his doGnite place in 
this universal order, a place indicated by his special work ; that 
each of the accident^ of his existence, in so faring it does not 
result from his persona] conduct, is a consequence of this gonerul 
plan r that, except in conformity with this plan, not a hair can 
fail from his head, any more than a sparrow from its roof ; that 
every truly good action succeeds, every bad action fails ; and 
that all things necessarily work for the greatest good of those who 
only rightly love the good.’ See Introduction, Part iv. p. r8o 
note. 

^ Cf. Nicholas of Casa, Cribratio Alchorany 16 : ‘ God created 
all things for the manifestation of His glory ; an unknown king is 
wanting in honour and in benefloence.’ Cf. also Exdtaiumes ex 

268 

THE MONADOLOGY 

also in relation to this divine City that God specially 
has goodness'**, while His wisdom and His power are 
manifested everywhere. (Thcod. 146; Ahr6g6j Object 2.) 

87, As we have shown above that there is a perfect 
harmony between the two realms in nature, one of efficient, 
and the other of final causes, we should here notice also 
another harmony between the physical realm of nature 
and the moral realm of grace that is to say, between 
God, considered as Architect of the mechanism [ machine^ 
of the universe and God considered as Monarch of the 
divine City of spirits [espritsj. {Thcod, 62, 74, 118, 248, 
112, 130, 247.) 

Sarmontbua, vi. iiaa: ‘(Jod dosirod to manifest the riches of His 
glory, and on this account Ho croatod the rational or intellectual 
creature, that Ho might manifest to him tin* riches of His glory ; 
for this creature alcPliu can perceive the glory of God with in- 
tolloctual nj>preciation \intellectu<th gxtstu] ; but these riches [of the 
glory of G<kI 1 are eternal life.’ * God wishes to ho known, and 
honco on this a<;count all things are’ (/oc, nV., 104 a). Of. also 
Schiller's * Freundlos war dcr grosse \VeltcnmoiHtt*r,' (Die 

Ficundsctidft), 

Because moral distinctions and moral qualities belong specially 
to the moral order, i. c. to the society of rational souls. 

Tlio question of the relation btdween the realm of nature 
and that of grace is, in one form or another, iioreniiial. Loibniz 
seeks to apply the principles of his philosophy in a i-econciling 
spirit to the seveiitoenth-contury discussion of the question in its 
theological form. Tlie harmony, of which Leibniz speaks, must 
not ho taken ns moaning (like the harmony between the Monads^ 
that the two realms of nature and of grace are ontiredy exclusive 
of one another. Tlio realm of final causes, for instance, does not 
belong Old i roly to nature; the realm of grace is the realm of 
final causes in its highe>t form. The relation between nature 
and grace is analogous to that between body and soul. Just as 
body, considered as an aggregate, in merely phenomenal and there- 
fore quite distinct from soul or real sub.'^tance, while yet it is 
fv pfimomenon bene fundatum and its reality is that of its component 
Monads or souls ; so naturo, considered as subject to the law of 
efficient causes, is quite distinct from grace, while yet, since 
effloicni causes, even in nature itself, derive their meaning and 
force from final causes, nature finds its perfection in grace, 
which is the highest expression of final cause. $$88 and 89 
illustrate this. Cl Principles ^ JVofurs and Groce, $ 15. 

THE MONAHOLOOY 

269 

88. A result of this harmony is that things load to 
grace by the very ways of nature, and that this globe, 
for instance, must be destroyed and renewed by natural 
means at the very time when the government of spirits 
requires it, for tlie punishment of some and tho reward of 
others. (Theod, 18 sqq., no, 244, 245, 340.) 

89. It may also be said that God as Architect satisfies 
in all respects God as Lawgiver “ and thus that sins 
must bear their penalty with thorn, through the order of 
nature, and even in virtue of the mechanical structum of 
things ; and similarly that noble actions will attain their 
rewards by ways which, on the bodily side, are mechanical, 
although this cannot and ought not always to happen 
immediately 

90. Finally, under this perfect government no good 
action would be iinrowarded and no bad one unpunished, 
and all should issue in tho well-being of tho good, that is 
to say, of those who are not malcontc^nts in this great 
state, but who trust in Providence, after having done 
their duty, and who lovo and imitate, as is meet, the 
Author of all good, finding pleasure in tho conteinplaticm 
of His perfections, as is the way of genuine ‘ pure lovo 

That is to sny, Iho world in built on a plan wbitdi parfuctly 
harmonizes with tlie moral governinont of ita inlnibitnnta. 

Leibniz regards sin as neeking one's own good in an imperfoet, 
unenlightened way, without regard tf) tho moral law or ordfT, 
which is tho only way of securing tlio higheat possible good of all 
and of each. Thus sin brings punishment as inovitiibly us neglect 
or defiance of natural laws brings dibeuso and pain. Uiit owing to 
tho harmony (above explained) botw<Kjn spirit and body, tlio moral 
and the natural woiTds, the punishment of sin is not merely 
spiritual: the bodily or natural has a share in it. Similarly 
virtiii. has its reward, both f^piritual and natural, because it is 
enlightened action in accordance with tho uliimati) law of iho 
whole universe, the principle of the highest good. 

That is to say, disinterested love, a.s distinct from interested 
or selfish love. One of tho great subjects of theological discussion 
in the seventeenth century was the question whether there is such 
a thing as purely disinterested love. About this a long pamphlet 
oontreversy (lasting from 1694 to 1699) took place between Bossuet 

THE MONADOLOGY 

270 

which takes pleasure in, the liappiness of the beloved. 
This it is which leads wise and virtuous people to devote 
their energies to everything which appears in harmony 
with the presumptive or antecedent will of God, and yet 
makes them content with what God aclbually brings to 
pass by His secret, consequent and positive [dcc/sivc] 
will recognizing that if we could sufficiently under- 

and Ftinolon. Fonelou (partly in defence of Mme. Guyon) main- 
tained the possibility of a disinterested love of God, that is, a love 
which has no regard to rewards and punishments. Ultimately, 
however, Pope Innocent XII condemned the views of F6nelon, at 
the same time censuring the controversial methods of Bossruet. 
The view of Leibniz is more fully given in his Preface, On the 
Notions qf Right and Justice (1693), p. 285 ; cf. Butler, Sermons xi, 
xiii, and xiv. 

i*' Tho distinction between the antecedent and the consequent 
will of God is duo to Thomas Aquinas. Ho says: ‘This dis- 
tinction is not founded upon the Divine will itself, for in it there 
is neither before nor after; but it is founded upon the objects of 
His will. ... A thing may be considered either in itself, absolutely, 
or with some particular circumstance, which forms a subsequent 
consideration. For instance it is good in itsolf that man should 
live and bad that he should be killed, considering the matter 
absolutely ; but if we add, with regard to some particular man, 
that he is a murderer or that his living is a source of danger tb 
a large number of people, in this case it will bo good that the man 
should bo killed, and bad that ho should live. Accordingly it may 
bo said that a judge wills with an antecedent will that every man 
should continue to live, but wills with a consequent will that 
a murderer should be hanged.' Summa Thed, i. Qu. 19, Art. 6 ad 
primum, Cf. De. Veritate, Qu. 23, Art. 2. Leibniz brings this into 
relation with his own hypothcisis regarding the region of possible 
things and the actual, existing world. ‘In a general sense it may 
bo said that will consists in the inclination to do something in 
proportion to the good it contains. This T^ill is called antecedent, 
when it is separate [detac/ic'ej and has regard to each good by itself, 
in so far as it is good. In this sense it may be said that God tends 
to all good in so far as it is good, ad perfectionem simpHdter simpHcem, 
in Scholastic language, and that by an antecedent will. He has 
an earnest inclination to sanctify and save all men, to do away 
with sfti and to prevent damnation. It may even be said that this 
will is efficacious in itself (per se), that is to say, so that the effect 
would follow, were there not some stronger reason which prevents 
it ; for this will does not go to the extreme of effort (ad summum 

THE MONADOIiOGY 

371 

stand the order of the universe, we should find that it 
exceeds all the desires of the wisest men, and that it is 
impossible to make it better than it is'**, not only as a 
whole and in general but also for ourselves in particular, 
if we are attached, as we ought to be, to the Author of 
all, not only as to the architect and efi&cient cause of our 
being, but as to our master and to the final cause, which 
ought to be the 'whole aim of our will, and which can 
alone make our happiness. (Theod, 134, 278. Pref, [E. 
469 ; G. vi. 27, 28].) 

conaium), otherwise it would nover fail to produce its full effect, 
since God is master of all things. Complete and infallible success 
belongs only to consequent will^ as it is called. It is complete, and 
this rule apj)lios to il, namely, that w'o never fail to do what wo 
will, when we can. Now this consequent, final and decisive will 
results from the conffict of all the antecedent volitions [‘wills*', 
both those which tend towards good and those which oppose evil, 
and it is from the concurrence of all these particular volitions 
that the total volition comes : as in mechanics the composite 
motion is the result of all the tendencies which concur in one and 
the same movable body, and equally satisfies each of them so far 
as it is possible to do so at once. ... In this sense it may be said 
that antecedent will [volition] is in a way efficacious and even 
effective and successful. From this it follows that God wills 
antecedently the good, and consequently the best.* Theodicee^ §§ aa and 
53 (E. 510 b; G. vi. 115, 116). God antecedency wills the absolute 
good of all beings ; but Ho cofxsequcntly wills the greatest good of 
each that is possihUy considering the essential limitations of their 
natures and their relations to one another in the system of things. 
This greatest possible good is thus compatible with a certain amount 
of evil. 

This is not to be taken as meaning that it is impossible to 
make the world better than it is at this or any particular moment 0/ 
time. Leibniz is speaKing of the world as a system* including all 
time, and accordingly he does not exclude progress in time. 

272 

THE MONADOLOGY 

APPENDIX F. 

THE DISCUSSION BETWEEN LEIBNIZ AND BAYLE BEGARDINO 
THE MULTIPLICITY IN THE MONAD. 

The ‘difficulty’ regarding the possibility of a multiplicity in 
the Monad, to which Leibniz refers in § 16 of the Monadology^ 
is variously expressed by Bayle in his Dictionary (article ‘Rora- 
rius'). He says : ‘As Leibniz with much reason supposes that 
all souls are simple and indivisible, it is impossible to under- 
stand how they can bo likened to a clock’ [see Thii'd explana- 
tion of the New System^ and Introduction, Part ii. p. 45], ‘ that is 
to say, how by their original constitution they can diversify 
their operations, by means of the spontaneous activity they 
receive from their Creator. We conceive clearly that a simple 
being will always act uniformly, if no extraneous cause inter- 
feres with it. If it were composed of several pieces, like 
a machine, it would act in divers ways, because the special 
activity of each piece might change at any moment the course 
of the activity of the others ; but in an independent simple 
substance [mhaiance unique], where will you find the cause of 
any variety in its operation ? ’ Leibniz’s answer to this appears 
in the Ri^ponse aux Reflexions de Bayle ; see Monadology, note 20 ; 
cf. Lettre a Bosnage (1698) (E. 153 a; G. iv. 522) : ‘ I compared 
the soul to a clock, only as regards the regulated precision of 
its changes. This is but imperfect in the best of clocks, but it 
is perfect in the works of God. And the soul may be said to be 
an immaterial automaton of the very best kind. When it is 
said that a simple being will always act uniformly, a distinction 
must be n ade : if acting uniformly means constantly following 
the saim? law of order or varying succession \conlhiutttion\ as in 
a certain order or series of numbers, 1 admit that of itself every 
simple being, and even eveiy compound being, acts uniformly ; 
but if uniformly means exactly in the same way [semhlahlemeni]^ 
I do not admit it. . . . The soul, though it is perfectly simple, 
has always a feeling [sentiment] composed of several perceptions 
at once ; and this is as much to our purpose as if it were com- 
posed of pieces, like a machine. For each preceding perception 
influences those which follow, according to a law which there 
is in perceptions as in motions.* Bayle allows that Leibniz’s 
view contains the promise of a theory which will solve all ditfl- 

APPENDIX P 

273 

culties ; but he etill feels dissatisfied as to the power of a simple 
subs^nce, like the soul of man, to develop spontaneously all 
the variety of thought, &c. It has not ‘ the necessary instru- 
ments’ for doing this. * Let us freely imagine an animal created 
by God and intended to sing incessantly. It will always sing, that 
is indubitable ; but if God assigns to it a certain piece of music 
to sing [une certaine iahlature\ He must necessarily either place 
this before its eyes, or imprint it on its memory, or give it an 
arrangement of muscles which, in accordance with the laws of 
mechanics, shall make one note follow another exactly according 
to their order in the musical score [tdblature\ Otherwise it is 
inconceivable that the animal should ever bo able to conform 
to the whole succession of notes indicated by God. Let us 
apply this to the soul of man. M. Leibniz thinks that it has 
received not only the faculty of continually supplying itself 
with thoughts, but also the faculty of always following a certain 
order in its thoughts, corresponding to the continual changes 
of the bodily mechanism. This order of thoughts is like tho 
musical score assigned to the animal musician of which we have 
been speaking. In order that the soul may from moment to 
moment change its perceptions or its modifications in accord- 
ance with the ‘‘ score ” of thoughts, must not the soul know the 
succession of the notes and actually think of it ? Now expe- 
rience shows us that it does nothing of the kind. And, failing 
this knowledge, must there not at least be in the soul a succession 
of special instruments which might each be a necessary cause 
of this or that particular thought ? Must not these instruments 
be so situated that one acts upon another, in exact accord with 
the pre-established correspondence between the changes of the 
bodily mechanism and the thoughts of the soul? Now it is 
quite certain that no immaterial, simple and indivisible sub- 
stance can be composed of this countless multitude of special 
instruments placed one before another in the orde^ required by 
the “ score ” in question. Accordingly it is impossible for the 
human soul to carry out this law.* (This illustration of Bayle’s 
may be compared with Leibniz's simile of the choirs, see Intro- 
duction, Part ii, p. 47. The letter containing Leibniz’s simile 
was written in 1687.) In a paper written in 1702 (G. iv. 
549 sqq.) Leibniz makes the following reply to Bayle (referring 
in the first place to Bayle’s supposition of an animal created by 
God to sing incessantly) : * It is enough if we suppose a singer 
paid to sing at certain hours in church or at the opera, and 

T 

THE MONADOLOGY 

274 

that he finds there a rausic-book, in which there are the pieces 
of music or the ** score ” he is to sin^ on the particular days and 
hours. The singer sings with open hook [A Uvre ouvert]^ his 
eyes are directed by the book, and his tongue and throat are 
directed by his eyes, but his soul sings, so to speak, by memory 
or by something equivalent to memory ; for since the music- 
book, the eyes and the ears cannot act upon the soul, it must 
by itself, and indeed without trouble or application and without 
seeking it, find what his brain and organs find with the help 
of the book. The reason is that the whole score of the book 
or books that shall, one after another, be followed in singing is 
potentially \tirimllemeni \ graven in his soul from the beginning 
of its existence ; as this “score ” was in some way graven in its 
material causes before the pieces of music were composed and 
the book made out of them. But the soul cannot be conscious 
of it [sVn apercevoir], for it is enveloped in the confused per- 
ceptions of the soul, which express all the detail of the universe. 
And the soul is distinctly conscious of it only at the time when 
its organs are markedly aflected by the notes of the “ score.” 
... 1 have already shown more than once that the soul does 
many things without knowing how it does them, when it does 
so by means ofV'onfused perceptions and unconscious [hi^fensib/es] 
inclinations or appetitions, of which there is always a very 
great number, and which it is impossible for the soul to be con- 
scious of, or to unravel distinctly. . . . The soul has all the 
instruments which M. Bayle thinks necessary, arranged [plac4^ 
as they ought to be. But they are not material instruments. 
They are the preceding perceptions themselves, from which 
the succeeding perceptions arise by the laws of appetitions 
\appetiis\* 

APPENDIX 0 . 

t 

PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD. 

The view of Leibniz, expressed in the Monadology (§§ 44 and 
45h must be carefully distinguished from the Cartesian argu- 
ment (derived from Anselm) that the idea of God involves His 
existencci because if He does not exist, a more perfect Being 
may be conceived, namely one who does exist. It is also 
to be distinguished from the view of Spinoza, which amounts 
to saying that the essence of God involves His existence, because 

APPfiKmX G 

275 

all ewence ezista* all that is poaeible is actual. As against 
Descartes's proof Leibniz argues that it is incomplete, for the 
idea of a most perfect being might perhaps be self-contra- 
dictory, like the idea of the swiftest possible motion or the 
greatest possible number. Thus, after stating the Cartesian 
argument, Leibniz says : ‘ But it is to be noted that the only 
logical conclusion is : ** If God is possible, it follows that He 
exists.’* For we cannot safely use definitions in order to reach 
a conclusion, until we know that these definitions are real or 
that they involve no contmdiction. The reason of this is that 
from notions which involve a contradiction opposite conclusions 
may be drawn at the same time, which is absurd. To illustrate 
this I usually take the instance of the swiftest possible motion, 
which involves an absurdity. For, suppose a wheel to revolve 
with the swiftest possible motion, is it not evident, that if any 
spoke of the wheel be made longer * [produced, in the mathe- 
matical sense] ‘its extremity will move more swiftly than 
a nail on the circumference of the wheel ; wherefore the 
motion of the circumference is not the swiftest possible, as was 
supposed by the hypothesis. Yet at first sight it may appear 
that we have an idea of the swiftest possible motion ; for wo 
seem to understand what we are saying, and nevertheless we 
have no idea of impossible things.’ Meditaiionea de Cognitione, 
Veritate et Ideis (1684), (E. 80 a ; G. iv. 424.) ‘ Therefore there is 
assuredly reason to doubt whether the idea of the greatest of all 
beings is not uncertain, and whether it does not involve some 
contradiction. For I quite understand, for instance, the nature 
of motion and velocity, and what “ the greatest ” is. But I do 
not understand whether these are compatible, and whether 
it is possible to combine them into the one idea of the greatest 
velocity of which motion is capable. In the same way, although 
1 know what “being” is, and what the “greatest” and the 
“ most perfect ” are, nevertheless I do not therefore know that 
there is not a hidden contradiction involved in combining these 
together, as there actually is in the instances I have just given 
... Yet I admit that God has here a great advantage over 
all other things. For, in order to prove that He exists, it is 
sufficient to prove that He is possible, which is not the case 
with regard to anything else that I know of. . . . Simple 
forms [i.e. living principles] are the source of things. Now 
I maintain that all simple forms are compatible with one 
another. ... If this be granted, it follows that the nature of 

THE MONADOLOGY 

276 

God, which containH all simple forms taken absolutely, is 
possible. Now we have proved above that God is, provided • 
He is possible. Therefore He exists.* (G. iv. 294 and 296.) 
Thus Leibniz, as he himself says (G. iv. 405), holds a middle 
position between those who regard the Cartesian proof as a 
sophism and those who say that it is a complete demonstra- 
tion. God’s existence, for Leibniz, follows immediately from 
His possibility, for all real possibility includes a tendency to 
existence, and there can be nothing to hinder this tendency in 
a being supposed to be perfect. In the R^ponses aux DeuxiimeM 
Objections, Descartes maintains the possibility of the idea of 
a most perfect being. Rut he does not make this a prominent 
or essential ])art of his proof, as Leibniz does. Cf. Descartes, 
Meditation 5 ; Prinripia Philosophiae, Part i. 14 sqq. 

In the Animadversiones in patieni generahm Principiorum 
Cartesianoruni (1692) (G. iv. 359) Leibniz suggests that the 
argument might be simplified by omitting the reference to 
* j)erfection/ and merely saying ‘a nerossary Being exists --or 
a Being whos(* essence is existence, or Being in itself [cn«.a sc] 
exists — as is evident from the terms. Now God is such a being 
(from the definition of God), therefore God exists. This argu- 
ment holds if it be granted that a necessary being is possible 
and does not involve a contradiction, or, what is the same 
thing, that the essence from which existence follows is possible.’ 
Elsewhere (K. 177 b ; G. iv. 406) Leibniz points out that ‘those 
who hold that from notions, ideas, definitions or possible 
essences alone we can never infer actual existence . . . deny the 
possibility of being in itself* a se]. But ‘ if being in itself 
is impossible, all beings .through another’ \entia cih alio\ ‘are 
also impoa.sible, since indeed they are only through being in 
itself: thus nothing can exist.’ 

As against Spinoza, Leibniz’s argument would be that not 
all that is possible is actual, but onlyrthe compossible or com- 
patible. There are unrealized * possibles,* essences which do 
not involve existence, and consequently the necessary being, 
whose essence involves existence, is not the all, but is some- 
thing distinct from the world of created things. The essence 
of a created being does not involve its existence, because it is 
limited, and thus its existence depends upon its ‘ fitting into * 
o^er essences so as to constitute, along with them, the best 
possible world. But the essence of a nocessaiy being involves 
its existence because it is unlimited. There^ is nothing to 

APPENDIX G 

277 

binder or condition its existence, and accordingly, if it be pos- 
sible, it must exist. The value of Leibniz's argument depends 
on the worth of the distinction he makes between * possible ' 
and * compossible/ that is to say between a metaphysical or 
absolute necessity and a moral or inclining necessity. How 
are these two kinds of necessitj' related to one another ? It is 
hardly a satisfactory solution of the opposition between them 
to refer the one to the understanding and the other to the 
will of God. We have here again the fundamental weakness 
of Leibniz's philosophy, the uncertainty of the relation between 
the principle of contradiction and that of sufficient reason. 

Kant rejects the whole argument as a paralogism, on the 
ground that ‘ existence ' can never be a i)redicnte, that is to 
say, that we are never justified logically in passing from a 
mere idea to the existence of its content. (See Critique of 
Pure licasopi, Rosenkranz, ii. 462 ; Hartenstein, ii. 456 ; Meikle- 
john’s Tr., 364.) It is true that we can never pass from a mere 
idea to the existence of its content; but to adduce this as an 
argument here is to beg the <xuestioii. For a mere idea is an 
idea of that which may be non-existent ; while the idea of 
a necessary being is the idea of that which cannot be non- 
existent. Gaimilo in his Liber pro tusipiente, anticij)ates the 
objection of Kant, and to this Anselm replied in his Liber 
apologetieus contra respondenfem pro insipientc, saying, among 
other tilings: ‘ L't us assume that the Sttmonim cogitahite 
need not exist merely because it is thouglif. Mark the con- 
sequence. That which can be thought without really existing 
would not, if it did exist, be the »ummum cogitahite ; so that, 
by the h3'pothe8is, the nummum cogitabde is and is not the 
summum cogitahite, which is in the last degree absurd* (Higg's 
St. Anmlm of Canierbut'g, p. 71. See the whole of his cliajj. v). 
Cf. Introduction, Part iv. p. 173, 

OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL WJUTJNIJS 
OF LKIHNIZ 

ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND 
JUSTICE. 1693. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

Leibniz was deeply interested in the maintenance of the 
rights of the Empire as against the pretensions of Louis XIV. 
lie observed that the French took every opjjortunity of obtain- 
ing and preserving documents on which tht'y might found 
claims. And accordingly, on behalf of the Empire, he set 
himself to make a collection of Treaties and State papers 
(international and national) atfecting the Kurop<*an nations. 
His plan was to publish them in three voluincs under the title 
Codex Juris Gentium Diplomatieus, In 1693 the first volume 
appeared, containing papers of <late from 1100 to 1500 A. i>. 
The work was never finished ; but an Appendix (mantissa) to 
the first volume was published in I7cx>. Writing to the Count 
de Kinsky in 1697, Leibniz remarks that his book ‘ is a little 
less in season than it was at first, for we are assured that 
ii general peace is on the point of being concluded’ (Klopp, 
vi. 454). 

To this work Leibniz says he * contributed only the title, the 
preface, and the trouble of reading it over’ (Klopj), vi. 
441). The preface, however, contains the most convenient 
summary of its authon’s views in an important department of 
ethics. The whole preface is given by Dutens (iv. 287) and 
by Klopp (vi. 457) ; but Erdmann (118) gives only the para- 
graphs dealing with * the eternal rights [or laws] of a rational 
nature,’ and Qerhardt includes no part of it in his edition. 
1 have translated the portion given by Erdmann, adding a few 
sentences from the succeeding paragraphs which deal with 
‘voluntary* and ‘divine* right. In the foot-notes will be 
found translations of a number of illustrative passages from 
the very interesting collection of papers from the Hanover 

aSa ON THE NOTIONS OP BIGHT AND JUSTICE 

MSS. published by Dr. Georg Mollat under the title, ReehU- 
philoaophiaches aua Leihnizena ungedruckten Schriflen (Leipzig, 
Robolsky, 1885). 

The following statement of Leibniz may be used as a sum- 
maiy of this part of the Preface to the Codex Diplofnatietis : 

* In stating the elements of natural right there must be ex- 
pounded, Jirat, the common principles of justice, the charity of 
the wise man; aecondly, private right or the precepts of com- 
mutative justice, concerning what is obseiTcd among men in 
HO far as they are regarded as equal; thU*dhjy public right, 
concerning the dispensing of common goods and evils among 
unequal people for the greatest common good in this life ; 
fourthlyy inward right, concerning universal virtue and natural 
obligation towards God, that W’e may have regard to perpetual 
happiness. To these must be added the elements of legitimate 
human and divine right : human right both in our own 
commonwealth and between nations, divine right in the 
universal Church.’ (De tnbua juris naturae et gentium gradihus, 
Mollat, p. 21.) 

The ideas expressed in this Preface arc to a large extent 
derived from Grotius. 

The doctrine of right, confined by nature within narrow 
limits, lias been immensely extended by the human intel- 
lect \ 1 am not sure that, even after so many distinguished 
writers have discussed them, the notions of Right and 
Justice may bo considered sufficiently clear. Right is a 
certain moral power, and obligation a moral necessity \ 
Now by moral I mean that which is equivalent to ‘ natural ’ 
jn a good man : for as a Boman lawyer admirably says, 
it is not to bo believed that we are capable of doing things 

* “ Medical t^cioiico is the science of the pleasant, political science 
is the science of the useful, ethical science is the science of the 
just.' Juris et aequi ehmenta (Mollat, p. 93). 

* Nothing impossible is a duty or, as it is commonly put, of 
impossible things there is no obligation. . . . Evorytliing necessary 
is permissible or, as it is commonly put, necessity has no law.' 
Oe ddntie et iUiciUs (Mollat, p. 9a). ^Necessity is the avoiding of 
misery,' which is defined as Masting 8adne.s8’ or Mhat state in 
which the aggregate of evils preponderates over the aggregate 
of goods.* Juris et aequi Oemenia (Mollat, pp. 39, 33). 

ON THE NOTIONS OF BIGHT AND JUSTICE 283 

which are contraiy to good moials [conira bonos mores] 
Further, a good man is one who loves all men, so far as 
reason allows \ Justice \ therefore, which is the virtue* 
governing that disposition of mind [affectus] which the 
Oreeks call Kf^iXavOpaiirta, will, if I mistake not, be most 
fittingly defined as the charitg of the wise man [caritas 
sapientis'^l, that is to say, charity in obedience to the 

’ ^Wlien tlio nature of justice and (as is necessarily involved 
in this) the nature of wisdom and charity is understood, it is 
manifest that tiiat wliich to a good man is possible, impossible, 
necessary (if he wishes to retain th<^name\ is just or permissible, 
unjust, and finally, obligatory [debitum]. For it is not to be believed 
that wc are capablo of doing tilings which are contrary to good 
morals, and in this sense it may be said that the right we have 
of acting or not acting is a certain power or moral liberty, while 
obltgatiOH is a necessity/ De (ribua juris naturae et gentium gradibus 
(Mollat, p. 13). 

* ‘He who lovos God, that is ho who is wise, will love all men, 
but each in proportion us the traces of divine virtue in him shine 
out, and in proportion as he hopes to find in him a companion 
ready and able to promote the common good, or (what comes to 
the same thing) the glory of God, the Gi^er of good things,' for, ciL 

* The doctrine of Right must, according to Leibniz, bo deduced 
from definitions, for tlie idea of justice is a priori. ‘Since justice 
consists in a certiiii congruity and ]iroportion, the just may have 
a meaning, although tlioro may neither be any one who practisem 
justice nor any one towards whom it is practised, just as the ratios 
of numbers ai*e true, although there may neither be any one who 
numbers nor anything which is numbered, and it maybe predicted 
of a house that it will be beautiful, of a naaohino that it will be 
effective, of a commonwealth that it will be happy, if it comes into 
existence, althougli it may never come into existence/ Juris et 
aequi eHementa (Mollat, p. 24^ I have in most pla<.*es translated the 
word *ju 3 * by * Right," Regarding the ambiguities of those words 
see K. C. Clark's Practic&l Jurisprudence, ch. 2 and 6. • 

* ‘AH virtue is the bridling of the desires [affectus] so that 
nothing can oppose the commands of right reason/ Juris pJ aequi 
elemenia (Mollat, p. 26). Cf. G. vii. 92 sqq. 

’ Leibniz gives various longer definitions of justice. In a letter 
to Kesner (1709) (Dutens, iv. 261) ho says : ‘Justice is perfection 
in accordance with wisdom, so far as concerns a i>orson's conduct 
in relation to the goods and ills of other persons/ Again, ‘Justice 
is nothing but that which is in conformity with wisdom and 
goodness combined ; the end of goodness is the greatest good, but 

284 ON THE NOTIONS OP RIGHT AND JUSTICE 

dictates of wisdom ^ Therefore the saying attributed to 
Garneades ^ that justice is supreme folly, because it bids us 
attend to the interests of others, neglecting our own, pro- 
ceeds from ignorance of the definition of justice Charity 
is universal benevolence, and benevolence is the habit of 
loving or esteeming [amcmdi sive diUgendi] But to love 

in order to recognize it wo require wisdom, which is nothing but 
the knowledge of the good. . . . Wisdom is in the understanding 
and goodness in the will. And justice consequently is in both.' 
Meditation sur la notimi commune de la justice (Mol la t, p. 69). * The 

true and perfect definition of justice is ilie habit of loving others 
or of taking phuisuro in the tiiought of other people’s good, as often 
as it comes into consideration.’ * Justice is prudence in bringing 
about tJio good of others or not bringing evil ii]>on them for the 
sijke of bringing about one’s own good (by thus manifesting one’s 
mind), or not bringing evil upon om^self (that is, for the sake of 
gaining reward or avoiding punishment).’ June et aequi demenla 
(Mollat, pp. 32 and 35), Regarding the Inst statement, it sliould 
be remarked that Leibniz says: ‘God Himself is the i*eward,' 
loc. cif, 

* ‘ . .oven in thoso who have not attained to this wisdom. For, 
setting Ood apart, tho majority of those who would act in 
accordance witli justice in all tilings, oven against their own 
interests, would in fact do what is required by tho wise man who 
finds his pleasuro in the general good, but in certain cases they 
would not tliemsolves act as %vise men, not being sensitive to the 
pleasure of virtue.’ Meditation sur la fiotion conimune de la justice 
(Mollat, p. 75). 

• The saying comes from the Epitome of tho Divinae Imtitutiones 
of Lactantiu.s, ch. i. Of. Instit. v. 14 and Cicero, De Hep. iii. 93 
(Ritter and 3 ’reller, HisL DhiL Grate. §$ 436 and 438). Carneades 
(about 913-129 B.C.), a native of Cyrene, was founder of the Now 
Academy. In 156 b.c. ho visited Rome as an ambassador from 
Athens and caused much astonishment by his skill in arguing 
successively for and against justice. Of. Grotius, Be jure belli et 
paciSf Prolegomena^ § 5. 

w ‘There cannot bo justice without prudence, nor can prudence 
be soparatod from one’s own good.' Juris et acqni dementa (Mollat, 
p. a6). 

“ ‘Tliere are two ways of desiring the good of others, tho one 
when wo desire it on account of our own good, the other when 
we (ftsire it as if it were our own good. The first is the way 
of him who esteems, the second of him who loves; the first is 
the feeling of a master to his servant, tho second that of a father 
to his son ; the first is the feeling of a man towards the tool he 

ON THE NOTIONS OP BIGHT AND JUSTICE 285 

or esteem is to take pleasure in the happiness of another, 
or what comes to the same thing, to adopt another's happi- 
ness as our own. In this way there is solved the difficult 
problem, which is also of great importance in theology, how 
there can be a disinterested love [amor non tnercenarius] 
a love apart from hope and fear and every consideration 
of advantage ; the solution being that the happiness of 
those in whose happiness we take pleasure becomes a part 
of our own happiness for things which give us pleasure 
are desired for their own sakes And as the very con- 

requires, the second that of friend to friend ; in the first case the 
good of others is sought for the sake of something else, in the 
second for its own sake.* Juris et acqui ehmenta (Mollat, p. 30). 
Ill til is note the word translated ‘esteem* is aestimart^^ while in 
the text it is diligere, Benevolenre is a efir in the Aristotelian 
sense, ‘ not an act, but a habit or strong Inclination of the mind, 
which we have acquired either by the fortune of birth, or by 
a special gift of God, or by repeated practice.* De just itia (Mollat, 
P- 37)- 

Cf. MoruuhJogi^f $ 90, note 14a. In the Preface to the second 
part of the Codex Juris Gentium DiptomatievSf § 10 (Dutens, iv, 313), 
Leibniz replies to those who olijected to his solution on the ground 
that ‘it is more perfect to cast onoholf ontiridy upon God, so as 
to be moved by His will alone and not by one/s own pleasure.' 
This, says lAubniz, * is contrary to the nature of things : for the 
endeavour to act springs from a tendency to perfection, the feeling 
of which is pleasure ; and there is no action or volition otherwise.’ 
Cf. a paper on the views of F« 5 neIon (-1697) (E. 790 a ; O. ii. 578) : 
‘ We do everything for our own good, and it is impossible for us to 
have other opinions, although wo can speak about othera. But 
nevertheless, we do not yet love quite purely, when we do not 
seek the good of the loved object for its own sake and because 
it pleases us in itself, but because of some advantage which comes 
to us from it. But . . . we seek at once our own gbod for our own 
sakes and the good of the loved object for its own sake, when the 
good of this object is immediately, finally {.viiimato) and by itself 
our aim, our pleasure and our good, as happens with regard to all 
the things which we desire because they please us in themselves 
and are consequently good in themfelves without regard to conse- 
quences : they are ends, not means.'* 

'‘The prerogative of true happiness is that it is incroased by 
the multitude of those who share it.* Dejustitia ; Mollat, p. 41). 

This is a convertible statement. ‘Everything pleasant is 

286 ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 

templation of beautiful things is pleasant and a picture 
by Baphael moves him who understands it, although it 
brings him no gain, so that it becomes dear and delightful 
to him, inspiring in him something like love ; so when 
the beautiful thing is also capable of happiness, his feeling 
for it passes into real love. But Divine love excels 
other loves, for God can be loved with the happiest result, 
since nothing is happier than God and nothing more 
beautiful or more worthy of happiness can be conceived 
And since He possesses supreme power and wisdom, His 
happiness not only becomes a patt of ours (if we are wise, 
that is, if wo love Him) but even constitutes it But 
since wisdom ought to direct charity, wisdom also requires 

nought for its own suko, and whatever ia nought for its own sake 
ia pleasant. Other things are sought on account of what is 
pleasant, that they may produce it, contribute to it, or remove 
wJiat is opposed to it. All men feel this whatever they may say, 
or at any rate they do it, whatever they may foci.' Juris et aetjui 
rkmenta (Mollat, p. 30). 

^ Wo seek beautiful things because they are pleasant. I define 
a beautiful thing as that the contemplation of which is pleasant.' 
loc, cit (Mollut, p. 31). 

* Ho who finds pleasure in the contemplation of a beautiful 
picture and would suffer pain if he saw it spoiled, oven though it 
bolong to another man, loves it so to speak with a disinterested 
love ; but this is not the case with him who thinks merely of 
making money by selling or getting applause by showing it, 
without curing whether it is spoiled or not, when it no longer 
belongs to him.' Letire it 2V/rais(f (1698) (E. 791 b ; O, ii. 581). Cf. Kant, 
CrUiiiuc of Judtjnitrnif Part i. div. i. bk, i. §§ 1-5. 

i. o. love for God. 

“ ‘He IliniHolf is always happy and will never be a cause of 
grief to us through His misfortune, nor wilKHe l)e in need of our 
help. And again, since He always does everything In the most 
reasonable way, wo can act in relation to Him otherwise than 
in relation to those who, being carried uway b^' their emotions, 
follow no fixed rule of conduct and may even be offended by those 
who are most anxious to honour them. But He is always content 
with a good will and richly rewards all things well done or 
intenaod, that is, all things which are in harmony with His 
presumptive will.' l>ejustitia,s (Mollat, p. 38). 

*The happiness of God constitutes . . . the whole of ours.* 
(E. 79a a ; O. li 578.) 

ON THE NOTIONS OP RIGHT AND JUSTICE 3^7 

to be defined. And 1 think that* the notion men have of 
it will best be satisfied, if we say that wisdom is nothing 
but the very science of happiness So we are brought 
back again to the notion of happincsSy which this is not 
the place to explain^*. 

Now from this source flows natural Eight [jus mturae | 
of which there are three degrees : Eight in the narrow sense 
\ju8 stricium^ in commutative justice, equity (or charity 
in the narrower sense of the word) in distributive justice 
and lastly, piety (or uprightness) in universal justice 

‘Wisdom iH tho scicnco of tho best, as prudence is the science 
uf the good.* Specitnefi demomtratimium politicarum (1669), prop. 38 
l^Dutens, iv. 559). 

‘Happiness is a lasting state of joy.* Initium institiitiimum juris 
perpetui (Mollat, p. 4). ‘ Nofhing contributes inoro to happiiiOHs 

than the enlightenment of the undorstaiiding and tlie inclination 
of the will always to act according to reason, and such an enlighten- 
mont is especially to bo sought in the knowledge of Ihose things 
which can lead our understanding ever onward to a higher light ; 
because from this there arises a continual progress in wisdom and 
virtue, and consequontly in perfi^dion and joy, tho fruit of which 
remains with the soul c\en after this life.’ Kon dvr GldcKmligkt'tt 
^E. 672 b ; G. vii. 88). Cf. E. 792 a ; O. ii. 581, 

” Those correspond rospectivedy to Aristotle’s to iv ro's avvaWAy- 
gcuri SiKatov or Sinatov BiopSwritcov and his SiavtprjriKuv SlKaiov or 
iv rats Biavdfjiat^. Ethics^ v. 2, 1130*^30; v. 4, 1131**27 and 33. Cf. 
Fo 7 . iii. 9. ‘Commutative justice has to do with x>i'ivate right, 
distributive with public right.* T)e frihus juris natinae et gentium 
gradibus (Mollat, p. 14). Cf. loc, cif,, p. 17, where tlioy are <‘aUed 
‘right of property, and right of society.* But ArishAle recognizes 
a ‘ catallactic * or ‘ commutative ’ justice (ri dvrintnovOds) distinct 
(at least according to what seems the best inteipretatioii of Eth. v. 
5) both from ‘ corrective ' justice {rd Biop$cjtih6v) and ‘ distributive ’ 
justice (TO dtavfprjTiKvii); ‘corrective' and ‘distributive* justi<’e 
prc-supx)Osing tho existence of a state while ‘catallactic* 

justice is pre-supposed by the state. See Prof. Rihdiie ‘ On Aristotle’s 
subdivisions of Particular Justice,' dassical RetieWf viii. p. 185. 

** * While justice is only a particular virtue, when we make 
abstraction from God or from a government which irnitah^M that 
of God ; and while this virtue, thus limited, includes only what is 
called commutative and distributive justice, we may say that as 
soon as it is founded upon God or upon the imitation of God, it be- 
comes universal Justin and contains all the virtues.* MMitation sur Id 
fioticn commune de la Justice (Mollat, p. 75). Cf. infroj note 42. 

288 ON THE NOTIONS OP BIGHT AND JUSTICE 

Hence come the precepts that we should do injury to no 
one, that wo should give each his own, that we should 
live virtuously (or rather piously), the universal and 
commonly accepted precepts of Eight {jus] ; as I 
suggested, when a youth, in my little book De Methodo 
Juris The precept of bare Right or JRight in the natrow 
sense \jus stnctum] '‘* is that no one is to be injured^ lest if 
it be within the state, the person should have ground for 
an action at law, or if it be without the state, he should 
have the right to make w’ur From this there comes 
the justice which the philosophers call commutative and 
the right which Grotiua calls right proper [/acMWas]®^ 

The procopU are j^ivon by Ulplan. Sco Jufttiniani Insfitutimesf 

i. Tit;, i. 3 (Moylo’s od., vol. i. p. icx>). In bin De irtfnis Juriff 
mtuiati ei (jenfium grndibua (Mollat, p. 14), I^dbniz says that tho tlire^^ 
pnucpt.s flow from Hho supreme rule of Right,’ which in ‘ to direct 
all things to the greator general good.* 

McOwdUH MrtM (Hscendae (iocendaefiUf Jurisprudentiae §( 74-' 76 

(Dutonfl, iv. flr3\ This waa tlie work through which Leibniz 
obtained an introduction to the Elector of Mainz. See Introduction, 
Part i. p. 4. 

(IrutiuH diatinguishoH between Jua strictum and jm hxiuaf tht' 
latter being moral right. Vejnre belli cf pacia^ bk. i. ch. i, § 9, i and a. 
Of. hohgomnmj § 10. Ij<ubiii7 holda, aa against llobbos, that ‘there 
IS a right ami even n jus sh'ictum before tho foundation of the State. 
He who produces u new thing or puts himself in posatvssioit of an 
already existing thing, which no one hna already taken posses.Hioii 
of, and who enUivatos it and fits it for his use, cannot us a rule Im« 
deprived of it without injustice.' MedilaUm gur Ui notion cotntnuue de 
la pisftre (^Mollat, p. 78), 

‘ Against him who knowingly injures without necessity, there 
is a right of war.’ Juris et aequi ehfnenta tMollat, p. 33). The object 
of this first di'greo of Right is the proservatioii of peace, which does 
not necessarily se(;un> happiness hut is an essential condition of 
happiness. ‘ It is an evil to a man that there is another man who 
wishes him ill, and it is a good to a man that there is another man 
who wishes him well.* >lri»wes om principes de droit (Mollat, p. 54). 

** Dejure MU et pacts, bk. i. ch. t. §§ ssqq, FtuntUas is Jus propHe 
»w< shirie dtc/wai. It includes power ( jHdestas) whether over one’s 
«eH (which is liberty), or o%'er another (which is authority), also 
ownership .dominium), whether full (a.^ of property^, or less IVill 
(as of compact, pledge, credit, to which corresponds debt on the 
other side), Whewell translates /acuttoa ‘jural claim ’ in contrast 

ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 289 

The higher degree I call equUy^^ or if you prefer it, 
charity (that is, in the narrower sense), which I extend 
beyond the rigour of bare Right to those obligations also 
on account of which those to whom we are obliged have 
no ground of action to compel us to perforin them, such 
as gratitude, pity, and the things which are said by Orotius 
to have imperfect right [or fitness^ aptitudo] not right 
proper ( f€U!ultas\ And as the precept of the lowest degree 
was to do injury to no one, so that of the middle degree 
is to do good to everybody ; but that so far as beiits 
each person or so fai* as each deserves, since we cannot 
equally befriend all men Therefore to this place belong 
distributive justice®* and that precept of Right [^/^J 
which bids us give to each his own. And to this political 
laws ill the state are related, laws whicii have to do with 
the happiness of subjects and which usually bring it about 
that those who had only moral claim [aptUudo\ acquire 
a jural claim [facultasY^y that is to say, that they are 

with 'moral claim' (<^hfurfo). 'Commutative juatioe ’ ex- 

plettix) conoortiH /ocuao^, while 'distributive justice* attri- 

bittrix) concerns aptitudo. 

This degree of Right presupposes some sort, of 'society' or 
social arrangement among men. There may bo such a ' society* in 
which the first degroo of Right is alone recogni/.ed, but it cannot 
be a happy state, for there must be ' perpetual quarrels* in it, and 
thus the higher degree of Right comes to be recognized. Be tribue 
juris naturae et gentium gradihus (Mollut, pp, 17 sqq.). 

' Do not do to others what you do not wish to bo done to your- 
self, and do not deny to others what you wish to bo done to yourself. 
It is the rule of reason, and it is our Lord's rulo. Put yourself in 
the place of others and you will be at the true poiii^ of view for 
judging what is just or not.' Meditation sur la notion commune do la 
justice (Mollat, p. 70). 

" dee note 4. 

•• ^In which I include emtributive justice,* that is, not merely 
the giving to each his duo, but the promoting of tho common good 
and the averting of the common evil. Be tribus juris naturae et gentium 
gradibus (Mollat, p. 16). 

** The different degrees of Right are merely degrees^ not absolute 
divisions, and thus one passes into another. Thus to refhse to give 
a m an his due is to injure him, for ' the absence of good is an evil 

U 

290 ON THE NOTIONS OF BI6HT AND JUSTICE 

enabled to demand what it is fair that others should give. 
But while in the lowest degree of Bight no regard was 
paid to the differences among men (except to those which 
arise from the particular matter in hand\ and all men 
were regarded as equal, now in this higher degree merits 
are weighed, and hence privileges, rewards and punish- 
ments appear Xenophon has cleverly i^presented this 
difference in the degrees of Right by the case of the young 
boy Cyrus who was chosen to decide between two boys 
the stronger of whom had forcibly exchanged clothes with 
the other, because he had found that the other boy’s gown 
fitted ‘him better, while his own fitted the other boy 
better. Cyrus decided in favour of the robber ; but his 
tutor }K)inted out to him that the question here was not 
whom the gown fitted but whose it was, and that some 
day he would more rightly make use of this way of judg- 
ing when he himself had gowns to distribute. For equity 

uiid tho absonco of ovil in a good/ (Mollat, p. ) Thus * the gover- 
nors of societies and certain magistrates are obliged not only to 
provont evil but also to promote good/ (Mollat, p. 68. ) * The science 
of the just and that of the useful, that is, the science of public and 
that of })rivate good are mutually involved, and it is not easy for 
any one to be happy in the midst of the miserable/ Juris et aequi 
thanmia (Mollat, p. 33"'. 

Itegarding the lowest degree of right, Leibniz says : * This is 
that equality wliich is commonly called arithtneticai^ that all are so 
far regardtMl ns having the same merit, and, no account of persons 
being taken, each receives just as much as he gave up.’ he tribus 
Juns -naturae et gmtium gradilus (Mollat, p. 15). *Tl»e distribution of 
goi>ds and evils is often made in prop<^rtiun to people's virtues and 
merits, or vices and faults, and this is called geometrical equality, 
heoause in this very inequality an equality of ratios is observed, so 
that unequal things are given to unequal persons, the same pro- 
portion being kept between the things given as there is between 
the persons,* loo. cit., p. 16. The distinction and the names are due 
to Aristotle, although Leibniz's application of them is somewhat 
Cf. JBWu’cs, v. 3, i id sqq. and v. 4, ii3i*» 35 sqq. See 
also Plato, Laws, bk. vi. 757 a sqq., and Grotius, De Jure bHli et pads, 
bt. i. ch. z, $ 8 , 9. 

Cyrepaedia, bk« i. oh. 3, 17. The story is quoted by Orotiiis. 
bk. i. oh. r, I A 

ON THE NOTIONS hv BIGHT AND JUSTICE 29I 

itself leads us in business to act upon Bight in the narrow 
sense that is, the equality of men, unless 

when a weighty reason of greater good requires us to 
depart from it”. Moreover, what is called respect of 
persons has place, not in the exchanging of goods with 
others, but in the distributing of our own goods or those 
of the public. 

I have called the highest degree of Right by the name 
of uprightness or lather piety For what has been said 
so far may be understood in such a way os to be limited 
to the relations of a mortal life. And indeed bare Bight 
or Right in the narrow sense [jus strictum] has its souroe 
in the need of keeping the peace ; equity or charity 

* It in not allowable to take from the rich their goods in order 
to supply the poor with them. . . . Because the disc^rder which 
would arise from this would caum> more evil and inoonveuience in 
general than the apociiil inconvenience of the pmsont state of 
things. . . . Tlius the state should maintain individuals in their 
possessions. Yet it may make a tolerable breach In them for the 
common security, and oven for a great common good.* Meditation 
*»ar la notion rommum; tie la justice (MoUat, p. 81). 

^Thc third principle of Ilight is the will of a suf)erior. . . . But 
the superior is oith< r superior by nature, as (led is : and His will 
again is either natural, hence %ncty, or law, hence positive Divine 
Right; or the superior is suporior by agreement [pw'tum\ ns a man 
is ; hence civil Right. Piety therefore is the third degree of natural 
Right, and it gives perfection and effect to the others. For (iod, 
since He is omniseient and wise, confirms bare right and equity ; 
and, since He is omnipotent. He carries them out. Hence the 
advantage of the human race, and indeed the beauty und harmony 
of the ‘world, coincide with the Divine will.' Msthodua Nova^ &c. 

i 76 (Dutens, iv» 314). Elsewhoro Leibniz argues that 
there must bo a highetr degree of right than roertf equity, for 

* God is supremely just and supremely good,' and the justice of 
God diM^rS not in kind but in degree from the justice of man. 

* But it is not for his ease nor in order to keep the peace with us, 
that God shows us so much goodness ; for we could not make war 
upon Him. What, then, wiJl be the princijde of His justice and 
what will be its rule ? It will not bo that equity or that equality, 
which has place among men. . .. . We cannot regard God tut having 
any other motive than perfection.* M^itation tur la notion commune 
de la justice ^MoUat, p. 73). 

t 

IT a 

292 ON THE NOTIONS OT RfbHT AND JUSTICB 

strives after something more, to wit that while each to 
other does as much good as possible, each may increase 
his own happiness through that of others ; and, to put it 
in a word, Bight in the narrow sense [jus strictum] avoids 
misery, Right in the higher sense [jus superius] tends to 
happiness, but of such a kind as foils to our mortal lot. 
But that we ought to subordinate life itself and whatever 
makes life desirable to the great good of others so that it 
. behoves us to bear patiently the greatest pains for the sake 
of others this is beautifully inculcated by philosophers 
rather than thoroughly proved by them. For the moral 
dignity and glory and our sours feeling of joy on account 
of virtue, to which philosophers appeal under the name 
of rectitude, are certainly good things of thought or of the 
mind, and are indeed groat goods, but not such as to pre- 
vail with all men nor to overcome all the sharpness of 
evils, since all men are not equally moved by imagination ; 
especially those who have not become accustomed to the 
thought of honour or to the appreciation of the good 
things of the soul, either through a liberal education, or 
a noble way of living, or the discipline of life or of method. 
But in order that it may be concluded by a universal 
demonstration that evorytliing honourable is beneficial 
[omne honestum utile] and that everything base is hurtful 
\(m%nc turpe damnosumY^y we must assume the immor- 

^ ^Tlu^ principles of charity are abnegation of self, osteem of 
others.* Tabulae duae disciplinae juris, &c. (Mollat, p. 9). ‘Lovo feels 
not the wounds which it suffers, but those which it makes^' loc, cit 
p. 19 . * Among truo friends all things are common, ovon to 

misery.* Juris et acqui elemerUa (Mollat, 33 )- 

^ * If you had listentMi very nttontively to Cicero declaiming on 
behalf of rectitude ns against pleasure, you would have heard him 
magnificently perorate about the beauty of Tirtue, the deformity 
of base things, abi>ut a conscience at peace with itself in the depth 
of a rejoioing soul, about the good of an untarnished reputation, 
about an immortal name and the exultation of glory.' Juris vt 
aqgui riemenia (Mollat, p. 30). 

^ In his Inifittm instiiutimum Jurie perpetui (Mollat. p. 4) Leibniz, 
using a similar expression, adds ; * And moral qualities are turned 
into natural.' Cf. §§ 88-90. 

ON THE NOTIONS OF BIGHT AND JUSTICE 293 

tality of the soul and the Ibiler of the universe, Odd 
Thus it is that we think of all men as living in the most 
perfect City under a Monarch who on account 

of His wisdom cannot be deceived [fMi] and on account 
of His power cannot be avoided ** ; and a Monarch who is 
also so loveable that it is happiness to serve such a master. 
Therefore he who spends his soul for Him gains it, as 
Clirist teaches By His power and providence it comes 
to pass that every right passes into fact [omnc in 
factum transeat] that no one is injured except by him- 

If the 8oul wore not iminortal, Leibniz thiikkn it would be iiii- 
piHsible for even a wImo man to have a sufficient regard for liis 
own porfootion. (Mollat, p. 31.) To a aimilar oifoci ho writea 
against the view of Puffondorf, of w)»om ho had a very poor 
opinion. (‘He is not much of a lawyer and very little of a 
philosopher/ Duteus, iv. a6i.) Piiffcndorf limited natural right 
to exk^rnal laws and regarded all virtm^H or moral qualities aa 
bail'd on principles not of roaaon but of revelation, ^e MoniUt 
ffuimidm ad Samuelis Puffemlorfii pnttapia (Dutona^ iv. 275 aqq., and 
362'. 

Grotiua held that ‘ thei'o would bo acerUiiti natural obligatutn, 
e%en if it were granted (which it cannot IkO that there is no (Jod,’ 
Dt' jure l>elli et pa£v*^ §11. ‘ It i» tine that Ariatotlu 

recogfiimi thin uii'vorsal jiiatice, although ho did not refer it t<> 
Go*!, and 1 think it udmirabhi in him to have hud, novertheleaa, 
so high an idea of it. But this is due to th<« fact that for him 
a welhconatituted government or state takes the place of God as 
regards eurt^ily things, and such a governinont will do what it can 
to compel men tc* be virtuous.' Medif<UwH ttur la notion communed*' 
h juttice (Mollat, p. 76). 

*■* Finding, as I do. the principle of justice in the good, Aristotle 
takes as the rule of expediency {conveyance] the best, that is to say, 
what would bo ex|>edient for the best government (r/wod optima^ 
rctpuUicae cont'enirci), so*that, according to this at|thor, natural 
right is that which is most expedient for order.' loc.ciL (Mollat, 
!>. 80;. Cf. Monadologtff § 85. 

^ So that the honourable and the advantageoua are the same, 
and no sin is without punishment, no noble deed is in vain or 
goes without reward.’ (Mollat, p. 96.) Cf. Monadology, $ 90. 

^ St Luke, ix, 24 ; xvii. 33 ; St. John, xii. 25. 

** When power is combined with wisdom and goodness * it 
makes right become fact, so that what ought to be really exists, in 
so far as the nature of things allows. And this is what God does 

294 NOTIONS OT RIGHT AND JUSTICE 

self that nothing done rightly is without a reward and no 
sin without a punishment. For, as Christ dirinely taught, 
all our hairs are numbered, and not even a draught of 
water is given in vain to one who thirsts, and thus nothing 
is disregarded in the commonwealth of the universe^*. 
It is on this account that justice is called universal and 
comprehends all other virtues for things which other- 
wise do not seem to concern any one else, as for instance 
whether we abuse our own body or our own property, and 
which are beyond the range of human laws, are neverthcj- 
less forbidden by tlie law of nature [jus naturale] that 
is, by the eternal laws of the Divine Monarchy, since w’e 
owe ourselves and all that is ours to God For as it is 
of importance to a commonwealth so much more is it 
to the universe, that no one should make a bad use of 
that which is his own Accordingly from this is derived 

in t}H3 world.' Meditation mr la notion commune cle la justice (Mollai. 
p, 6a). Cf. Monadology^ $ 55. 

‘Tho immortal bouI, oxpoBod to no injuries except from itself, 
is alwiiys in the hand and keeping of God, and Christ has divinely 
bidden us not to fear those who can kill the body but cannot harm 
tlio soul.' iJej^isHfia (Mollat, p. 40^ 

‘ If a draught of cold water has its reward, what will those 
receive, who have done something great in human affairs for the 
glory of God and the common good, seeing that those who bring 
many to righteousness shall shine as tlio stars.’ De trtl»uf> 

juris mifuriie et gentium gradibns (Mollat, p. 90). Cf. G. jpr. 46a, 463. 

Cf. Aristotle, EthicSj v. i, iiso* 8. 

•® * Right [^1 cannot l)e uigust : that w-ould be a contradiction. 
But law may bo. For it is pow'or that ordains and upholds 
law ; and if this power is lacking in wisdom or goodwill, it may 
ordain and uphold very wicked laws. Bu^ happily for the universe, 
the laws of God are always just, and Ue is in a position to uphold 
them, as He undoubtedly does, although He does not always visibly 
and immediately do so, for which He has doubtless excellent 
reasons.' M^itation sttr la notion commune dc la justice ^Mollat, p. 61). 

‘We were not born merely for ourselves, but others claim for 
themselves a part of us, and God the wliole.' Jifofitfti od PuffendorJH 
prhKtpiOy § 5 (Dutens, iv. a8i\ ‘ Quieguid awmue Dei nanus * (Mollat, 
P-*3)- 

** * SaiM pMisa siqifsma lex est* (Mollat, p 3). 

^ ‘ For when we are vicious, we not only injure ourselves, but 

ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 295 

the force of that highest preoq;>t of Bight, which bids us 
live virtuously (that is, piously). And in this sense learned 
men have rightly put it down among things to be desired, 
that natural law and the law of nations [^5 naturae et 
gentium] should be formulated in accordance with tlu^ 
doctrines of Christianity, that is (according to the teach* 
ing of Christ) ra avaxrtpa the sublime things, the divine 
things of the wise. Thus I think I have very fitly 
explained the three precepts of Kigbt or three degrees of 
justice, and liave pointed out the sources of natural law. 

Besides the eternal rights of a rational nature which 
flow from the Divine Source, there is also observed a 
voluntary Itighiy derived from customs or made by a 
superior. And indeed in the commonwealth civil Bight 
receives its force from him who has the supreme power ; 

wo also diininis}), in ho far ah it d4*|x>ncl8 upon us, the perfection 
of tho great coinmonwenlth, of which Clod is the Monarch.' 
Meditation aur la notion commune de lajuetice (Mollat, p. 76), 

Possibly Leibniz is thinking of 1} duwOiy ao^ia (8t. JamoSf iii. 

I?)* l^ihniz Heems hiiUHcdf to have intended to supply the 
want to which hu here refers, for he sketidied tho outline of 
a book on tho subject, wliich is printed by Mollat (pp. BHqq.), undf*r 
the title Tabulae Auae diaciptinac juris 'naturae et ffentium eecundum 
disriplinam Christuinorum. In this ho refers to St. James ns ^calling 
charity popot ^aatAisur, tho royal law (ch. ii. 8), inasmuch as it 
comes from tho supremo King i^St. Paul, lifnnansy i. 39, Ikmtoj/ia rov 
Seov),’ cMollat, p. ii.) 

While admitting a right of this kind as distinct from natural 
right, Leibniz maintains that the two ought always to be in 
harmony. Ho tliua condemns tho view of Hobbes, that the bnbiM 
of right is power, which ho idontiflos with tho view of TliraMymiichus 
in Plato's RepuUic, bk. i. (stM? Mollat, p. 57 sqq.). Of. Le Portrait 
du Prince (Klopp, iv. 4CI) : *Ah the order of Stato^ is established 
on the authority of i hose who govern them and on tho dependence 
of th'^ir peoples, nature which destines men for pivil life endows 
them at biHh with different qualities, some for commaiiding, 
others for obeying, in order that tho jKiwer of tlie sovereign in 
a monarchy and the inequality between those who crimmaml and 
those who obey in a republic, bo no less founded on nature than 
on law, on virtue than on fortune. 80 princes ought to l>e above 
their subjects by their virtue and their natural qualities, as they 
are above them by the authority which the laws give them, in 

296 ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 

outaide of the commonwealth or among those who are 
sharers in supreme power (of whom there are sometimeB 
several even in the same commonwealth) there is the 
sphere of the voluntary law of nationSy accepted by the 
tacit consent of the peoples. • • • 

But Christians have also another common bond, namely 
the 2^ositive Divine law [jus] which is contained in the sacred 
books. To which are to be added the sacred canons 
received by the whole Church and afterwards in the West 
the Papal law [jurcs] to which kings and peoples submit 
themselves. And in general (and certainly not against 
reason) it seems for a long time to have been accepted, 
before the schism of last century, that there should be 
understood to be a certain general commonwealth of the 
Christian nations, the heads of which werc^ in sacred 
things the Pope \J\mtifcx Maximus] and in temporal 
things the Emperor of the Homans, who also seemed to 
retain so much of the law of the old Roman monarchy 
as was needed for the common good of Christendom, 
without prejudice to the Right of kings and the liberty 
t)f princea 

order t<i reign both by natural right and by civil right, like the 
first kings in the world, who having boon raised to the government 
of their peoples by their virtue and their intellectual gifts, com- 
manded aa much by nature as by law, by merit as by fortune/ 

NEW SYSTEM OF THE NATURE OF SUB- 
STANCES AND OF THE COMMUNICATION ' 
BETWEEN THEM, AS WELL AS OF THE 
UNION THERE IS BETWEEN SOUL AND 
BODY*. 1695. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

In this paper, which appeared anonymously in the Journal 
iJeti Sarants of June, 1695, we have Leihnia’s first public state- 
ment of his New SyMem (see Introduction, Part i. p. 12). In 
character it is much more tentative than his later writings, 
and it is only towards the end of the paper (§ 17) that he 
ventures to speak of his view os *raore than a hypothesis.' 
This is very chanicteristic of Leibniz : he likes to advance by 
suggestion and hypothesis. But he regards hypothesis an 
merely a stepping-stone : he will not rest there if it is possible 
to go farther. ‘In matters where certainty can be obtained, 
I will not use hypotheses,’ he says to Bernouilli (G. Math. iii. 
575). And nearly twenty years afLjr he published the New 
System, Leibniz writes of ‘this hypothesis, which J venture 'to 
call proved’ {Monadoloyy, § 59). Thus the peculiar interest of 
the New System is that it lets us see something of Lnbniz's 
philosophy in the making. For in this work he writes liistori* 
call}, indicating to us the course which his thought took. 

The New Systefn may be divided into two main parts, in the 
first of which (§§ i-ii inclusive) Leibniz shows us how he was 

‘ i. e. inter-relation or interaction. 

* The title in the First Draft is New system far explaining the nature 
qf substances and their communicatim with one another, aa well as (he union 
qf smd teith body. 

NEW STSTEM 

398 

led to re-introduce into philosophy the ^substantial forms* 
of the Scholastics, and in what sense these forms, souls, simple 
substances or real units are to he understood; while in the 
second (§§ 12-18) he applies his theory of substance to the 
question of the relation between soul and body, mind and 
matter, and finds that the problem can be satisfactorily solved 
only through the hypothesis of a pre-established harmon}' 
between all simple substances. Analyzing the title of the 
paper, we may say that the first part deals with the nature 
of substances and the second with their cmimunication, 

P>dmann (£. 124 sqq.) gives the New System as it was origin- 
ally published. Gerhardt (G. iv. 477 sqq.) gives it as it was 
afterwards revised and altered by Leibniz, and he also prints 
an interesting First Draft of it. I have translated from 
Gerhardt/s text, indicating its differences from Erdmann's ; 
and in the notes will be found some passages from the First 
Draft. The paragraphs are numbered in £. ; but not in G. 

1. Several years ago I conceived this system and had 
communications about it with learned men, especially 
with one of the greatest theologians and philosophers of 
our time\ who, having been informed of some of my 
opinions by a x>erson of the highest rank^ had found 
them very paradoxical'^. But having received explana- 
tions from me, he witlidrew what he had said in the 

” ^Mona. Arnauld.' Note by Leibniz, who tells us also tliat with 
regard to hia Nt'tv System he * followed the rule of Horace : nonum(/u« 
prematur in annum' (G. iv. 490). There is an interesting account 
of Arnnuld and his friends in Stephen’s Essays in EcclesiashaU 
Biographyy vol. i, Essay vi, 77 kf Port^BayaUsts. 

* Landgraf Ernest of Hesse'Rl&einfels ^1623-1693), who in 1652, 
shortly a^r the close of the Thirty Years' War, b^amo a Itoman 
Catholic and published a justification of the course he had taken. 
A copy of this work he sent to the Duke of Brunswick, and he 
thus CHUio into communication with Leibniz. They kept up 
a correspondence on tluxilogical and ecclesiastical subjeots until 
the doaUi of the Landgraf in 1693. 

^ Arnauld writes to the Landgraf; — find in these thoughts 
so many things which alarm me and at which almost idl men, 
if 1 am not mistaken, will bo so shocked, that 1 do not see 
what use there could be in a writing which apparently will be 
rejected by everybody ' (Q. ii. 15). Leibniz felt tnis very keenly ; 
but Arnauld made ample explaimtions and apologies in a letter to 
Leibniz himself. (G. iL 95.; 

NEW SYSTEM 

399 

most generous and exemplary way ; and having approved 
a number of my propositions^ he praetermitted his cen- 
sure as regards the otheie, to which he was still unable 
to agree. Since that time 1 have continued my medi- 
tations, as 1 had opportunity, in order that I might give 
to the public only well-tested opinions, and I have also 
endeavoured to meet the objections raised against my 
essays on Dynamics, which have some connexion with 
this^ And in short, as some people of consideration 
have desired to see my opinions^ more elucidated, I have 
ventured upon these meditations, although tliey are by no 
means popular nor such as to be relished by eveiy kind 
of mind. I have been led to this mainly in order that 
I may profit by the judgment of those who are en- 
lightened in these matters ; since it would be too trouble- 
some a task to seek out and call to my aid individually 
those who might bo disposed to give me suggestions, 
which I shall always be glad to receive, provided they 
are marked by a love of truth rather than by a passion for 
preconceived opinions'^. 

2 . Although I am one of those who have worked much 
at mathematics, I have none the less meditated upon 
philosophy from my youth up ; for it always seemed to 
me that there was a possibility [moycn] of establishing 
something solid in philosophy by clear demonstrations. 
I had penetrated far into the country of the Scholastics, 
when mathematics and modem authors brought me out 
again, while 1 was still quite young. The beauty of 
their mechanical explanations of nature charmed mr^ 

t 

• Leibniz's principal essay on Dynamics is thb Fipccimen l/j/tui- 
micunif published in the Acta Eruditorum for April, 1695. Matli. 

Vi. fl'34.) 

^ The First Draft has in addition the words: 'Which lh4>y 
think may be useful in harmonizing faith with reason as regards 
matters of importance.' 

* 'I desire objections to be made against me, which oblige me 
to go beyond what 1 have already said. Objections of this kind 
are instructive and I like them because 1 may profit by them 
and make others profit by them ; but it is not easy to make them.' 
LeUre a Uaaon (1716) (G. vi. 629). 

300 

NEW SYSTEM 

and I rightly contemned the method of those who make 
use only of forms and faculties, from which we learn 
nothing*. But afterwards, haring tried to go deeply 
into mechanical principles themselves, in order to find 
a reason for the laws of nattire which experience makes 
known, I perceived that the mere consideration of an 
vHended mass is not suificient and that use must also be 
made of the notion of forcCy which is very intelligible, 
though it belongs to the sphere of metaphysics'*. It 
appeared to me also that the view of those who trans- 
form or degrade the lower animals into mere machines, 
although it seems possible, is improbable and indeed is 
contrary to the order of things. 

3 . At first, when I had freed myself fi*om the yoke 
of Aristotle, 1 took to the void and the atoms, for that 
is the view which best satisfies the imagination. But 
having got over this, I perceived, after much medita- 
tion, that it is impossible to find the principles of a real 
unity in matter alone, or in that which is only passive, 
since it is nothing but a collection or aggregation of parts 
ad infinitum^K Now a multiplicity \muliiiiide\ can derive 
its reality only from genuine units [imii€s\ which come 
from elsewhere and are quite other than the mathematical 
points which are only extremities of the extended and 

'•* Soo Introduotioii, Part i. p. 3, nnd Part iv. p. 156. 

Tho meaning in that, although force ia nut anything that 
<uin ho pictured or roprosentod in imagination, it can novorthcdesa 
Ihj quite well understood. The notion of force is ‘metaphysical,* 
liecuiUM' force is nut merely a physicid thing that can l>e perceived 
in the same way as uther physicail things. For instance, we 
can understand, hut we cannot perceive, , the |K»tential energy 
of a mass. In the Fii’st Draft, lieihniz says : * By force or power 
I do not mean the i)ower [powreir] or mere faculty, 
whidi is nothing but a near pgs.sibility of acting and which, l>eing 
as it were dead, never produces an action without being stimulated 
from without, but I metin sometliing between power to act [poueofr] 
and action, something which includes an effort, an actual working 
[cicfe], an enteleohy, for fon)e passes of itself into action, in so far 
as nothing binders it. Wherefore 1 regard force as constitutive 
of substance, since it is the source [pnaciiM] of action, which is 
the charaoteristte of substance * (O. iv. 47s). 

Of. Introduction! Part li. p. 03. 

NEW SYSTEM 

301 

modifications of which it is certain that the coslin tcous 
\contnmum] cannot be composed Accordingly^ in order 
to find these real units [tmUes] I was constrained to have 
recourse to a real and animated point, so to speak, or to an 
atom of substance which must contain some kind of form 
or active principle, so as to make a complete being It 
was, then, necessary to recall and, as it were, to rehabili- 
tate the substantial fonns which are so much d6crie<i 
now-a-days, but in a way which renders them intelligible 
and separates the use to which tliey should be put from 
the abuse which they have suffered. 1 found, then, 
that the nature of the substantial forms consists in force, 
and that from this follows something analogous to feeling 
[sentiment] and desire [apjMt] ; and that thus they must 
be conceived after the manner of the notion we have of 
souls But as the soul ought not to bo used to explain 
in detail the structure of the animars boily, I held that 
similarly these forms must not be used to solve the par- 
ticular problems of nature, although they are necessary 
for establishing true general principles Aristotle calls 
them first entelechies* I call them (in n way that may 

That is, not indepondent boings, but proportioa or 
like tho two ends of a stick. 

£. reads: * quite other than tho pidntB of which it is cer- 
tain/ &c. See Prefatory Note. 

£. reads : * 1 was constrained to have recourse to a formal 
atom, since a material being cannot he at once material and 
perfectly indivisible or possessed of a genuine unity/ 

Substantial forms as distinct from accidental forms, the former 
being used to explain substances, the latter to explain their 
accidents. 

The transition fi^om point to point is here rather rapid, 'i'he 
analogy between desire and force is manifest, bht that between 
feeling and force is more obscure. Tlie essence of feeling, accord- 
ing to Leibniz, is not consciousness but tho represontation 01 * 
concentration of many in one ; and similarly the manifold actions 
of any substance are < enveloped’ or potentially contained in it«^ 
force or vital principle. Cf. Mona^totagy, ^<1* 

” In the First Draft, Leibniz says : * In my opinion everything 
in nature takes place mechanically, and to give an exact and 
complete explanation of any particular phenomenon (such, for 
instance, as weight or elastirity), nothing but figure and motion 
need be used ’ (G. iv. 479. ; 

NEW SYSTEM 

302 

perhaps be more easily^ understood) primary forces^\ 
which contain not only actuality \yacte\ or the comple- 
ment of possibility, but also an original activity, 

4. 1 saw that those forms and those souls, as well as 
our mind [€sprit\ ought to be indivisible, and in fact 
I remembered that this was the opinion of St. Thomas 
with regard to the souls of the lower animals'*. But 
this tiiith renewed the great difficulty about the origin 
and the duration of souls and forms. For, as every 
simple^^ substance which has a genuine unity can have 
a beginning and an end only by miracle, it follows that 
they can come into being only by creation and come to 
an end only by annihilation'^*. Thus I was obliged to 
recognize that (with the exception of the souls which 
(rod still intends spocially to create) the constitutive 
iorms of substances must have been created with the 
world and must always continue to exist So some of 
the Scholastics, like Albertus Magnus and John Bacon, 
had an inkling of part of the truth regarding the origin 
of these forms And all this ought not to appear ex- 

iM distinguish it from tho secondary, which is called moving 
forot^, and which is an accidental limittition or variation of primary 
force/ First Draft (G. iv. 473). 

"* Possibly Leibniz rf^fer8 to the imssago in which Aquinas 
siiys: ‘The substantial form, which requires diversity in the 
parts, for instance tho soul and especially tho soul of complete 
animals, doos not stand in exactly the same relation to the whole 
and to tho parts. And hence it is not divided per arvitlenSf that 
is to say, by a quantitative division.* Summa TheoL i. qu. 76, 
ai*t. 8. Elsewlion?, however, Aquinas says : ‘ Tho sensitive soul 
in tho lower animals is corruptible ; but in man, since it is the 
.same in substance os the rational soul, it is incorruptible/ De 
AninMf art. 14 ad primum. . 

Janet roads cdte * this new' view,* instead of ceUe v4rit^, 

E. omits * simple.* 

■ The First Draft has in addition tlie woi'ds ; * brought about 
expressly by tho supreme power of God * (O. iv. 474). 

” Cf. Prindplea 0/ Nature and qf Grace, $ 6 ; Monadologyf $$ 4r 5, 6, 
and 76. The First Draft has: * genuine unity is absolutely in- 
dissoluble * (G. iv. 474). 

** (If. jWonaddoffyf note 116. The statement of Leibniz is so 
vague that one can hardly fix the passage in Albertus Magnus 
of whi<di he is thinking. In his Summa de Oreaitaria (part ii. qu. z6, 
art. 3), Albertus Msgnos says : * We hold that the souls of the 

NEW SYSTEM 

303 

traordinary, for we are only attributing to forma the 
duration which the Gassendists ^ accord to their atoms. 

5, Nevertheless I held that we must not include 
among these, without distinction (or confound with 
other forms or souls minds [esprita] or rational souls, 
which are of a higher rank and have incomparably more 
perfection than those forms which are sunk in matter, 
which in my opinion are to be found everywhere and 

loAver animals and plants aro educed from the matter of the seed 
through generation. But if it be asked whether they are in the 
seed or not, we say that they are there in one way, and in another 
way they are not. . . . They are not there actually [oerti], hut they 
are there in the potency [potenh’a] of the efficient cause and the 
matter [epicientia ei maieriae]. And if it be asked : What is this 
efficient cause ? Is it the soul or not ? We say . . . that it is not 
tho soul. . . .* Cf. De Aninuilibua (xvi. ii) : *The prineiplo of life 
is m tho seed in the way in which tho act is in tho instruments 
of the act. . . . And in this way also the soul is in the seed like an 
act and not like the ontelechy of an organic body. . . . That which 
is in tho seed is something of tho soul [dliquid amniac] and not tho 
soul/ 80c also Anima, bk. L Tract. 2, cup. 13: ^ 7 'ho soul is 
indivisible, and nothing can hi* cut off from it/ John Bacon or 
Baoho, is hotter known as John Bacon thorp, from the place in 
Norfolk whore ho was bom towards the close of the thirteenth 
century. He was a Carmolit«^ monk and a schoolman, and in 1329 
he became Provincial of tho English Carmelites. He lived much 
in Oxford and Paris, where ho obtained a groat reputation for 
learning. Ho was called the liesoluh) Doctor. Ho died in 1346. 
Besides a book on tho rule of his order, his chief work is the 
Oommentaria seu guaesttunca in gucUwjr liltros SerUerUiarum, Leibniz 
probably refers to a passage in tliis book, In SecurHium, Dist xii. 
Qu. I, Art. 3, S 3. 

** Pierre Gassendi (1592-1655), a French priest and a disciple of 
Bacon, expounded the doctrines of Epicurus and endeavoured to 
adapt thorn to the conditions of modem thought. His attitude 
was both anti ‘Scholastic and 4^ti*Oartosiau. Hosevoroly criticizc»d 
Descartes's Miditations and thus began a long controversy with 
Doscartes regarding the origin of knowledge, Gassendi taking 
a purely experiential 'standpoint as against Dos(;artes’s belief in 
innate ideas. See Descartes, MeditationSf Cinquihnaa Objertima (by 
Gassendi). Gassendi himself does not attribute eternity to his 
atoms, which he regards os created by God. Tlie spirit of his 
thinking is well expressed in his own words: *The shadow of 
truth which 1 everywhere pursue suffices to fill me with joy. I say 
**thc shadow/' for, as to truth itself, God alone can know it/ 
Lettra a Ooliua. 

^ This danse within brackets is given by G., but not by E. 

” * Which in my opinion are to be found everywhere * is given 
by G^ but not by £. €f. MonaMogy, {§ 65 sqq. 

NEW SYSTEM 

304 

in comparison with which minds or rational souls are 
like little gods, made in the image of God and having 
within them some ray of the Divine enlightenment 
\lumidre8\ For this reason God governs minds [e^Us] 
as a prince governs his subjects, and indeed as a father 
looks after his children ; while, on the other hand, He 
deals with other substances as an engineer works with his 
machines. Thus minds [esprits] have special laws which 
put them above the revolutions of matter through the 
very order which God has put in them ; and it may be 
said that everything else is made only for them, these 
revolutions themselves being arranged for the felicity of 
the good and the punishment of the wicked 

6, However, to return to ordinary forms or material 
souls the duration which must be attributed to them 
(in place of that which used to be attributed to atoms) 
might lead to a doubt whether they do not go from body 
to body ; which would be metsmpsycliosis, something 
almost analogous to the transmission of motion and the 
transmission of species which certain philosophers have 
maintained. But this fancy is very far from the nature 
of things. There is no such passing” And here the 
transfonnations noted by MM. Swammerdam, Malpighi, 
and Leuwenhoek ”, who are among the most excellent 

* *Throug)i the very order which Ood has put in them * in given 
by (>., but not by E. 

® Cf. Monadoloffy, §$ 83, 84, 89. 

^ E. has dntfis mai^Ues wJiile G. has dniea brutes, Loibniz prob- 
ably wrote firutfs in order to avoiA the ambiguity of tho other 
expression, which seems to suggest Inat some souls are * material,' 
while Leibniz, of course, holds that all are immaterial.' By 
* material or brute souls' he means the ^uls which are *sunk 
in matter* (§ 5% i.o. unconsoious souls, in which matter as a 
pAefwmmon is bene f undatum, 

i. e. transference of quality from one body to another, as 
when the quality of the leaven is imparted to the whole lump 
or the red oolour of a drop of wine is diflfused throughout water. 
Of. Monadology, note xo. 

” The First Draft says: *This transmigration of souls is an 
abs&rdity. The principles of substance do not flutter outside of 
substances ' (G. iv. 474). 

^ The reference is to such cluinges as that from caterpillar to 

NEW SYSTEM 

305 

observers of our time, have come to my aid and have 
led me the more readily to admit that no animal nor any 
other organic substance comes into existence at the time 
at which wo think it does, and that its apparent genera- 
tion is only a development and a kind of growth [au(j- 
mentation], I have notice<1 also that the author of the 
Itecherche dc la TVW/e’**, M. Regis'*', M. llartsooker 

buttorfly. ‘God has pi^ormcd tilings, so that now organisms aro 
nothing but a mo<*haiii<*al ooiiseqiionro of a procodiiig orgnnii* 
cotisl iliitiou : ns when butUM'flies come from silkworius. which 
M. Swammordain lias shown to be inorely a process of tlovelop- 
meiit.' Thetnhi:ee, Preface (E. 476 a ; G. vi. 41) ; cf. Monadolmfy^ 
§ 74 John Swammerdam (1637 -1680^ of Arustordam, is famous 
ns an obsi'ivor of insect lift*. Murct'llo Malpighi (1638-1694'), 
hologna, the fatnous anatomist, is probably mentioned by J^>ibniz 
he^nll^o of his work on the process of incubation Anton van 
licuwonhoek (1633-1723 , of I)t*Lft, did much to support Harvey's 
theoiy of the circulation of the blood. Leibniz refers to him on 
a<*count of his investigations regarding hpermatoz«>a, in (‘onnexion 
with which ho may be r<*garded as one of the founders of the 
hCience of embryol<»gy. 

■''* Nicdbis Malebraiiche (1638-1715' published his Pi hi Pethvrch' 
lie la I'enfe in 1674. Descartes had already given a similar title 
to one of his writings. While differing gn^atly from MalobruncIn^’H 
general theory, Ij< ibniz endeavours to harmonize Malebranclio's 
view with his own on many )iarticular points. Sc*o Foucher de 
Caioil, Ltthes ef o] uscuIch tntdiPi de LeihmZy Introduction. lA.^jbniz 
corresjionded intermittently with Malebranchc up'ui philosophical 
and other qiieHtions b(dwi*en 1674 and 1711. In his lieihmhe 
la VtnU, bk. ii, ch. 7, § 3 (CFams, Jules Sirooirs od., vol. iii 
pp. 199 s<pj.';, Malebnincbo uses expressions which indicate a bl^lief 
in the theory of preformation. 

” Pierixi Sylvain Regis or Ijeroy 1 Petrus SiUanus Regius) 

( 1633-1707) was an expf>nent«»f the philosophy of I>eM«uirte«, wliich, 
in opposition to the idealism of Malchrutiche, he developed in an 
empirical direction. Descartes, how'over, disowned tiie view.s of 
Ri^^gis. See (Euvtes de Dtucaites (ed. Cousin), vol. x. p. 70, Cf. 
Veitch, Method rfr. of Dcficartes, note vi. on Inrtalr Jd^a. Cf. Kuno 
Fischer, hescartes and his .SV/oot, bk. iii. ch. 3. Rogis, whom* philo- 
sophical school at Paris was in 1675 clo.sed by Archbishop Ilarlay 
on acc ount of its Cartesian teaching, wrote a violent attack upon 
Ix^ibniz, charging him w'ith injustice towards DescartcH. 'i'his 
attack, anonymously published, will be found, along with Leibniz’s 
reply, in E. 140 ; G. iv. 333. 

^ Nicolas Hartsoeker (1656-1735) was a Dutch physi«-ist, whos4» 
earlier work had mainly to do with the making of microscopes 
and teloscoj>eM. Irfdbniz, writing to Dos Bosses in 1709, calls him 
rir clarissimua in Dic^ptricis CE. 461 a ; G. ii. 377;. In 1694 Ilartsoeker 
published an atomist philosophy of ualure, based on the sup- 

X 

NEW SYSTEM 

306 

and other able men have not boon very far from this 
opinion. 

7. But there still remained the greater question, what 
becomes of these souls or forms at the deatli of the 
animal or on the destruction of the individual, of the 
organic suhstanc*.*? Tliis is a most perplexing question, 
inasmuch as there seems little reason in thinking that 
souls remain uselessly in a chaos of confused matter 
Accordingly I came to tlio conclusion that there is only 
one view that can reasonahly ho taken, namely, that 
which atlirins the conservation not only of tho soul but 
also of tho animal itself and its organic mechanism ; 
although tho dostrnction of its grosser parts has reduced 
it to a Jiiinuteness which makes it as little perceptible 
to our senscis as it was before its birth Thus no one 
cun exactly note the real time of death, which for a time 
may he taken for a mere suspension of j>ercoptihlo 
activities and wliich at bottom is never anything else 
than this in the case of mere animals : witness tho rc- 
susciiafion of flies which have been drowned and then 
buried in powdered chalk, and several similar instances 
which are sutheient to inform us that there inight he 
other res?i8ci tat ions, even when tho destruction of the 
organic substance had gone much faither, if men wore 
in a position to rcjconstruct the [ animal | mechanism'^®. 
And apparently it was about stjuiothing like this that 
the great Democritus spoke (thorough atomist as he 
was), though IMiny laughs at what he said Accord- 

pOHitiitn of porfoctly hard ntoroM in a i^erfcct fluid. In 1704 ho 
hccaino Proft*s«or of MaihemaiicH and I'hysifs at DQMseldorf, and 
from 1706 to 171a lu' discuHsed his phil«»sophy of nature with 
Lt^hniz in a correMpondeiico to which lj«>ibniz frequently refors 
iu his letters to Pos Bosses. The correspondence is given by 
Perhardt, iii. 483. Cf. Third Explanatton 0/ tfu’i Nate System^ p. 334. 

That is, matter which is (^comparatively) inorganic. 

*• Cf. MimatitUMjy, § 5 73 77- 

^ Cf. Jiionadotogtf, S i4» note a3 and § ai ; Principles of Nature and 

Grace, §$ 6 and ja. 

*** Cf. lettre d de» Maiseanx (1711) 676 b ; O. vii. 535) : ‘Plato 

believed that material things aro in a perpetual flux, but that 

NEW SYSTEM 

307 

ingly it is natural that an animal^, having always Iw^en 
living and organic (as some people of great penetration 
are beginning to recognize), should likewise always re- 
main so. And thus, since an animal has no hist birth 
or entirely new begetting [generation]^ it follows that it 
will have no final extinction or coni}dete death, in tluj 
strict metai>hysical sense, and that conseciuently, in 
place of the transmigration of souls, there is nothing but 
a transfoi mation of one luid the same animal, according 
as its organs are diirorontly enfolded and moro or 

less developed 

8. Nevertheless rational souls follow innch liigher 
la\vs and aro exempt from every thing w'hich <*onld make 
them lose the rank \Ia gualitv \ o£ citizens of the society 
of spirits [c.spW/5j ; C«od having pnwided for this so caro- 
fully that all the changtjs of matter cannot mak() them 
lose the moral qualities of their personality. Ami it may 
be siiid tliat everything t<*nds to the j>erfection, not only 
of the univ<*rse in general, hut also of these created 

gfuuine substanoos (‘ontinuo to exist. By siibhtanceM *' 

lie u]>peai\s to liavo meant t-nly miuIh. But iM*rbai>s DeinoerilUH, 
tlmroiiij^li atoiniMt In ln'lieve^l in the ciinservation <>f ihe 

aniiiuil also. For he tiuij. t that there is reHUseitation [fivtuM^uv 
lis Pliny says of Imn : rt n.-ycindi j/romissa hettiw ritu rnmfas, qui ipnc 
non urijii' [the false opir on of n eoining to lift' a^ain, jmt forth 
by Deinoeritus, who liin self did not e<nne to life a^ain]. *\Ve 
hunlly know anything about tliis great muii, ('xeept wliat bas 
Ik^oii borr<Av<*d from him by Kpietirus, wdio was not ca[iubb‘ of 
always taking ins best things.’ Th«* wonls quoted from 
occur ill his Ilmtorta Aaturalis^ bk. vii. cap. 55. (Sillig'u od., vol. ii. 
p. 60.) 

*' Monculology^ §$ 73 and 73. In the First Draft (G. iv. 474) 
Leibniz writes; ‘As th^- minutenesH of organic bodies may bo 
infiniU* (which may be mh^ii from thc5 fact that tJieir Reeds, en<do>«ed 
in one another, contain enfolded n continual Nucccssion of organized 
and animate bodies), it is eahily seen that even tins which is 
the most penetrating and violent ngemt, will not destroy an 
kiiimal, since it will at most reduce* it to such a smallnesH that 
fire can no longer act upon it/ In the correspond cm ee with 
Arnnuld, to which I«eibniz refers in $ i of the A’cw Syat^fn^ Ariiauld 
had asked (as an objection to Leibniz's theory of (be indestruc- 
tibility of animals) what became of the ram which Abraham 
•aeriticed in place of Isaac. The foregoing passage contains in 
brief Leibniz's answ'or. 

X 2 

NEW SYSTEK 

308 

beings in particular, which are destined to such a degree 
of happiness tliat the universe is concerned in it, in 
virtue of the Divine goodness which is imparted to each, 
so far as supremo wisdom can allow. 

9. As to the ordinary body** of animals and other 
corporeal substances, which have hitherto been supposed 
to suifor total extinction and whose changes are de- 
pendent rather upon mechanical rules than upon moral 
laws, I observed with pleasure that the author of the 
book l)c iJlaela (wliich is attributed to Hippocrates^'^) 
had Homo inkling of the truth, when he expressly said 
that aniiiials are not born and do not die and that 
the things wliioh we suppose to come into being and 
])erish niorely appear and disappear. This w'as also the 
opinion of Pariiienides and of Melissus according to 
Aristotle*^; for these men of old had more worth than 
wo suppose. 

10. 1 am as ready as man can be to do justice to the 
niodi'rns, yet 1 think they have carried reform too far ; 
among other things, in confounding natural with arti- 

low cotps onlinatre. E. rends conts orrJinaite usual history *). 
Ilippooratort, ‘the fatlior of mcslieiiio/ is no loiif^or n*uardod 
as the iiiithor of tlio Jfe IMaeUi (ircpi ^tairrj^). Tiie passage to which 
la'ihiiiz reft'rs is most probably tlie following: dTnJAXirrai ptv vvv 
ovSiy dirdyrofy xprjpdrofVj ovdi yiyfrat o ti fir^ kqI irpucOwy . koX 

oiVrf , fl diruOaufiv aI6v t€, ft ft^ fjttrd irdurwu' rrov ydp dnoOayurai ; 

ovT« tO ^77 6y yty€<T6ar irdOty ydp (crai ; clAA’ auffrat vdyra fAttovrai 
xal is Tti pyKicrrov ical ( is rd] iKaxit^Toy^ rwv y€ hvyaru)i\ i. 4. *Now 
noun aiimiig all tilings is destroyed, and there does not come into 
being thjit w hieh was not in existence before. . . . And neither ia it 
posaible fnr an animal to die, except along with all things (for 
how shall it die?M nor can that which in not come into being 
for wdience shall it he?); hut all things grow and diminish to 
the greatest and to the least that is possible.’ See Bywater, 
Ilermdiii Kpfusrti Rdi/idav, Appendix ii. 

l)f Tat^'o, r 1 , 14:0! ply ydp avrS/y (I\o>s ay^tKov y 4 y€<rtv itai 

il^Oopdy ovfily ydp oCrt yiyvtffBai ^airtv oer« ip 0 tipta$ai rufy vVTtav, dKXd 
puvo9f 8otC€ty ifpTy nTny ot MiA«r<r^v rc iral TlapptvihijVy oC;, cl Jral 
TeAAa Xiyovfft xdXuSj dAA* ou tpvffucws y€ fiu vopiaai Xiyuy. Of. 
^!onadiii(tgy^ § 74, note 116. But the views of Parmenides and 
Melissus, who deny the reality of change or of becoming, are very 
far ivinuvod IVom the position of Leibniz. They deny change or 
becoming of rd If, not of each of a plurality of substances. 

NEW SYSTEM 

309 

ficial things, through not having great enough ideas of 
the majesty of nature. They think that the difference 
between nature’s machines and ours is only a diflforenoe 
of size. This has lately led a veiy able man*’^ (the 
author of the Entretiens $ur la pluniWe dcs ^londrs*^) to 
sixy that, when wo look closely at nature, we find it less 
wonderful {admirable] than we had thought, it being 
merely a kind of workshop. It seems to me that tliis 
is to give an idea of nature which is not quite just nor 
worthy of it*^, and that it is only our system wliich 
shows how real and immense after all is the distance 
between the least productions and mechanisms that are 
made by the Divine wisdom and the greatest aiiistic 
masterpieces of a limited mind the difference 

being not merely one of degree, but oven one of kind. 
Accordingly it is to bo observ'ed that th(^ inacliines of 
nature have a really infinite number of organs and are 
so well equipped and so proof against all aceidenfs that it 
is not possible to destroy them. A natural machine still 
remains a macliino in its smallest parts, and moreover 

Bernnrd lo Bovi<*r dtt ll« (>657- 1757^, 11 p<-phow of 

Piorn* Corneillo, was H<’rrftarv t)i<* Aradthnc fJr.'i Setmeefi nt Pai'Im 
from 1699 to 1741. Oic of iiis diitn*« as s<si n*t.«ry was t«) proparn 
t'vory year f'AofjcH or triliuios to tlu‘ iiic'inory of tlioso moinlsM’s of 
tlio academy w'Ih) had <iM*d during (lie year, and among the jihlesf 
of these pafs^rs is his Khye df Leihmz^ puidiHh<'d in tiio Ifhdftre ih 
V Acath'mie Hoyaln cl^s Srt cures de Paris ^ am icc. 1716. He wrote a great 
deal of iiidilferent verse; hut his main woik consisted in the 
popularizing of seiontific ideas. There is a saying of hi^ (which 
sounds like a [parody of Leihniz; that 'everything is ]KJSHihle, and 
everybody is right.' 

‘Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds.’ This hook (puh- 
lishcd 1686) was intendoJl to pipularizo tho nstronortiical thef>rieM 
of Copernicus. It has been se^'eral times translated into English. 

I'J has merely ‘w'hich i» not wortliy of it.’ 

A machino made hy man has a finite nuinbi^r of ‘organs’ or 
parts having each a definite function in rcdalion to the wliole. 
The tooth of a w'hcel is an ‘ organ * of the wiietil and of the whole 
niachiiio. But the material particles which make up this tooth 
are not ‘organs’ of tho wheel or the machine. Nature, on the 
other hand, is organic throughout ; no part of it is not an ‘organ ' 
of the whole, llius a noturai machine has ‘a really infinite 
liumber of organs.' Cf. Monaddogy^ § 64. 

NEW SYSTEM 

310 

it always remains the same machine it originally was, 
being merely transformed through different foldings 
it receives, and sometimes expanded, sometimes 
coninicted and, as it were, concentrated, when we think 
that it is lost. 

1 1 . Further, by moans of the soul or form, there is a 
r(‘jil unity which corresponds to what in us is called the 
Ego ; but this cannot be the case in regard to the machines 
of art or to mere material mass, however well organized 
it may bo, which can bo considered only as an army or 
a Hock, or as a }>ond full of fish or as a watch com- 
postid of springs and whcsds. Nevertheless if there were 
no real substantial ( m/i/Vcs] thero would be nothing 

substantial or real in tln^ collection. It was this that 
compollod M. C(jrdenioi to give up Descartes and to 
adoj)t Democritus’s doctrine of atoms in order to find 
a real unit \u'nitil\. But atoms of matter are eontraiy to 
reason, besides being still composed of paiis, since the 
invincible attachment of one part to another (even if 
it could rationally be conceived or supposcxl) would not 

‘ Wli«»n I say “I,’* I spoak of ono siihstjinco only; but iin 
army, a flock, a pond full of finh, oven though it wore frozen and 
liad become s«>lid with all the fish in it, will always bo a collection 
of several Hubstaiices.' First Draft (G. iv. 473). Cf. Introduction, 
Part, iii, pp. 96 -q8. 

tioruud do Cordemoi (horn oiirly in the 8ov(*nteontli century, 
died 1684 ' a French Cartesian, annved indepoiidt‘ntly at an 
Occnsioiialist position, about the same tirno as Geulincx developed 
liH more famous system. See Kuiio Fischer, and his ScJioolj 

hk. iii. eh. a. Ilis most iin{>ortant philosophical Work is disceme- 
nunt lin corps et dr Vtimr (1666', and it was in this hook that he so far 
gave up Descartes ns to adopt a theorjt of atoms. Cf. Leibniz's 
Icttrr a la fVmrfls.sc Sophtr (1705) ;G. vii. 561") : ‘ M. Cordemoi, seeing 
tliat compound things must t>e the result of simple things, was 
forc«H.l, Cartesian though he was, to have recourse to atomSf 
abandoning his master. . . Also L*itre d Arnauld (1686) (G. ii. 78') : 
‘ M. Cordemoi ... in order to account for the substantial unity in 
bodies, folt obliged to admit atoms or indivisible extended bodies 
in order to find something fixed to constitute a simple being. . . . 
4 Ie appears to have n'cognized something of the truth, but he had 
not yet seen in what the real notion of a substance consists.' 
Cordemoi, however, was more devoted to history than to philo- 
sophy. 

NEW SYSTEM 

make one part any the loss difforent from another*^*. 
Only atoms of st^hstancPy that is tt) saj^ real units 
ahsohitely devoid of parts, are the sources of actions, and 
the absolute fimt principles of the composition of things 
and, as it were, the ultimate elements in the analysis of 
substantial things®'. They might be called metuphifslcal 
points : they liave somcthimj of the fiutitrv. of life and 
they have a kind of })erceplion, and malhematUal points 
are their points of riew^'^ for expressing the univei*se. 
Bui wlu*n a corporeal substance is contracted, all its 
organs together' make but one physical /mint for us®*. 
Thus jdiysical ]K)ints are only apparently indivisible. 
Mathematical points are indivisible [emctsl but they are 
only modalities. None but metaphysical or substantial 
points (consisting of forms or souls) are indivisible (c.ratV] 
and real ; and without them nothing would be real, since 
without genuine units there would bo no njulti- 

plicity 

12 . Having settled these things, I thought I had 
gained my haven, but when I set myself to meditate 
upon the union of soul and body 1 was as it were driven 
baick into the doep sea. For 1 found no way of exjdaining 
liow the ))ody transmits anything to the soul or vice versa, 
n(»r how one subshincc can communicate with anotJier 
created substance. 8o far as can be gathered from bis 
writings, M. Descartes gave this up ; but liis disciples, 

Sc*e Introduction, Part ii. |». 30. 

E. roads ‘ siibstancos/ In the First Draft, I/oitmiz says; 
constitut<*s ooi-jioroal suliHtanei) mu-it bo soniotiiing 
corrosponds to wbitt is called tyo in us, wliicli is indivisible and 
nevortholesB active [ar^'ssaatj, for being indivisLlvIe and vvifbout 
parts, it will no )onf2;ci' bo n lioinK by ll^grogation, but being 
[ayissantj it will bo soinetbing Kubstantial ’ ((i. iv. 473% 

^ E. roads * point of view*/ Mathc^matn-al points arc rnondy 
positions in space, and when wo speak of f)ositions in sjaioe, wo 
are describing in a confused way the essential difforonc^-s botwoon 
Monads. Of. (( 60-63. 

^ Cf. Monadoiuyy, §§68 and 69. 

Cf. Introduction, Part ii. pp. 28 sqq. 

‘The human mind is not capable of distinctly conceiving the 
difference of essence between soul and body and, at the satue time, 

NEW SYSTEM 

312 

seeing that the common opinion is inconceivable, held 
that we are aware of the qualities of bodies, because God 
makes thoughts arise in the soul on occasion of the 
motions of matter ; and, on the other hand, when our 
soul wishes to move the body, they hold that it is God 
who moves the body for it. And as communication of 
motions also appeared to them inconceivable, they were 
of opinion that God gives motion to a body on occasion 
of tho motion of another body. This is what is culled 
the system of oceasional causeSy which has been brought 
into wide repute by the excellent reflexions of tho author 
of tho Jlechcrrhe de la Verite^'^. 

13. It must be admitted that they have gone far into 
tho difliculty in lolling us what cannot bike place: but 
they do not appear to have removed it by their oxplana- 
tioii of what actually does happon. It is quite true that 
one created substance has, in tho strict metaphysical 
sense, no real influence upon another, and that all things 
and all their n^ality are continually produced by the 
power \rcrtu] of God. But to solve problems it is not 
enough to make use of a general cause and to introduce 
what is called Dnts cx machina. For to do this, without 
ofl’ering any other explanation which can be derived from 
(ho order of secondary causes, is just to have recourse to 
miracle. In philosophy wo must endeavour to give a 
reason for tlnngs by showing how they aro carried out 
by the Divine wisdom in confonnity with tho notion of 
the matter we are dealing with '''’. 

14. Accordingly, being obliged to admit that it is im- 

their union, for it would then l»e necossaVy to ooncoivo both aa 
a hiukIo being and at tho same time us two diflon'nt things, which 
is n contrndiction.’ (Kunrs ,od. Cousin), vol. ix p. 13a. 

Arnold (^1635-1669) was tho n*al founder of Occa» 

siorialisrn. Tho first part of his Ethica appeared in 1665, while 
Malohraneho's gu at work was published in 1674. See Introduction, 
Part ii. pp. 4a aepp Cf. Kuno Piachor, Descartes ami his School, bk. iii. 
eh^3. 

^ We must not make a vague roforonco to the Divine wisdom, 
but must show how it is present in particular departments of 
experience. 

NEW SYSTEM 

313 

posftible the soul or any other real substance should receive 
an}d:hing from outside^ unless through the Divine omni- 
potence, I was insensibly led to an opinion which 
surprised me, but which seems inevitable and which, in 
fact, has very great advantages and very considerable 
beauties. It is this, that God at first so created the soul, 
or any other real unity, that everything must arise®'* in 
it from its own inner nature [/owr/.sl with a peifect 
spontaneiiy as regards itself and yet with a perfect con- 
formity to things outside of it. And thus our inner 
feelings [ sc «/.<?] (that is to say, those which an) in 
the soul itself and not in the brain or in the liner j)arts 
of the body), being only connocbul phenomena of external 
things or rather genuine appearances and, as it were, 
well-ordered dreams*"''*, fln^so internal perceptions in the 
soul itself must como to it from its original constitution, 
that is to say from the rc'presontativo nature (capable of 
expressing beings outside of it in relation to its organs®') 
which was given to it at creation and w'hich constitutes 
its individual chaiacter. And accordingly, sineJe each of 
these substances accurately represents tho whole universe 
in its own way and from a certain point of view, and 
tho perceptions or expressions of external things come 
into the soul at their appropriate time, in virtue of its 
own laws, as in a world hy itself and as if there existed 
nothing hut Gocl and tlie soul (to ado])t tho jdiraso of 
a certain i)erson of high intellectual jjowor, renowned 
for his piety®®), there will bo a perfect agreement between 
all these substances, which will have tho same result as 
would be observed "if they had communiciition willi one 

E. ha.H ^arisefl.* As to tho ‘ spontaneity ' of tho hoiiI nrnl its 
‘creation,^ see iJovndolvffy, § 47, note 75. 

‘And so genuine that th^ycan taj surcoMsfiilly foroKoon.' First 
Draft (G. iv. 477). See Introduction, Part iii. p 98 H(r|. 

That is, according to tlicj nature and disposition of its organs. 

E. has ‘the world.* 

•* Kirchmann suggesta that this may perhaps rcf«jr to Fouchcr. 
But Leibniz uses the phrase, without any spcrml refereruie or 
acknowledgment, in a letter to Ftmehor, written in 1686. (G. L 383.) 

NEW SYSTEM 

3H 

another by a transmission of species or of qualities, such 
as the mass of ordinary philosophers suppose®*. Further, 
as the organ izecl mass, in which is the point of view of 
the soul, is more nearly expressed by the soul®' and, 
conversely, is ready of itself to act, according to the laws 
of the coipriroal mechanism, at the moment the soul 
<lesires it, without either of them interfering with the 
laws of the other - the animal spirits [/r5 “ and 

the blood having i‘xactly at that moment the right 
motions to corres[>ond to the passions and j»erceptions of 
tlie soul — this mutual relationship, prearranged in each 
substance in the universe, jtroduces what we call their 
communkation and alone constitutes the union of soul and 
hodif. And in this way we cun understand how the soul 
lias its seat in the body through an immediate j)rosencG, 
which is as near as possible, since the soul is in the 
body as the unit \nnite] is in the multiplicity which is 
the resultant of units [unites^ 

M%naiWo(ty, § 7, note 10. 

0111 itM * liy tho soul ’ (pin eUr), 

** * Animal spiritM ’ was the iiaino given hy I>osc*arto‘» to eci*t;iin 
* very tino pniliclos of the blood,' by means of which he explained 
inusculur iiioveinent. The iinme was derivt*d from the Stf»ic 
Trv€u>ia, through the early medieal philosophers, sueh asO.'^len. who 
speaks of * natural spirits' and * vital B]>irits' ; hut Dt^cartes's use 
of the term is original. ‘What I here call “spirits^' are only 
bodies, and they have no other property except that tliey are very 
Hinull bodies which move very quickly, like the particles of ftaine 
wliich come from a lighted torch ; so that they do not stay in any 
)>laco, and as soon ns some of tlicni enter the rnvitios of tho brain, 
others go out again through the j)ore8 in its suhstaiice, which pores 
lead them to the nerves and thcncti to tlu' muscles, by means of 
which they mo\e the ImhIv in all the diffen'iit ways it can be 
moved.' Les lUs'swns fio V Amp, p.’irt i. art. lo. Sef* also articles ii-is, 
and AfethiKif part v, where he says that tho ‘animal spirits' are Mike 
A very subtle wind, or rntlier a very pure and vivid flame.* The 
name survives in eetnmon languagts and the hy}>othesis was only 
set aside by the results of microscopic study in anatomy. Cf. Kuno 
Fischer, IksKartvs and hts Schoot, bk. ii, ch. 9, § a. 

Descartes also held that the jm>u 1 must be present to the whole 
of^anism. Dut he maintained that * nevertheless there is in the 
l>ody a part in which tho soul exercises its functions more specially 
than in any other part/ this special * seat of tho soul ' being tho 
pineal gland in the brain. (Les PU8$ionSf part i. articles 30-33.) 

NEW SYSTEM 

315 

15 . This hypothesis is very possible. For why might 
not GckI in the beginning give to substance an inner 
nature or force which could regularly i)roduco in it 
— as in an automaton that is spiritual or endowed with 
a living principle ***, hut free in the case of a substance 
which partakes of reason — eveiything that will happen 
to it, that is to say, all the ap|>earancos or expressions it 
will liavo, and that without the help of any created 
thing? This is the more likely since the nature of sub- 
stance necessarily recpiires and essentially involves a 
progress or change, without which it would hawe no 
force to aict'*'. And m the naitairo of the soul is to 
represent the universe in a ver>" exa^ct waiy (though with 
greater or h‘ss distinctneas), the succession of ropresentai- 
tious which the soul produces for itself will correspond 
naturally to the succession of eliamges in the univiu*so itself ; 
while, on (he otluiv hand, the body has also ho<*n adapted 
to the soul to fit the circumstances in which the soul is 
conceived as acting outwardly. This adaiptation of the 
b(Kly to tliG soul is the int»re imsomiblo inaismuch as 
bodies are made only for spirits [c.s7>nY5j which ailon(« 
are capable of cuitering into fellowship with (lod and 
celebrating His glory. Thus ais soon as wo see tlmt this 
hypoihvsw of agrecmcnls [accord^Y'^ is possible, wo set* 

lifibiiiz scoks to sliow Uiat, on hts tho roniif'Xtoii 

biM wcM-n soul niid tiody is inurli closor. Tin* soul is * inirnfdiiitoly ' 
prostuit tf» tin* body and thus has no sjM*ciaI srut but is in evi^ry 
part (indopondoiitl> of tiui part's position; as tbo unit is in ovory 
part of tlu' wliolo. 

•• Tlio Fr«*rn‘h is: un automate sfim hid ou ft/nnel. Vormd ronvoys 
tho idea of tlie fornii or individual unity (»f thp thLn^^ jik in tin* 
phrase ' suhstantial form.’ 

Every subHiunco hnn eporUanfity^ inasmur^h ns it pro<lmM*s from 
within itsolf the serioH of its statos or pbimomena : but rationai 
souls alone have liberty^ for liberty is action under the ^‘ddaiice of 
right reason. 

No substance can act upon anything outside of it. TI»us its 
action must appear in some internal change. 

'* That is to say, bodies are entirely Hubordinotc to spirits, n» the 
realm of efficient causes is to that of final cauHcs. See Moruuivlogy^ 
concluding 

In the First Draft, Leibniz says ; ‘ I call this the system of 

NEW SYSTEM 

316 

also that it is the most reasonable hypothesis and that 
it gives a Wonderful idea of the harmony of the universe 
and the perfection of the works of God. 

16. There is also this great advantage in our hypo- 
thesis, that instead of saying that wo are free only 
apparently and enough for practical purposes, as several 
clever pooi)le have lield, wo must rather siiy that we are 
only a])parently constrained, and that, to use strict meta- 
physical language, we })ossoss a perfect independence as 
regards the inlluonco of all other created things This 
also throws a wonderful light upon the immortal iiy of 
our soul and the ever unbroken preservation of our 
individuality, which is [ujrfectly well-ordered ])y its own 
nature and independent of all external contingencies, 
whatever appearance there may bo to the contrary. 
Never has any sysit^m more completely sliown our high 
calling. Every .sj)irit |c.9pr/7) being like a world apart, 
sufTiciont to itself, independent of every other creato<l 
thing, involving the infinite, expressing the univei*se, is 
as lasting, as continuons in its existence and as absolute 
as the veiy univcjrse of creahnl things. Thus wo should 
hold tliat each spirit should always play its part \faire 
fi(jurv \ in the universe in the way that is most litted to 
contrihuto to tlio perfection of tho society of all spirits, 
vvhi<*h constitutes their moral union in the City of God. 
Then* is also hero a new and surprisingly clear proof of 
the •‘xistonce of God. For this perfect agreement of so 
many substances which have no communication with 
one another can come only from their common cause 

17. In addition to all these advantages which this 

ooiTos|K)Tidonco ’ (O. iv. 476\ 1I« is still fi^eling for the name 

‘ l*n>-eHtabliNhrd Ilnniioiiy,* wViich ho usoa for the first time in 
tho First Explanation of the jNVjc System {\ 6 ^\ 

Hoe IntrcKiuctioii, Pint iii. pp. 141 sqq. 

In tho Fii-st Draft, Lei bn ix says : ‘It is true that this is only 
by% participation, though limited, in the Divine perfections; for 
tho ngi'iHunont among tho eflects arises from their expressing the 
common cause* (G. iv. 475). Cf. Principles of Eature and qf Grace ^ 
$11, note 49. 

NEW SYSTEM 

317 

hypothesis has in its favour, it may be said that it is 
something more than a hypothesis, since it hardly 
appears possible to explain things in any other intelli- 
gible way, and since several great difficulties, which 
have hitherto [lerplexod men's minds [Ics cs^)rifji\ seem 
to disappear of themselves when we rightly comprehend 
this hypotliesis. The expressions of ordinary language 
may also be quite well adapted to it. For we may say 
that the substance whose condition ] explains 

a change in an intelligible way (so that we may hold 
that it is this substance to which the others have on this 
j)oint boon adapted from the beginning, according to the 
order of the decrees of (lod) is the substance which, in 
respect of this change, \ve should consequently conceive 
as acting upon tlio others Thus the action of one 
substance uj)on another is not an emission nor a trans- 
plantation of an entity as is commonly 8upj)osod, and it 
can ho rationally understood only in the way I have 
just mentioned. It is true that wo quite well conceive 
in matter both the emission and the receiving of parts 
through which we are entitled to explain mechanically 
all the phenomena of pliysics ; but as material mass is 
not a substance it is evident that action as regards 
substance itself can only be what I have just said tluit 
it is. 

18. These considerations, however metajdiysical th^y 
may appear, arc? also of remarkable service in physics 
for establishing the laws of motion, as our Dynamics will 
be able to show. For it may bo said that in the impact 
of bodies each suffers only through its* own elasticity, 
caused by’’ the motion which is already in it ^ And 

See Introduction, Part iii, pp. 105 aqq. 

S»ie Introduction. Part iii. p. no 

E. has cause dUj (or the) cause of tlio/ O. has rausr du^ 

* caused V>y the/ The Fir^t Draft has ; ‘ wliich couich from a motion 
already existing in it' (G. iv. 476^ 

Leibniz opposes tho idea that there is a fixed quantity of 
motion dispersed throughout the universe and pasBing indifferently 

NEW SYSTEM 

318 

as to absoliito motion, nothing can determine it mathe- 
matically, since all ends [/?<? termine^ in relations, with 
the result that there is always a perfect equivalence of 
hypotheses as in astronomy ; so that, whatever number 
of bodies wo take, we may arbitrarily assign rest or such 
and such a degree of velocity to whichever wo like, with- 
out it lioing possible for us to bo refuted by tlie pheno- 
inon;i of motion, whether it be in a straight line, in 
a cinde, or composito. Yet it is reasonable to attribute 
to bodies real motions, according to the supposition 
which explains the phenomena in the most intelligible 
way, for this is in harmony with tho notion of activity 
\a<ihm\ which wo have here maintained 

tnnn fum to anotlK-r. Kft<*h hotly, ho woiilit s)iy, hns a foroe, 

which in tlio oauso of its aotiuil motions, xind whon two ImmUos 
fikllido, tlo-io is not a trniisfort n<*o of motion from oin* tt» tlu* other, 
hut a certain release of i Im ywiit-iip foi«*<* in each, ami this rtdi*xise 
shows itself in tlio olastieity of th«*ir r< hound. See Introduction, 
rurt iii. i»p. rtg sti<i. 

* Ahsolnte motion ’ would he motion tlint is not in any degree 
rest. Jhit motion must always he deterinintsl throu;jh rehitioii. 
<)ii(» body has ttioiioii only in n'ferenec* to niiothor, and, aeeoi dingly, 
if we wish to <loterjiii n<' whicdi «»! th»' two it'ttUy (i.«‘, absolutely! 
moves, We inuKt refer them hoth to some third hocly ami so toi 
tnjinitum, 'i’he ‘equivalence of hy|)oth<‘.Si‘S in astronomy* x>rohahly 
refers to tho taet that tho hypothesis of Copernieus ^*473-1543), 
a<'Coidiiig t(» which all tin? planets mo\e round tho sun, and tho 
hypothesis 4*f 'I’yoho Brahe 1546-1601 ), aceording to whitdi the sun 
moves round the earth and the otlnT planets move round the sun, 
equally w<dl 4'X[dained the phenomena as observed at that time, 
('f. Ci, IV. :^69, and Descartes, iYmci/au, Part iii. §§ 15-16. 

Appendix C, j>. ao-p 

KXPLANATION OF THE NEW SYSTEM OF THE 
(COMMUNICATION BETWEEN SUBSTANCES, 
BY WAY OF REPLY TO WHAT IS SAID 
ABOUT IT IN THE JOURNAL OF SEPTEM- 
BER 12 , 1695 ^ 1696. 

rREFATOHY NOTE. 

Tn the Jonrua! fhs Sarattfs for Se|)<(Mn)>er. 1695, there 
appeared a letter to Fieihnix from Enueher in wbioAi varioim 
ohjr*e.tioii8 to the \nr Sffsfini were stiitetl. Sinum Euin'her 
(1644-1696) waH a CaiK^n of J)ijou, wlio j>rofeHse{l philoHophien) 
Hcepticiriiii and endeavoured lo reston* the teueliin^ of the. later 
Academies, somewhat as (iasscMidi souj^lil to interjjret ane.w 
the doctrines td’ Kjiieurus. IhAwc^eu 1676 and 1695 ladbai/. 
corresponded with Koueher, discnssinp^ in the earlier letters 
tiuestions re^iirdin^y the Iheorjj^ of knowledge and in the la1(*r 
letters questions of Ehysics. Foucher’s eomparativcdy early 
deatli was to some, extent due to overwork. In 1697 lioibniz 
writes to Nicaise ((1. ii. 566) : * I am grieveil at the death of 
M. Foucher. His curiosity was limited, and was direct(*d only 
to certain somewhat dry matters, and oven these he did not 
treat with the acciiiacy tliey required. Perhap.s his aim was 
merely to bo the resuscitator of the Aeadtunicn, as M. (iassendi 
has resuscitated the Sect of Epicurus. But he ought not to 
hai3 contined himself to generalities. Plato, Ciemo, Sextus 
Empiricus and others might have enabled him (o make a real 
advance. And under pretext of doubting, In; might have 
established good and useful truths. I look the liberty of giving 

* The reference is of course to the letter of Foucher in tho Journal 
dfs Savants, 

FIRST EXPLANATION 

320 

bim my opinion as to this ; but he had perhaps other views of 
which I did not know enough. Yet he had much cleverness 
and subtlety and he was a most virtuous many and hence 
I lament him.* (Cf. 0 . i. 365.) Leibniz replied to the objections 
of Foncher in an Explanation of the New System, which appeared 
in the Joanial des Sai'untu for April, 1696. A further Explana- 
tion (called by Erdmann the Troisi^me Eclat rcissement) was 
]>uljlished in the Journal for November, 1696. I have translated 
these two Explanations, omitting that which Dutens and 
Erdmann call Second EclaircUsement (E. 133, J. S. Feb. 1696, 
cf. (f. iv. 498), as the Troisihne itclaircissement contains practi- 
cally the whole of it. 

In Fouchcr’s letter of objections there appears the simile of 
the clocks, which Leibniz passes over in hia immediate reply 
but takes up and develops in the Second and Third Explana- 
tions. Foiieher writes : * It will be granted you that God, 
the great Artificer of the universe, can so perfectly adjust all 
the organic parts of a nuin’.s body, that they may be capable 
of producing all the motions which the soul combined with 
this body will desire to produce in the course of his life, with- 
out the soul having the power to change these motions or to 
modify them in any way, and that on the other hand God can 
make a construction in the soul (be it a mechanism of a new 
kind or not), by means of which all the thoughts and modifi- 
cations which correspond to these motions might successively 
arise at the same moment in which the body performs its 
corresponding functions, and it will also be granted you that 
this is no more im]K)sfiible than to make two clocks keep time 
[s\i<ron/rr| so well and go so uniformly that at the moment 
clock A strikes twelve, clock 11 will strike twelve also, so that 
we imagine the two clocks to be kept going by the same 
weight or the same spring* (E. 129b ; G. iv. 488). The 
simile was originally applied in this w/iy by Geulincx. See 
Introduction, Part ii. p. 43 note ; cf. Third Explanation of the 
New System, p. 33 1 note. 

In the translation of the Explanations T follow G.*8 revised 
text (G. iv. 493, 5CX) sqq,). E. gives them as they were origin- 
ally published (E. 131, 134 

I recollect, Sir, that in compliance with what I under- 
stood to be your desire, I conun unicatod to you my 
hypothesis in philosophy several years ago, although at 

OF THE NEW SYSTEM 

321 

the same time I ijadic4ited to you that I had not yet 
resolved to make it known.- I asked your opinion of it 
in exchange ; but I do not recollect having received 
objections from you : otherwise, teachable | as 

I am, I should not have caused to offer the same 
objections twice over. Nevertheless they still come in 
time, although they come after T liave i)ublishod. For 
I am not of those with whom tlie committing of them- 
selves to an opinion takes tho place of reason, as you will 
find when you are able to say that you have brought 
forward * any }>recise and urgent reason against my 
opinions ; whicli apparently has not lH‘en your purposo \ 
Your intention was to spoiik jis an able Academic ^ and 
thus to give an opportunity for a thorough investigation 
of things. 

1^1 intended to e\2>Iain here, not the principles of 
extension \ViHcndnc\, hut tho principles of that wJiicli 
is actually extended \ Vvlendu cffedif] or of bodily muvss ; 
and these principkis, in my opinion, are real unities, that 
is to say, substances possessing a genuine unity®. 

2. Tho unity of a clock, which you mention, is in my 
view quite other than that of an animal ; for an animal 
may he a subshince possessing a genuine unity, like what 
is called ego [mjo/ j in us ; while a clock is nothing hut an 
aggregate [asscmbla(fc\ 

3, I do not find the prineiph^ of the anirnars conscious- 
ness [Ic principe sensitif] in the arrangement [dis2iosiiion\ 
of its organs ; and I agree that this arrangement concerns 
only the bodily mass 

• 

■ E. has ‘ wlion you are able to bring forward.* ^ 

* E. adds * on this occasion.* 

* In referonco to Fouchcr's x^hiloiiopbical x>oaition. Sow IVefutory 
Note 

••In 0.*8 text the paragraphs are numbered. In E.'h text they 
are not numbered, and tho paragrapba uro di/fc'rcnily divided. 

• Foucher bad maintained that *tbe e^j^ontial principlea of ex- 
tension cannot really exist.* i. e. that extension has no ultimate 
real elomenta (E. 129 a; G. iv. 487.) Cf. Appendix II, p. 329. 

• Foucher bad aaid : ‘Whatever an*uDgemont [fiisp<mtum] tho 
organa of an animal might have, that ia not enough to make it 

Y 

FIRST EXPLANATION 

322 

4. 1 notice these things in order to prevent misunder- 
standings, and to show that what you say on this point 
is by no means contrary to what I have brought forward 
Thus it appears that you do not make me out to be 
wrong in requiring genuine unities, and in consequently 
rehabilitating the substantial forms. But when you 
appear to say that the soul of the lower animals must 
have reason, if we attribute feeling [smfimmt] to it®, that 
is an inference of which 1 do not see the proof 

5. With laudable aandour you recognize that iny 
hypothesis of harmony or eoneomitanee is po^^-siblo. But 
you still have a certain repugnance to it ; doubtless 
because you think that it is purely arbitniry, through 
not iKiing aware that it follows from my view regarding 
unities ; for everything in my thooiy is coiinoctod to- 
gether. 

6. Accordingly you ask, Sir, of what use is all this 
elaborate contrivance which T attribute to the Author of 
nature'"? As if one could attribute too much contrivance 
to Him, and as if this exact mutual corrosjnmdence of 

n>UH<‘ieus I ; for in short this luis to d«» with nothing but 

tho (ij'gaiiio Hiul inocimnical structure, and I do not m'o that you 
aro riglit in attributing to tho lower animals a piiiu’iple of cohmuous- 
noss, sub.slanl ially diiTererd, from that of men ’ ^E. 129 b ; G. iv. 488;. 

" E. does not have this sentence. 

• Eoiiclu*!* wrote : ‘After all, it is not without ground that the 
Cartesians acknowledge that if w'o allow to tin* animals a principle 
of eonsf'iouNfie.ss, eajNiblo of di.stingui.sliiiig good from evil, we miihl 
also, as a consequoin*e, allow to tliern reason, discrimination and 
judgment ’ (E. 129 b ; G. iv. 488''. In the Remarr/ues sur ks Objections 
If. Foucher lioibniz replies: ‘I do this’ (attribute to the animals 
a principle of consciousness, substantially difh'nmt from that of 
tneii'l ‘ because we do not find that the nnunnls make the reflexions 
which constitute reason and which, producing the knowledge of 
iiecoHsary truths or science, make tho soul capable of personality. 
Tho lower animals, having perception, distinguish good and evil; 
but they are not capable of moral good and evil, which presuppose 
reaBoii aud conscience' ;G. iv. 492). Of. Moyiadohffy, §§ as^sa 

*• E. reads ‘ you make use of an inference.’ 

“ E. reads ‘force.* 

^ Foiicher'a question is : ‘Of what use is all this great elaborate 
contrivance among substances, unless to make us believe that they 
act upon one another, although this is not the case?' (E, 130a; 
«. iv. 489). 

OF THE NEW SYSTEM 323 

substancoB, through the special laws which each has ut 
the beginning received, were not a thing most admirable 
in itself and worthy of its Author I You ask also what 
advantage I hnd in it. 

7. I might refer to what I have already' said ; but 
I reply, first, that when a thing cannot but be there 
is no need to ask of what use it is, before we admit it. 
Of what use is the incommensurability of the side with 
the diagonal ? 

8. I reply in the second plact', that this correspondence 
is of use in explaining the communication of substances 
and the union of the soul with the body, through the 
laws of nature whi<di have boon established from the 
first I par avance], without having recourse tuther to 
a transmission of species*^ | (qualities \ which is incon> 
ceivahlo, or to a new iiitervontion of God, wliich seems 
out of accord with the fitness of things. For it is to lie 
observed that as iliero are laws of nature in matter, so 
there are also laws of iwiture in souls or forms ; and the 
moaning of these laws is that which I have just indicated. 

9. Again, 1 am asked ‘'whence it comes that God does 
not think it enougli to produce all the thoughts and 
modifications of the sonl, without these useless hodi(«, 
which the soul, it is said, can neither move, nor know. 
The answer is easy. It Avas God s will that there should 

Ilns Leibniz sliown tliat his pro-estBblisbeil hannnny ‘enrircft 
but 1)0 ’ ? In the already quoU'd, he sayw : ‘ Thin elaborate 

oontrivanro, wliich niakoa each substance ct>ri*c.sjKind to .ill otborn, 
is necessary because all hubstanees are tlie effect of a supn'ino 
wisdom ; and it was noj otherwise possible :ut any rate in tlic 
order of iiatuiv and without miraclos) to bring about their inter- 
dependence and the changing of one by anotlier or In cnns<.-rpi(‘iic«' 
of another. It novertheless remains true that they act upon otm 
another, provided we give a right ttentto to tiieso word^. . . . tiod is 
not obliged to make a system, about which we arc not liable to 
make mistakes ; as He was not obliged to avoid the system of the 
earth’s motion, in order to save us from the error into which 
almost all astronomers fell until Copernicus’ (U. iv. 49a;. 

See Monaddogy, § 7, note 10. 

** £. has * 1 shall be asked.' The question was put by Foucher 
in his letter of objections. 

Y 2 

FIRST EXPLANATION 

324 

be more substances rather than fewer, and He thought 
it right that these modifications of the soul should corre- 
spond to something outside 

1 o. No substance is useless ; they are all made to 
co-operate towards fulfilling the plan of God. 

n. I am also far from admitting that the soul does not 
know bodioH, although this knowledge arises without any 
influence of the one upon the other. 

12. 1 will not even shrink from saying'^ that the soul 
moves the body ; and as a Coporiiican speaks truly of the 
rising of the sun, a Platonist of the reality of matter, and 
a Cartesian of the reality of sensible qualities provided 
we rightly understand them, in the same way I hold 
that it is most true to say that substances act upon one 
another, provided we understand that one is the cause of 
changes in the other in consequence of the laws of the 
harmony. 

13. The objection whicli is based on the supposed 
Icthargif of bodies, which would bo without activity 
[action] while the soul believes them to bo in motion, 
cannot hold because of this v(‘ry unfailing correspondence, 
which the Divine wisdom has established 

'•In the Hemarquca Leibniz says : ‘Bodies were iieeessary so that 
there inij(hh be produced not only our unilies and S(»iils but also 
those <>f (lie other corporeal substances, animals and plants, whicli 
are in our bodies and in those which surrouiul ua* (G iv. 493\ 
This last seiilenco indicates Leibniz's real answer to the difficnlty 
(the answer lie would have piAon in later years^ viz. that ulti- 
mately all bodies are souls or Monads, so that to ask why there 
are bodies is to ask w'hy there are other souls. la the answer 
sufficient? , 

E. has ‘they all co-operato.* 

E. has ‘ I will even raise no objection against saying.* 

*• i.e. (he qualities of bodic.s, as they are perceiTod by our senses. 
As aensatiotts, facts of consciousness, these are real, according to 
Descartes ; but as qualities of bodies they are confused and there- 
fore unreal. See Prinnpia, Pai*t i. §§ 66-70. 

^ Foucher says that, on Leibniz’s hypothesis, ‘even although no 
motion took place in bodies ’ [in harmony with tlie action of the 
* soul], ‘ the soul would nevcrtheleas always think that such a motion 
does take place ; in the same way as sleeping people think they are 
moving their limbs and walking, while nevertheless their limbs 

OP THE NEW SYSTEM 

3^5 

14. I have no knowledge of these idte^ useless, and 
inactive masses, to which i-eference is made. There is 
activity [action] everywhere, and I maintain it even 
more fully than does the received philosophy ; because 
I hold that there is no body without motion, no sub- 
stance without force [effort\^\ 

15. I do not understand the nature of the objection 
that is contained in the words : — In truth, Sir, is it not 
evident that these opinions tvcre formed mih a special putposc 
in view, ami that these Sifstctns, appearing hg wag of after- 
thought [venant apres coiq)], were constructed merelg to safe- 
guard certain principles'^ All hypotheses are made with 
a special purpose in view, and all systems appear hg wag of 
afterthought [ricyuwnt apres coup], in order to safeguard 
phenomena or a]>pourances ; but I do not S(‘o what aro the 
principles in favour of which I am said to ))e pn*jiulieed 
and which 1 wish to safeguard. 

i(). If it is meant that 1 am le<l to my hypothesis also 
by reasons a priori or by fixed principles, as is actually 
the case ; this is ratlier a commendation of the hypo- 
thesis tlian an objection to it. It is usually onougli tiint 
a hypothesis be proved a posteriori, by being ndeejuate to 
the phenomena ; but >vhen therf* aro in addition other 
reasons for it, and these a priori, it is so mueli the hotter. 

1 7. But perhaps w hat is meant is that, having invented 
a new opinion, 1 have delighted to make use of it, ratlior 
to give myself airs because of its novelty than because 
I have found any usefulness in it, 1 arn not sure, Sir, 
that you have so bad an opinion of mo as to attribute to 
me these thoughts, for you know that I love truth, and 
that, if I were so fond of novelties, I should have* more 

are at rest and do not move at nil. So, when wide awnko, bouIh 
would always continue to be pornutided that tlieir bodii'H move in 
obedience to their volitionn, though nevct*theleM4 thf‘M« idle and 
useless masses would be inactive and would remnin in u continual 
lethargy ’ (E. 130 a ; G. iv. 489). 

Thai is, force which is not necoMsarily obstTved, but includes 
tendency or the active x>otentiulity of observed force. 

FIRST EXPLANATION 

326 

eagerness to produce them — especially those whose sound- 
ness is recognized. But, lest those who know me less 
should give to your words a meaning which we should 
not liko'''*^, it will bo enough to siiy, that in iny opinion 
it is impossible otherwise to explain transeunt actwiiy 
[ Vaction nnanenteY^ in conformity with the laws of nature, 
and that I thought that tlie use of my hypothesis would 
be evident, owing to the diflicultj'^ which the most able 
philosophers of our time have found as to the inter- 
relation [rammunication] of minds [n^prits] and bodies, 
and evi-n of bo^lily substances wMth one another: and 
I do not know but that you yourself have found some 
difliculty in this. 

iS. It is true that, in iny view, there are forces \i\(forts\ 
in all substanci's ; but these forces |c//bW,s | are, rightly 
speaking, only in the substance itself, and what follows 
from them in other substances takes place only in viHue 
of a harmony prc i'stahlished'^* (if 1 may use the word), and 
in no wise hy a real influence or ))y the transmission of 
some spvcirs or <iuality®\ As T have exidairied what 
activity [action] and passivity [pc/.<fsir>u] are, the nature 
of force [effort] ami of rt*.sistaiice may be inforred, 

X(). Vou say. Sir, that you know there arc stiil many 
(iucstions to he put, before those which wc hare been discussing 
can be decided. But perhaps you will find that I have 
already put these questions ; and 1 am not sure that your 
Academics have applied what is good in their method 
more rigorously and effectively than I strongly 

” K. rortUs ‘ rontrnry to iny intoiitioiiM.* 

That is, activity which NppMreiitly pass's beyond tho suhatanco 
itself and bus oflfoctsi in other Hut>»taucoH. It jn the same thing aa 
tho * initiiCJU'o ’ of <*no substance upon another. So (3 I)e tpm Satura 
M698', § 10 ^K. 157 b ; <X. iv. 510), where Leibniz usee tho oxprossioa 
iranMunies creafuiarum achones. 

** This is tho first use of the term by Leibniz. 

** See Monadoloffy* § 7. note 10. 

^ FoiK'her wrote : ‘We ought to observe the laws of the 
Academics, the second of which forbids us to put in question 
matters wliioh we clearly see cannot be settled, as are almost all 
those of which we have been speaking; not that these questions 

OF THE NEW SYSTEM 327 

approve of «K>ekiug to demonstrate truths from first 
principles: it is more useful than people think, and 
I have often put this precept in practice. Thus I com- 
mend what you say on this iK)int, and I would that your 
example may k»ad our philosophers to think of it as they 
ought. 

20. I will add a further reflexion, which snoins to me 
helpful in making the reality and use my system better 
understood. You know that M. Descartes Ix^lievei] in 
tlie conservation of the same quantity of motion in bodies. 
It luis been shown that ho was wrong in this : but I havt^ 
show*n tlmt it is still true that there is conservation of 
the same moving force, instead of wliich he put. ({luintity 
of motion. Nev<‘rtlu'less, lie was j>orplexed )>y the 
change.s which hike j>laco in the body in consequence 
of modifications of tJie soul, Ix'causo they seemed to 
break (his law. liut he tlioiighi he bad found a way 
out of it (which is certainly ingcuiious) in saying that 
we must distingnisli between motion and dir»*ction ; and 
that the soul cannot increase nor diminish the moving 
force, but tliat it changes the direction or determination 
of lh<‘ cfuir.se of the animal spirits, and that it is in this 
way that voluntary motions take place It is true that 
ho in*ade no attempt to explain how the .soul acts so as to 
change the ct»ui>ie of bodies, for tln*re setuiis as much 
difliculty in this as there is in saying that the soul gives 
motion to liodies, unless with mo you have recoursi* t<i 
the pre-c.stablished harmony ; but it is to be observed 
that there is another laiv 0/ nature ^ which I have discovered 
and proved, and 'v^iich M, Descartes was unaware of, 
namely, that there is conservathn not only of the same 
quantity of moving force, but also of the same quattfity 

are absolutely inHr>lublr, but borauHC they «n* Nolnbb* f»i»Iy in 
a certain order, which requires that philoaophtu-H HlioubI Ixmii by 
coming to an agreement iih to the infallible mark of triitb, iiinl 
ahould confine theinbelveb to deinonatratioDH from firMt princijdoH ’ 
(E. 130 b ; G. iv. 490^. 

^ E. omita ^ often. Of. Introduction, Pari ii. p. 59. 

** See ifomujoloffif, § 80, note iaj, and Introduction, Pari iii. p. 89. 

FIRST EXPLANATION 

328 

of direction in whatever line [de qiielque cot^y^ we take it in 
the tvorld. That is to say, drawing any straight line you 
ploaso, and taking also such bodies and so many of them 
as you i>h^aso, you will find that, considering all thase 
bodies together, without omitting any of those which act 
upon any one of those which you have taken, there 
will always be the same amount [quantite] of progreasion 
in the wime direction \jlu meme cotv\ in all lines parallel 
to the straight line you have taken — obsoiwing that the 
total amount of j)rogressi<m is to be calculated by sub- 
tracting from the amount of progression of the bodies 
which go in th(j giv^^n direction, the amount of progression 
of those which go in the ojiposito direction This law, 
being as good and as general as tlu' otluT, deseived as 

K. roiiilH //»/«•///»/(• cuU\ 

Soo Pnn‘ tph'H of Sahirr and of fh ace ^ i ff note <|8 Cf. Kpiatola ad 
Ihnmdlinm (1696 (G. Math. iii. 243; K. 108 note): ‘In the next 
j>ln(je it to ho observed that I make a diati nation between absoluto 
foree and directing force, although I can denture and deinonstrat*? 
dir<‘etitii4 force from (he solo eonsbleration of ui>s(vhite power. And 
indeed I prove tliat there ia coiiHervation not of the RAine 

iilisfdiito force or quantity of action in the world, but ivlso of the 
Huiiie direetin^ force and the aanie quantity of direction in the 
^allle Iiiiea [ad easdem pane?*], i.«‘. the 8umo ({uaniity of proj5ressi(»n, 
its dire<*tion tuuiig tak<'ii into ac«*ount and the quantity of pro- 
i^reHMioii heiii;^ counted equal to the muss multi]>licd by tiio 
vtdeeity, and net by tin' .squai>» of the vtdocity’ [mi\ not mr^\. 

‘ Neverllieless tJlis quantity «if progression differs from ({uaiitity 
of iniitiou in tbis way, that whtm two liodies are moving in 
opposite direi-tioiis their total <jiiantity of motiim (in the Curte^iaii 
stuise is to be got by adding together the quantity of motion of 
eueh (ealeulated as the mass into the vebH'ity ) ; but tlie quantity 
of prt)gresHioii is t«i be got by Mibtrneting tin; one from the other; 
for in such a ease the differeiice ladween the quantities of motion 
will be the ipiniitity of progression. Th«;ivfore when Descjirtes 
ibouglit that lie could safeguard the rouI's power of acting on the 
body in this way. that while the soul cannot increnRo or diminish 
the quantity of mot inn in the world, it can nevertheless incroase 
or diininisli the quantity of direction of the [animal] spirits, he 
erred througli nt»t knowing this new law of ours regarding the 
conservation of the quantity of din^ction, wdiieh is no leas Ivcautiful 
and inviolable than the law of the eonwrvation of absolute force 
[n'j'tus] or jxiwer of action.* The ‘quantity of progreaMioxi ' ivould 
called a projtndion of the quantity of motion. A full 
explanation, with diagrams, will be found in the appendix to 
Boutroux's iHlition of the Mnna»io?>)i/ui. 

APPENDIX H 

329 

little to be broken, and this is so, according to my 
system*', in which there is conservation of force and 
direction, and none of the natural laws of bodies are 
broken, notwithstanding the changes which take place 
in body in con.se<pience of changes in the soul. 

APPENDIX n. 

ON THE ELEMENTS OF EXTENSION. 

One of Fouchcr'a objootiont. to the Xeir waw bascul on 

the contention that exte union litui no iiKiruate real elements 
(E. 129a ; G. iv. 4‘S7). In noine Hrmarqum sur /es dt* 

A/. Foncher (G. iv. 490) ijoibniz replies; ‘The author of the 
objection tloe« not seem to have rightly understootl uiy view. 
Extension or space, ami the surfaces, linos and points that can 
he conceived in it. are nothing hut relations (»f order or orders 
of co-exixtenee, both as regards Dint which actually exists 
and us regards the possible thing that might he put in place 
of that which exists. Thus they have no ultimate component 
elements |pn‘n<ipc.sl, any more than numher has. And as 
a brok»*n number, for instance .It can he further hroktMi into 
two-fourths or l^nir-eigJiths and so on ad without our 

being able to reach the absolutely Kinullest fractions or to 
conceive the numher as a whole formed by the combination of 
ultimate elements, so it is with a line which can he divid(‘d, 
just like this numher. Again, strictly speaking, the mimher J 
in the abstract is a perfectly simple ratio [I'apport], not at all 
formed by the compounding of other fractions, although in 
nurahered thing.s there i.s ecpiality between two-foui-tlis and 
one-half. And we niaj’ say as niu(di regarding an ahsfrarf line, 
since compounding tak(‘.s place only in ronerf'^ things, or tin* 
masses of which these abstract lines indicate the relations. 
And it is also in this way that mathematical points are to he 
regarded : they are merely modalities, that is to say (‘xireiui- 
ties. And as in the abstract line all is ind(*tinite, it has 
reference to everything which is possible, oh in the case of 

E. reads ‘and this" [i e. the breach of the lawj * is avoided by 
my system." 

APPENDIX H 

330 

fractions of a number, without our troubling about divisions 
actually made, which indicate points in the line in various 
ways. But in actual substantial things the whole is a sum or 
aggregate of simple substances or rather of a multitude of real 
units [uhitis]. And it is the confounding of the ideal and the 
actual that has brought the whole matter into confusion and 
has proiluced the labyrinth de compositionv coniinui. Those 
who have supposed the line to be made up of points have 
souglit lor the primary elements in ideal things or relations, 
which was quite a miHtake ; and those w’ho have found that 
relations like number or space (which includes the order or 
relation of possible ( o-existent things) cannot be formetl by 
the aggregation of pfdrits, have, usually made the inistake of 
denying the ]»rimary elements of Bubstantial realities, as if 
they had no primary uniti<*B. or as if then^ were no simple 
Hubslances. Nevertheless number and theliiut are not chlnnri- 
val things, although they are not th\is eoinpoiincled, for they 
are relations which iiivoJvt‘ <‘ternail truths, in accoidanee with 
which the phenoDKuia of nature are ordered. Hence it may 
he said that, considered in the abstract, I ami } an; imle]>cn- 
dont of one another, or rather tlie total ratio [rappovt] is 
anterior in the orde.r of reason le siijnc de iu jik 

the Scholastics say to the partial ratio J. sima* it is by the 
subdivision of the half that we come to the fourth, following 
the order ot what is ideal ; and the same is the case with the 
line, in which the whole is anterior to the part because the 
part is only possible and ideal. But in roaliti^’s, in which 
there are only divisions actually made, the whole is merely 
a sum or aggregate, as in the ciise of a flock of sheep. It is 
true that the number of simple substances which entei into 
a mass, how'ever small it he, is infinite, since in addition 
to the soul which constitutes the real unity of tlie animal, the 
body of the sheep (for instance) is actually subdivided, that 
is to say it is also an aggregate of invisible animals or plants 
(which are likewise compound) besides that which constitutes 
also their real unity ; and although this proceeds ad infinitupn, 
it is manifest that ultimately all is reducihUi to these unities, 
the remainder or the aggregates being merely well-founded 
phenomena.* 

THIKD EXPLANATION EXTRACT FROM A 
LETTER OF M. D. L. REGARDING HIS 
PHILOSOPHICAL HYPOTHESIS AND THE 
C.'URUIUS PROBLEM, PROI»OUNDED TO 
THE MATHEMATICIANS BY ONE OF HIS 
FRIENDS, WITH AN EXPIANATION RE- 
GARDING SOME DISPUTED POINTS IN 
PRECEDING .lOURNALi-t BIOTWEEN THE 
ALTHOR OF.THE PRINCIPLES OFPlJYSK'S* 
AND THE AUTHOR OF THE (JRJ EOF JONS. 

i6t)6. 

Some learned and aouto friends of mine having co»>- 
sidered my now hyixithosis on the grout quoslion of fhr. 
union of xonl and hody, and having found it of valu*», 
have asked ino to give some explanations regarding the 
objections wliich have been brought against it and which 
arose from its not having been rightly undorstood. 
I think the matter may be made intelligible to minds of 
every kind by the following illustration. 

Suppose two clocks * or two watches^ which ])erfectly 

* £. haa * Third Exjilanution/ which im omitted hy (i. 

* NicholaH Hurtsockor. ‘ M.O.L.' is A ]iM<.udoriyin of Lfihriiz. 

* So© Pi*ofatory >ioto. Oeulincx’s Uho of tho Mini do is it» follows : 

will certainly dries not move the movini;; powor that it may 
move my limbs ; but Ho who impiirtoil in<»tion lo matter and 
laid down laws for it, Himself also formed my will. Therefore 
He bound together thcK© most diverse things (the motion of 
matter and the choice of my will), so that w'hen tny will wills, 
such a motion as it wills occurs, and on the other hand when 

THIRD EXPLANATION 

332 

keep time together [s^accordent]. Now that may happen 
in three ways. The first way consists in the mutual in< 
iluenco of each clock upon the other ; the second, in the 
caro of a man who looks after them ; the third, in their 
own accuracy. The first way^ that of influence, was 
ascertained on trial by the late M. Huygens *, to his great 
astonishment. He attached two largo pendulums to the 
same piece of wood. The continual swinging of these 
pendulums imparted similar vibrations to the particles of 
the wood; but a.s these differont vibrations could not 

the moti«)n orcura, tho will wills it, without nny cnuHtilliy or 
inilucnco nf (ht» ono upon tho other; n.s in thn ram* of 

two cI<»oks wliifh aro rarefiilly ailjuHt«'ci togofhor to tho daily 
rourwj <if <Im‘ sun, as oftoii as Hit* <»nn strikoa and tells us the 
hoiira, the other strikes in tho sarno way and inditwites the hours, 
and that apart fnjin any cuiisfility, hy which the ono might prodiiee 
this elToet in the other, but solely on aeeount r»l‘ the connexion 
w'hieh euinos from th<» fact that both were iiiado by the same 
art and with similar workmanhliip. Thus, for example, the 
motion of tlie t<»ngue aecompanit's our volition to speak, and thia 
volition aoeompnnies that motion : and the motion does not deixuid 
upon tho volition, nor tho volition upon the motion, hut hofh 
ilepfuul upon the sjime Supreme Artificer, who has so woiitlerfiilly 
eoiiiiected and hound them togothor.' AY/ura, Tuv't. L cap. 2, $ a, 
note 19 ; Laiul’s * d., vol. iii. p. afi. Cf. ihid noie^H ; Jiund, iii. aao. 
Cf. a 1st) Inirotiuetiiiii, I*art ii. p. 43. 

* Christian Huygens ( i6aQ“i695) was a mathomat ieian, phy- 
sicist and astronomer, who Tn'ed for tho most part in Holland, 
where 1 h‘ whs horn, and in Fraiiee, W’here Leihni/, cf»ming to 
Turis ill 167J, met him. Anticipating tho revocation of the Kdict 
of Nanti's, the I’mte.stant Huygtvn.s left Paris in i68i and returned 
to Jlollami, hut he cnjitiiiiU'd to et>rrespond with Leibniz on 
mathematical subjects. In 1673 Huygens published his great 
work liuutltJfjium iMllafo} mm, tie tnotu })( nciulijrum ad korologm 
ndaptatn, in which he gav«' a full aeeount of a discovery ho had 
tnado in 1656, that ot the pendulum clocks Among the other 
grtmt works of Huygens were discoveries in ixuinexion with the 
astronomy of the planets, tho undulatory theory of light,' and 
tho use of spiral springs lor regulating the lialnut’Cs of watches, 
lioibniz frequently acknowledges his groat iudebtodneH.s to 
Huygens in regal’d to niaihematics, and in July, 1695, ho writes 
to Nicaise; * Nothing can equal the loss of the incomparable 
M. Huygens. Most wrtainly he ought to be named immediately 
after ^laliloo and Descartes. He might still have given us great 
light ujwn nature’ (H. ii, 55a). But elsewhere ho says that 
^ M. lluygcms had no taste for metaphysios.’ Lettre h Hemond (1714) 
(F. 70a b ; G. iii. 607). 

OF THE NEW SYSTEM 

333 

continue in their proi)er order, without interfering with 
one another, unless the pendulums kept time together, 
it happened, by a kind of wonder, that even when their 
swinging w'as deliberately disturbed they soon came to 
swing together again, somewhat like two stretched st rings 
that are in unison. 

The second u'Ujf of making two clocks (even though 
they be bad ones) constantly keep time* together would 
be to put them in charge of a skilled workman who 
should keep them together from moment to moment. 
I call this the way of assistance. 

Finally, the third ivm/ will bo to make the two clocks 
[pcvdides] at Hrst with such skill and accuracy that we 
can be sure that they will always afterwards keep time 
together. This is the way of prc*-establishod agreement 
[cowNcn/owcw/]. 

Now j)ut the soul and the body in ]>lace of the 
two clocks. Their agreement [accord] or sympathy wll 
also arise in one of tliese three ways. The waj/ of in* 
fluence is tliat of the common phiJosoi)hy; hut as we 
ciinnot conceive material partiedes or immaterial species 
or qualities which cun pass from one of thes<^ substanceR 
into the other, we are obliged to give up this opinion. 
21ie nay of assistance is that of tin* system of occasional 
causes ; but I hold that this is to introducci Jhius ex 
maehina in a natural and ordinary matter, in which it is 
reasonable that God should intervene only in the way in 
which He suj)port8 [ronrourt d] all the other things of 
nature. Thus there remains only my hyj)othe.si8, that 
is to say, the way of the harmony pre-cstahlished by a con- 
trivanc<5 of the Divine foresight, which has from the 
beginning formed each of iiieso substances in so ]>crfect, 
so regular and accurate n manner that by merely follow- 
ing its own laws which were given to it when it came 
into Ijeing, each substance is yet in harmony with the 
other, just as if there were a mutual influence between 
them, or as if God were continually putting His hand 

THIRD EXPLANATION 

334 

upon them, in addition to His general support fcon- 
furrerice], 

I do not think that I need offer any further proof* 
unless 1 should be required to prove that God is in 
a position ’’’ to make use of this contrivance of foresight, 
of which we have instances even among men, in pro 
portion to the skill they have. And supposing that 
God is able to make use of this means, it is very evident 
that this is the l><*st way and the most worthy of Him. 
It is true tliat 1 have also <ither proofs of it ^ hut they 
are deeper and it is unnecessary to adduce them bore*. 

Let mo say a word al)Out the dispute between two very 
(•h*vei‘ people*, tho author of the rc‘contly-pul)lished Prith 
rtplrs of Pht/ssirs^^ and the auUior of the Objections (which 
u})p('arod in the Journal of August 13 and els<*where\ 
hucauso my hypothesis serves to bring those controversit^s 
to an end. I do not understand how' matter can ho 

^ It hIiouM ))o c^b^Ol^vo<l that L<‘ibni/*H nr^j^uiTK^nt from niialojjy 
pnauiiMla tip(»n (lit) aM.suiiiption that hotly ami soul, t>r j-oul aud 
at>ul, aro in roality quito indept-ndont and separate from (tna 
another. If tlii.s bo not admitted bis ^ proof’ breaks down: tho 
•thre<» ways’ do not exhaust llie po'-sibh^ hy|>otJiesoH. Loibnix 
Htsuns rattier to liavc prided liiinstdf on emphtisi/in^, by his 
l»ypt)lbesi'*, the diOVreneo between body and soul. In tlie po«t- 
Horipi to a hotter to BasnaKe de Beauval (1696'), part of whieli ia 
printfjd as the .sVrtiary ^efatrets^ment (E. 134b: O. iv. 4 c>q\ ladbniz 
sayn; ‘You liad a sitspieioii that my exidanation would be irre- 
«*oiietlnble with the Rreat difference which, in our opinion, then» 
iM between mind : 1 and iKaly. But now you see elearly, Sir, 
that no one has e'«tablished their indcqaunlenc** more completely 
than I. I'or Miu*e Jntherto we have heeii ohlijjed to explain their 
inter rf'lat ion | hy u kind of mirae.le, we have con^ 

rtiantly given occa'-iion t^ many |HH>ple to fear that tho distinction 
In^twoen iniivii and Ixuly is not so i't3nl as }H*o]de think, since our 
rt^asons for inaintaiuing it are so far-fetched. Now all those scruples 
«‘ea.so.* 

• The Second Artairri/rsrmrnt I'eada ‘ is skilful enough.' 

^ The n'forenco is probably to such arguments as those which 
he afterwards gave in the Jfonculofoffy. 

** 1 have ointtii*d two paragraphs dealing with a purely mathe- 
matical problem. 

* Hartsooker. See New S^cm, $ 6,* note 36. 

*• Fouohei*. 

OF THE NEW SYSTEM 

335 

conceived as extendeil and yet without either actual 
or ideal parts ; and if it is ao^ I do not know what 
is meant by being t^xtended I even hold that matter 
is essentially an aggregate, and constKiu’ently that thoro 
are always actual paiiiS. Thus it is by ivasoii, and not 
merely by the senses, that we judge that it is divided, 
or rather that it is ultimately nothing but a collection 
Imuitiindr]. 1 hold it as true that matter (and even t^ach 
IMiit of matter! is divided into a greater nuinher of parts 
than it is possible to imagine. And accordingly 1 oftim 
say tliat each body, liowovor small it may be, is a world 
of creatures infinite in number. Thus I do not believe 
that there are atoms, that is to say, parts of matter which 
are perfectly hard or of invincihle solidity ; while*, (»n the 
other hand, I as little believe that tljero is a ])tu*fectJy 
fluid matter''*, and my opinion is that each Ixsly is fluid 
in C(unparison ^^iih more solid hodit's and solid in com- 
parison with the more flui<l. I am surjirised that it is 
still said that an equal quantity of motion, in the Car- 
tesian sense, is always conserv<-d ; for I have proved the 
opjiosite, ami already excellent mathematicians hav«* 
admitted it. Nevertliel(*ss 1 do not regal’d the solidity 
or consistence of bodies as a primary quality, but as 
a consequence <»f motion, and 1 ho]>e that my Dynamics 
will show in what this consists, as the understanding of 
my hypothesis will also serve to remove several diffi- 
culties which still engage tho attention of jdnlosophers. 
In fact, I believe I can intelligibly aiiswiir all the doubts 
to which the late M, Jiernicr'* has specially *de voted a 

“ mrnfiUes, i. e tliinkable. 

Til rttferoace is probably to the views of Fouelii*r, wlio denied 
tbul tbo e^«enco of matter in exieiiHlofi , iloldin^ that all «>ur ideaa 
iticluding thoKO of external objecta) are meivlv m<^lirn'ation» of 
our-H^lvea and that, in <o‘der Ut repreiw»nt an object, an idi'U muHt 
bo like it. hkxi Foueher de Careit, Lettres et OpunrH/f^a de 

Introdtietion. 

“ Uartnoekor a theory was that the ultimate eIfm«*ntH of thinKH 
are perfectly hard atoms in ^perfect fluid, the aloiiiH romhiued 
forming tangible bodies, while the fluid transmits light, &c. 

“ Fraupoia Bernier (d. i688; was more fuinoua an a traveller 

336 THIRD EXPLANATION 

book ; and those who will think out what I have 
formerly published will perhaps find that they already 
have the moans of making this answer. 

than aH n philosoplif^r. After travt^Jling in Syria and Egypt, 
wont to India (whoro he wa« pliyaicmn to Aiiriipg2el)e\ and 
afiorwardN to Oashmir. In Paria he was nicknamed *• the Mogul.' 
He assiute<l Boileau in preparing the Mock Decree, given in tke half 
of ParnasHUft, in favour of the Maett^'s of Arts^ Physicians, and Proff shots of 
the Uniy erstty qf i^tagira^ tn the land of chimeras^ for the support of the 
doctrine of Aristotle^ which by its ridicule killeil the serious proposal 
that the French Parliament sliould officially condemn the philo- 
CKiphy of Deseartes. Bernier’s principal philosophical works were 
Ahrege de la phitoHcphie dc Gassendi '6 vols., 1678) and, by way of 
supplement to this, Douti s ds M, licmU-r sur queUfuts-uns des principiux 
chapitres dr son ahrny de la jihilosophie de Gassendi '"7 vol*»., 1084). The 
hitter is prohiihly tlio Work to which Leibniz refers. There is 
an English translation of Bcrnier’a Tntctls in the Mogul Empire (now 
ed., Cotislablo, 1897;. 

ON THE ULTIMATE ORIGINATION 
OF THINGS. 1697. 

PREFATOKV NOTE. 

Tins paper, written in Latin, ia dated l>y Leibniz, Novend)er 
liave been intended for the Acin fJnaiitorum ; 
tint it remained uiipubliahed until 1840, when Krdinann in- 
cluded it in his edition, lieibniz here ex)>lains the fiinetioii 
of the principle of sufTicient reason in his philosophy', expand- 
ing^ what he hinl alrea<1y ^aid in a pa])er writti'ii about J685, 
to \vhi<‘h Krdinann j^ives the title, De Srirnfla Vptirrrsnfi are 
CnlcHlo philottophivo (see E. 83 b ; th vii, 200). §§ 36-48 of the 

MotHtdoloijif may be refjrai'ded as a condensation of the main 
argument of this ^^ssay On the VithnntP (h'itjiuntinn of Things, 
In the latter part of the KK^ay we have a \indi('ation ot tln^ 
optimism of laMhiiiz (that this is the best of all possible 
worlds), and .some of the chief doctrines of the Thioiiin'e are 
given in outline. 

The Vlfimatf Origination of things is given by E. 147 sepp ; 
G. vii. 302 tqq. 

Behtdes the world or the aggregate of finite thing.s 
there is a certain unity [imt/mj whicli is dominant, not 
only as the soul is dominant in me or ratl]or as the ego 
itself isMominant in my body, but also in a much higher 
sense’. For the dominant unity of the universe not 
only rules the world but constructs or^fasliums it. It 
ia higher than the world and, so to speak, extmmundane, 
and is thus the ultimate reason of things. For the 

* Of. MonadcUngy, 70 and 7a, notes xix and 115. 

^ E. reads * and.’ 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

338 

sufficient reason of existence cannot be found either in 
any particular thing or in the whole aggregate and 
series of things. Let us suppose that a book of the 
elements of geometry existed from all eternity and that 
in Huccession one copy of it was made from another, it 
is evident that although wo can account for the present 
book by the book from which it was copied, nevertheless, 
going back through as many books as we like, we could 
never reach a complete reason for it, bt^cauae wo can 
always ask why such books have at all times existed, 
that is to say, why books at all, and why written in 
this way. Wliat is true of books is also true of the 
different states of the world ; for, in spite of certain laws 
of change, the succeeding state is, in some sort, a copy 
of that whicli precedes it. Therefore, to whatever earlier 
state you go back, you never find in it the coihjdote 
reason of things, that is to say, the reason why there 
exists any world and why this world mther than some 
other. 

Yon may indeed suj>pose the world eternal ; but as 
you supj>(>se only a succession of states, in none of which 
do you tind tln^ sullicient reason, ami ns even any nnmher 
of worhls does not in tho least help y^^u to account for 
them, it is evident that tho reason must be sought elae- 
wliero. For in otorual things, even though there be no 
cause, there must be a reason^ which, for j>Grmanent 
things, is necessity itself or essence * ; hut for tho series 
of changing things, if it be su}»posed that they succeed 
one unethcr from all eternity, this retison is, as we sliall 
presently see, tho prevailing of inclinations^ which con- 

* If a thing is (^tornaJ. it cannot have a causo in time; but there 
mufit still Homo nvisoii (other than a cause in timo^ for its 
existence. Of. Aristotlo*a afriov (which is wider than our ^ cause*) 
and tho (U>rnian OrtuuK 

* By * jMirinancut things* is meant things that are not contingent, 

•nd those, inTiOibuiz's language, are ^possihlo’ things — ' necessary' 
things — essences. Cf. §§ 40 and 43, notes 64 and 67. 

^ The tiuffioieni reason of changing or c^mtingent tilings is not 
an absolute principle, whoso opposite would be self-contradictory, 

ORIGINATION OP THINGS 339 

&ist not in necessitnting reasons, that is to say, reasons 
of an absolute and metaphysical necessity, the opposite 
of which involves a contradiction *, but in inclining 
reasons. From this it is manifest that even by 
posing the eternity of the world, wo cannot oscaj>e the 
ultimate extrimmndano reason of things, that is to say, 
God \ 

Accordingly tho re^isons of the world lie hid in soinc'- 
thing extramundane, different from the concatenation of 
states or the series of things, the aggregate of which 
constitutes tho world. And thus we must go beyond 
the physical or hypothetical necessity, according to which 
the later things of tho world ore detonninod by tlio 
earlier, to something which is of absolute or metaphysical 
necessity ^ of which a reasoti cannot Ix' givt'n. For the 
present world is nece.ssary jdiysically or hypothetically, 
but not aijsoliitely or metaphysically. That is to say, 
the nature of the world being such as it is, it follows 
that things must hap[>en in it just as they do. There- 
fore, sinc(i the ultimate root of all must be in sometbing 
which has metaphysical necessity, and since the reason 
of any existing found only in an existing 

thing, it follows that there must exist one Ihnng which 
has metaphysical necessity, one Being of whose essence 

hut a superiority of the pood or dcHirablt* ov<t (Ik* had nr iin- 
dosirablo in tbo tilings which coiiio to p;isH. The hahince or 
jirepondcraiice of gr»<idno-s iiiolincH (ho will of (hxi (without 
absolutely noccssitating it) to croah* tlichc conting(;nt tliingH. 

• Tho Word amfrafiicfKmrm to have boon onuliod perineurium. 

Neither E. rmr O. gives ft. 

’ Kvo% thnuph Iho world bo taken as etornal,* its iM‘coMsity is 
not on that account abfwdiito or compcdliiig hut m«*roIy ‘ iiicliiung/ 
and it thoreforo prcsup|Kisc8 soino ono whoMj will is ‘inclined,* 
i o. <fod. 

" E roads ‘ s^>mcthing which is absolute or mol;iphysicnI no- 
I'ossity.* Ahsoluto or motuphysical nocossity is a n«'<'CHsity that 
is indopendont of actual things, in contrast with hypothetical 
.(ytnditional, relative) or physical necessity, which is tho necessity 
arising out of the natures of actual things, the iH-eensity which 
a system of ‘ compowible * things imposes on its moinbers. Cf. 
IntitMluciion, IJart ii. p. 67. 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

340 

it is to exist and thus there must exist something 
different from that plurality of beings, the world, which 
as wo admitted and showed, has no metaphysical neces- 
sity 

But to explain more distinctly how from eternal or 
essential or metaphysical truths there arise temporal, 
contingent or physical truths, we must first observe that, 
from the very fact that there exists something rather 
than iHithiiig, it follows that in possible things, or in 
possibility or essence itself, there is a certain need of 
existence or, so to speak, 11 claim to exist, in a word, 
that essj'nce of itself tends to existence". From this it 
further follows that all possible tilings, that is, things 
expressing essence or possililo reality, with equal right 
tend to existence in proportimi to tlie quantity of 
OHsence or reality, or in proportion to the degree of per- 
fection whicli belongs to them. For perfection is nothing 
but quantity of essence*'. 

Hence it is most evident that out of the infinite 
possible combinations and series of possible things there 
exists that one through which the greatest amount of 
ossence or possibility is brought into existence. Indeed, 
there is always in things a principle of determination 
according to maximum and minimum, so that, for instance, 
the maximum effect is produced with the minimum out- 
lay And the time, the ]>lace, or, in a word, the 

® C!f. Spiiid/a’H distinction between SubHiance i\fi vi quod in se esf 
and Modi' as id in alia esL Ethics, Part i. deff. 3 and 5. See 
MonadoOtqy^ §§ 3C f'UU* 

For Kant’s cniiriHin of the coMUiologic^I proof of the existence 
of Ooil, see Cntiyiir 0/ rury- lieasnn, Transi'endetdal Dialectic, bk. ii. oh.d, 

$ :2, Vourfh Antnvtmy. ^ 

“ t^f. Monaditloqy, ^ 40, note 64. 

Both E. and (i. read esseniiam^ which is manifestly a slip for 
e.ri.<ite*n<«am. E. corrects the error in his Eirata, 

“ Cf. Monadotogy, §§41 and 54. 

Outlay or cost is in itself loss or limitation. But If there is to 
\m a world at all* there must be loss or limitation, for if the 
elements of the world were not in dilTerent degrees limited, there 
Would be no variety. All w^ould be one * splendidly null ' perfec- 
tion. Yet the world is the best possible world in the sense that it 

ORIGINATION OP THINGS 34I 

receptivity or capacity of the world** may here be con- 
sidered as the outlay or ground on wliich tlie world in 
to be built as fittingly [quam votnmodissimv] us possible, 
while tho variety of forms corresponds to tho fitjiess 
[comwiodi/cfs] of the building and to tho nuinbur and 
elegance of its rooms. The whole matter may be likened 
to ceilain games in which all the s]>acos on a board art^ 
to be filled up according to definite rules, so that, unli'ss 
you make use of some ingenious contrivance, you find 
yourself iu th(‘ end kept out of some refractory spaces 
and compelled to leave empty more spaces than you 
intended and some which you might otherwise lmvt‘ 
filled. Yet there is a definite melluxl by which thi^ 
int>st comidete filling up of tiio sj>ace.s may most easily 
be accomjdished. So if we have to draw a triangle, no 
other determining condition being given, it will b(» an 
e<[iulateral triangb* ; and if a line is to be drawn from 
ont' point to anotlier, no further cmulltion being ussigruKl, 
tlie (‘Usiest or shortest way will Ih 5 cliesen. So if t>nce 
it is given that being is superior to not-being (that is tt> 
say, that there is a reason why something slioiild exist 
rather than nothing or that possibility must pass into 
actuality, it follows that, though nothing further is 
determined, there must exist as much ns is possible con- 
sidering the capacity of time and space (that is, of ilje 
possiblo order of existing *^), just as tiles are put together 

containH tho givati -t hnlaiui' of ju-rfoof ioii ovor limitation or <»f 
ov«-r ovil, i. i*. Ilio iiiaxinniin of at tho luiniminn 

of cost. Ill this smisti iho ^{iriiK*i]ao of tin? host,’ to whicli Lcilmi/ 
constantly refers, is prinriplo «»f (lot()rininHtioii si<;c(»r(liii;4 t«) 
iiiaxirnuui and miiiiiniun.’ That tho cost HhouUl ho rniujjjiunj 
might taken us a way of aiatiiig Oh* Maw of pui!sjmon\.’ 

. Thut is, tho natural or essential limits within wJo'< h ihv 
acttal world may t‘Xpress an ideal possibility, whicli lias no liiiiiN. 
This limiting ‘receptivity or capacity* (wJiich is to the world what 
the body is to tho individual Monad might Is* regarded as the 
passivity or matter of tho world, in contrast with its activity /yr 
form. 

'• Cf. Princip/'C^ 0/ Nahtre and of Gratae, § 7. 

i. e. not merely the order which we discover among actual 
ihmgs, but the order which is a condition of posaiblc things 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

342 

ia such a way that as many as possible may be contained 
in a given area. 

Thus it is wonderfully made known to us how in the 
veiy origination of things a certain Divine mathematics 
or metaphysical mechanics is employed and the greatest 
quantity is brought into existence [ Ut the determination 
of the greatest quantity takes place). So among all 
angles the determined [fixed] angle in geometry is the 
right angle **, and so also liquids put into heterogeneous 
media bike the form of greatest capacity, that of a sphere. 
But best of all is the illustration we get in ordinaiy 
mechanics, where, when several heavy bodies act against 
one another, the resultant motion is that which produces 
the greatest fall on the whole'**'. For as all possible 
things by an equal riglit tend to exist in proportion to 
their reality, so all weights by an equal right tend to 
fall in proportion to their gravity ; and as in the case of 
the latter there is produced a motion which involves the 
greatest possible fall of the heavy bodi<‘s, so in the case of 
the former there is produced a world in wliich the greatest 
number of possible things comes into existence. 

And thus we luive physical necessity coming from 
metaphysical necessity ; for although the world is not 
metaphysiciilly necessary, so tlmt its opposite involves 
a contradiction or logical absurdity, it is nevertheless 
])liysk*ally necessary or so <leterinined that its opposite 
involves imperfection or moral absurdity. And as possi- 
bility is the principle of essence, so perfection or degree 

coming into cxistonco. Only coinpt>ssiblo cswncoH can give rifio 
to co-cxiHting phcuonicna, and time and Mpaco are the order of 
co-exi.stcncc (*f tlu^se phenomena. St*o Introduction, Part yi. p. 102. 

*" ‘When Ood culcutattis and employs thought, the world is 
made.’ ctmnexinm' hder res el rer6a (1677} <'E. 77 a; H. vii. 191). 
The phrase was written by Leibniz on t]»© margin of the MS. and 
may accordingly be of later date. 

** The right angle is always 90*^ ; but an acute or an obtuse angle 
iitTariable in size. The right angle is thus ‘ Axed * or ‘determined,' 
^d the right angle is the greatest angle at which one line <uin 
moot another. 

^ The suggestion is of some such arraugemeut as we have in 
a system of pulleys. 

ORIGINATION OP THINGS 343 

of essence (through which more things are compossihlo 
the greater it is) is the principle of existence. Whence 
at the same time it is manifest how the Author of the 
world is free, idthough He does all things determinate! y, 
for He acts from a principle of wisdom or perfwtion. 
Indifference springs from ignorance, and the wiser a 
man is the more is he determined towards that whicli is 
moat perfect '^’. 

But, you will say, however beautiful may aoein this 
comparison of a certain metapliysical dtHermining me- 
chanism with tlio physical mechanism of heavy bodies, 
it nevertheless fails in this respect that heavy bodies 
really exist and act, but possibilities or essences anterior 
to existence or apart from it are imaginary or fictitious 
and therefore no Reason of existence is be sought in 
them. I reply that neither those e8sen(*eR nor what arc» 
called eternal trutlis reganliiig tliese essences are ficti- 
tious, but that they exist in a certain region (if I may so 
call it) of ideas, that is to say, in ftod Himself, the source 
of all essence and of the existence of other things. That 
this is not a mem gratuitous assertion of mine is shown 
by the existence of the actual series of things. For since 
the reason of the series is not to bo found in itself, as lias 
been sliown above, but is to be sought in metiiphysiciil 
necessities or eternal truths, and since existing things 
can come only from existing things, as we have already 
remarked, eternal truths must iiave existence in some 
absolutely or*’ metaphysically necessary subjcjct, that is, 
in God, through whom these things which would other- 
wise be imaginary &re (to use a barbarous but expressive 
wordjT realized 

And indeed we actually find that all things in tlie 

“ Cf. Introduction, Part iii. p. 145. 

” Or ‘ground/ ” K. roadH ‘and.' 

** That ia to say, Ofxl gives them a <^rtuin reality or cxi»tonc« m 
His utulerslandingj as distinct from exislenci* in tfw actual uorldy which 
belongs to contingent things. Cf. Monatiulmjy, §$ 43, 44, 46 and 
47, note 75. 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

344 

world take place in accordance with the laws, not only 
geometrical but also metaphysical, of eternal tmths, that 
is, iKjt only in accordance with material necessities but 
also in accordance with formal reiison3*’\ And this is 
iiot only true in general as regards the reason (which we 
have just explained) why a world exists rather than not, 
iind why it exists thus rather than othenvise (a reason 
which is to 1)(» found only in the tendency of possible 
things to exist) ; but also when wo come down to par- 
ticular things we see that inehiphysical laws of cause, 
power, activity, arc' present in a wonderful way through- 
out tiio whole of nature, and that they are even sui^erior 
to the j)uroly geotntdrical laws of matter, as to m3' great 
astonishmont 1 fiuind wlion I was explaining tlie laws 
of motion, so that, as J have elsewhere more fully ex- 
[>lainod '^^ 1 was ultimately com])elled to give up the law 
of the geometrical composition of forceps which 

1 had maintained in my youth when I had more belief 
in the material view. 

Accordingly we have the ultimate rtauson of the reality 
both of essences and of existences in one Jleing who is 
necessarily greater, higher, and ohh*r ) than the 

world itsidf, since through Him not only the existing 
things whicli the world contains but also possible things 
have reality. But this uUiinnte n^ason can he found 
only in oim source on account of the inter-connexion of 
all thes<^ things*^ But it is manifest that from this 
source existing things continuall3' come forth [ 
that they are being and have been produced by it, since 
it does not appear why one state of the world rather 
than another, the state of 3'estertla3' ratla r than that of 
to-day, should tlow from it*'’. It is also manifest how 

E. ready ‘ nor 04 *si tics' instead of * reasons/ 

^ Api>ondix I, p. 351- 

” That is to say, the aotuul Mysicin of things is one and therefore 
](% source is one. Cf MonaM)ffyf $ 39. 

** The reforenco is not quite clour. Janet tranalntes ‘from the 
world itself.' Kirohmaun translates * from this souroe,' On Janet’s 

ORIGINATION OF THINGS 345 

God acts not only physically but also freely, how not 
only the efficient but also the final catise of tilings is in 
Him, and how He manifests not only His greatness and 
power in the mechanism of the world as already con- 
structed, but also His wisdom and goodness in the 
constructing of it^. 

And lest any one should think that we aro here con- 
founding moral perfection or goodness with metaphysical 
perfection or greatness and, allowing the latter, slioiild 
deny the former, it is to be ohsen t'd that it follows from 
what has bi'en said not only that the worhl is moat 
perfect physically, or, if yon prefer it, metaphysically, 
that is to say, that that stories of things hais come into 
existence in w’hich the greatest amount of reality is 
actually manifested, hut also that the world is most 
perfect morally hecause g<>miino moral perfec tion is i»hy- 
sicaP" j)erfi‘Otion in minds [ tliemselves, Whtu’c*- 

fore the world is not only.ihe most aclinirahle mechanism, 
hut it is also, in so far as it is made up of minds | tuvnirs]^ 
the best cominonwealth, thrcaigh which there is be- 
stowed upon minds the gii»atest possi]>le happiness or 
joy, in which their physical perfection consists"*. 

interpretation, tlio pn^sam' would mean that all tlu> stat<*M of the 
world must eomu from tiod. in wlamo nature is h* found th«' 
KufTieient n^ason of all and of ea<*h, and not from tJie Wi>rld itse If, 
whi«*li eannot suj)j»ly tho suflieient reason of any. On Kijchmann's 
interpretation, the inmninK would be that eaeJi Hiate of tlio world 
comes frciin Ood by a ‘ continual fn ation,’ beraus*> there is no reasoji 
why God abould ereate one state rather than another. Uoth iiiter- 
pretntifins are possible ; but Janet'a Meems tlie more natural. 

t:f. yfonwMnqy, $§ 47, 48, 55. 

^ ‘Physical* means * imturnl ' or ‘accordirip to tin* 
nature of the tiling’ in contrast with ‘ metaphysirar in tin- 

Hense id 'absolute, indoixuiderit of the sfiecilbr nature of the thing/ 
Thus (cf. .Kupra) ‘the Wfirld is most jsjrfoct physically' means that 
its individual riicmhei*fl or elements are an perfect as the nature of 
each allows, whiles * the w'orld is m»»Ht jserfect inofaphysn ally' means 
that the world as a whole is the most jMirfect )H»Hsible. So also 
‘genuine moral perfection is physical p«>rfection in minds them- 
M'lves * inoann that the specific natural pt'rfectioii of mind is moral 
pc'rfwtion. 

Of. Monodology, §$ 86 sqq. ‘Felicity is to persons what [H*r- 
fection ia to beings.’ Paper without a title (16&6) (O. iv. 462). 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

346 

But, you will say, we find that the opposite of this 
takes place in the world, for very often the best people 
suffer the worst things, and those who are innocent, both 
animals and men, are aiHicted and put to death even 
with torture ; and indeed the world, especially if we 
consider the government of the human i*ace, seems rather 
a confused chaos than aii3rthing directed by a supreme 
wisdom. So, 1 confess, it seems at a first glance, but 
when we look at it more closely the opposite conclusion 
manifestly follows a priori from those very considerations 
wliich have bo<!n adduced, the conclusion, namely, that 
the liighest possible perfection of all things, and therefore 
of all minds, is brought about. 

And indeed, as tlie lawyers say, it is not proper to 
judge unless wo have examined the whole law. We 
know a very small part of eternity which is imineasure- 
able in its extent ; for what a little thing is the record 
of a few thousand years, which history transmits to us ! 
Nevertheless, from so slight an exiiorience we rashly 
judge regarding the immeasiiroable and eternal, like men 
who, having been born and broiight up in prison or, 
perhaps, in the subterranean salt-mines of the Sarnia- 
tiuns should think that there i.s no other light in the 

'**' Th« roforonoc to sonu* of tlio salt-mines in or near 

thr (’iirpnihinns, which are tlie ricliest in Europe. The most 
famous salt-mines in the worhl are at Wieliczii, near Cracow in 
( 4 alif'iu (^wliich in Leibniz's time >vas still part of the kingdom of 
Poland). They have been worked f<»r about 600 year.s, and many 
of the workei-s live {xTinuneiiily underground, there l)eing streets 
and hoiiHes and, in short, something like a village in the lower 
levels. In .feremy Collier’s Ihcttonaty^ published towards the end 
of the soveiitoenth eeiitury, the famous wflt-minea are said to he 
those of Eperies, in northern Hungary, on the other sidt of the 
Our]>athians fn*m Cfacow. Sarniatia is a very vague word. Ac- 
cording t<i Ptolemy it included all the eastern Euro{)oan plain from 
the Vistula and the Dniester to the Volga. In any case it included 
the district of the salt-mines referred to. Ijoihniz elsewhere seems 
to identify Sarmatian with Slavonic speech. {Nouveaux Esnais^ iii. 
^ § z ; £. 399 b ; G. v. 359, s6o.) In English verse, Sarmatia is 
mteii used as synonymous with Poland, e. g. * Sarniatia fell, un- 
wept, without a crime ’ t^ampboll, Fisasures qf Hopef Part i. line 376 ; 
see also 1. 407}. 

ORIGINATION OP THINGS 347 

world than that of the feeble lamp wdiich hardly suffices 
to direct their steps. If you look at a very beautiful 
picture, having covered up the whole of it except a very 
small part, what will it present to your sight, however 
thoroughly you examine it (nay, so much the more, the 
more closely you inspect it), but' a confused mass of 
colours laid on wiiliout selection and without art ? Yet 
if you rt'inove the covering and look at the whole picture 
from the right point of view, you will see that what 
appeiired to liave been carelessly daubed on the canvjis 
was really done by the painter with very groat art*\ 
The experience of the eyes in painting corresponds to 
that of tho <'Ara in music. Eminent composers voiy 
often mingle discords mth harmonies so as to stimulate 
and, as it were, to prick the hearer, who h<»conios anxious 
as to what is going to haj>pen, and is so much tho more 
pleased when presently all is restored to order ; just as 
we take i>leasure in small dangers or risks of mishap, 
merely from tho eonscionsness of our power or our luck 
or from a desire to make a display of them ; or, again, as 
wo delight in the show of danger that is connected with 
performances on the tight-ropo or sword-dancing {mnts 
perillfux)^\ and we ourselves in jest lialf lot go a little 
boy, as if about to throw him from us, like the ape which 
carried Christiern, King of Denmark”'', while still an 
infant in swaddling-clolhos, to tho top of the roof, and 
then, as in jest, relieved the anxiety of every one )>y 
bringing him safely back to his cradle. On the muiio 
principle sweet things become insipid if we eat nothing 
else; sharj), tart, bnd even bitter things must bo com- 
bined with them, so as to stimulate *the taste. He 

** A most inioroHting variant of thin illuwtratioii wfMirs iii 
Boftanquot*H EssenHals 0/ lA>gic^ pp. 55 

** Lc'ibniz gives the French phruKO to explain iiis fiJihn. 

** Probably Chriatiern or Christian V (,1646 1699., lh»' firat 
hereditary tnot elected; King of Penmark, wbo was i*oigiiing at 
the time when Leibniz wrote. In tho tnxt ho is callod (Jhri^liorniia, 
Christiern or Kristiern being tho Danish form of the name. 

ON THE ULTIMATE 

348 

who has not tasted bitter things does not deserve sweet 
things and, indeed, will not appreciate them. This 
is the veiy law of enjoyment, that pleasure does not 
have an even tenor, for this begets loathing and makes 
us dull, not happy ''®. 

But as to our saying that a part may be disturbed 
without destroying harmony in the whole, this must not 
be understood as meaning tliat no account is taken of the 
parts or that it is enough for the world as a whole to be 
pt‘rfect, although it may l>o that the human race is 
wretche<l, and that Uiero is in the univei*se no regard 
for justice and no care for us, as is the o[)inion of some 
whose judgment regarding the totality of things is 
not quite just. For it is to bt) observed that, as in 
a tln>roughly well-constituted commonwealth can^ is 
taken, as far as may be, for tlie good of individuals, 
M) the univei-se will not be sutliciently j>erfect unless 
tlie interests <»f individuals are attended to, while the 
universal harmony is preserved And for this no 

*To Imvo a (liousand wi'll-bound VirgiN in youj* library, always 
to sinjr airs IVoni Ibc opera of Cadmus ainl nortiiiono, to break ail 
your porctdain that you might have nothing but cupn of gold, to 
havo diamonds aloiio for buttons, to eat nothing but ])aiiridges, 
to ilrink only Hungarian or Sbiras wine — would yf>u call that 
reason?' § 124 , K. 539 b; H. vi. 179^. Cf. of 

Niitun tinif i\t (tHtcCf § 18 ; also fhicoii, Dc Augmentis^ iii. i. 

Cf 7V<mW<«(V, § ti8 (K. 535 u ; (h vi. 169): ‘No substanco is 
iibsolutoly uontiunptiblo or precious in tlie sight of Goil. ... It 
is certain that God gives more impmtance to a man than to 
a lion ; yet 1 di» not know if \ve can be certain that th>d pitTcrs 
one man to the whole species of lions in all respects. Ihit oven if 
it wore 8t», it would not follow that, the interest of a certain niimljor 
of men should prevail in face of a general di||order, extending to an 
infinite tiutnher of created things. This ojiiiiion would l»e a relic 
of the old maxim, now quite out of repute, that evviytliing Iftippons 
solely on iiiairs account.’ Cf. Mvditatwn si/r la- notion commune de la 
ju^ttve (Mollat, p. 63) : ‘There are pimple wlio think that we are of 
too little consequence, in the sight of an inliniio God, for Him to 
Jiave any caro for u.s : we are sup)>osed to bo in relation to God 
what the worms, which we crush without thinking about it, are iu 
Illation to us. But this is to suppose' that God is like a mau and 
cannot think of everything. Just because God is infinite, He does 
things without labour by a kiud of consequence of His will, as it is 
a consequence of my will and that of iny friend that we are in 

ORIGINATION OF THINGS 

349 

better standard could be set up than the very law of 
justice which declares that each should participate in tlie 
perfection of the universe and in a ha}>piness of his own 
in proportion to his own virtue and to the degree in which 
his will has regard to the common good ; and by this is 
fulfilled that which we caII charity and the love of God, 
in which alone, in the opinion of wise theologians, consists 
the force and power even of tlio Christian religion ^*. Nor 
ought it to appear wonderful that so great a place should 
be given to minds in the universe, since they most closely 
resemble the image of the Supreme Author ; they are 
ndated to Him, not (like other things) as niachint's to 
their constructor, but as citizens to their prince ; they 
are to last as long as the universe itscdf, and in a inanmu* 
they express and concentrate the W'hole in theinselvos, so 
that it may be said that minds are whole parts I 
io(al€s]"\ 

But as to the sjH^cial fpiesiion of tlu^ afflictions of good 
men, it is to ))o held as certain that tliese afUiclions have 
as their result the greater good of those who are afflicted, 
and this is true not only theologically l)ut also naturally 
[p/o/sicr !, as the grain cast inb> the earth suff'i'rs before it 
bears fruit. And in general it may be said that atflictions 
are for the time evil but in tlie end good, since they are 
shoi’t ways to greater poifection. So in physics, liqiii<ls 
which ferment slowly take also a longer time to purify, 

rt>;r<*omont, no now arHon Iwini; n‘quiri<t to onr affriw- 

ineiit, beyoiet tlie rem>lv** \vln(;li viirh of us Iuih iniulf*. Now if tho 
liuinati race and even the ‘•inallest tiling wen* not well guverinul, 
the univerHO itjwdf w^uld Ji*>t ho well governed, for the wJioJo 
coriMists in it.s partK.’ 

Cff Pope, Eftmy on Fourth Epifsitlo, lines 327 sqq. Nature, 

says Pope, connects 

'libin’s greatest virtue with his gnat^ist bliss. 

Self-love’ thus push'd to social, t^> divine, 

Givija thee to make thy neighbour's blussing thine. 

Happier as kinder, in whate'or degnsi 
And height of bliss but height of charity/ 

* See Introduction, Pari ii. p. 31. 

350 ULTIMATE OKIGINATION OF THINGS 

while thof»e which undergo a greater agitation throw off 
certain of their ingredients with greater force, and ai*e 
thus more quickly rectified. And this is what you might 
call going back in order that you may put more force 
into your leap forward (qu^on recede pour mieux sauter*^). 
Wherefore these things are to be regarded not only as 
agreeable and comforting, but also as most true. And 
in general I think there is nothing more true than 
happiness, and nothing more happy and pleasaht than 
truth. 

Further* to realize in its completeness the universal 
bc^auty and pei'footion of the works of God, we must 
recognize a cc‘rtain |>erpotual and very free progress of 
the whole universe, such that it is always going forward 
to greah'i* improvement [rulfus]. So even now a great 
pari of our earth has received cultivation [rultura] and 
will receive it more and more. And although it is true 
that soiuotimes certain parts of it grow wild again, or 
again sufh'r destruction or degeneration, yet this is to be 
understood in the way in which afiiiction was explained 
above, that is to say* that this very destruction and 
degeneration loads to some greater end, so that somehow 
we profit by this loss itself ’’. 

And to the possible objection that, if this were so, the 
world ought long ago to have become a paradise, there 
is a ready answer. Although many substances have 

Cf. Prinnjtlea o/ynftue an*J of Oracef § 12, noto 51. 

“ Cf. d la /V/mrss>’ (1706^ (G. vii. 568^ : ‘And as there 
is roHSoii to think that th« univerno itself <|<?v<‘lof>8 fB«>m more to 
inoru and that all tcnclH to Home ond, sinao all comos from an 
Author whoHo wisdom is |H'rfoct, wo may Kimilarly Ih‘Hoi^ that 
souls* which last as lonpj as the uiiivors**, go also from twitter to 
bettor, at lonat naturally ' and that their p(irf*>ctioiiH 

go on increasing, although most often this takes place imperceptibly 
and sometim€>s ufU^r great circuits bn«'kward/ See also TMtjf a 
Bourguat (1716) (O, iii. 589'!; * Although the universe has always 
equally perfect' (i, e. each momentary state of the universe 
equally pt‘rfect with every other! it will never be Rupremely 
perfect ; for it always changes and gains new perfections, though 
it loses old ones.' 

APPENDIX I 

35 ^ 

already attained a great i^erfection, yet on account of 
the infinite divisibility of the continuous, there always 
remain in the abyss of things slumbering parts which 
have yet to be awakened, to grow in size and worth, 
and, in a woi*d, to advance to a more perfeci state [rir/ 
melioreni cultum]. And hence no end of progress is ever 
reached. 

AITENDTX I. 

THE GROWTH OF LElRNIZ’s THEORIES REGARDING FORCE 
AND MOTION. 

In the gecond of two dialogues, entitled PhorattonniM uru th 
Potentia et Jjfffthus Sttfuntt' <1689', Leibniz jfives an account of 
the i»rogr(‘Hs of his views re^ardinj^^ dyniiniuiH and i»liy»i(*8. 
AVluit follows is a j)ortion of this aeconnl, roiubined with 
part of a similar Ktatoinciit in the S)H*chnrn Jhfuatnirutn. 
•When first I esraped froiii the prickly thorn-bnikcH of the 
schools into the mon* ])leaKant fitdds of later philosophy, I wait 
greatly taken with that tWeinating ease* of nn<lerstanding, in 
which I saw a lucid iinagiiiation comprehend iiig all the things 
which formerly were wraj»ped in dark notioiis And after Jong 
and careful deliberation I at length rejected tlie “forms” and 
“qualities” of mat<*nal things, and redue.ed all things to j)urely 
mathematical principles ; but sincf3 I was not yet versed in 
geornetjy, 1 was convinced that a ronfinuum consists of ]>ointK 
and that a very slow motion is ]»roken hy littb* bits of rtist, and 
I was inclined to other <Iocfriiies of this kind, which c ommend 
themselves to thos*- who seek to comprehend all things with 
the imagination and who do not notice the infinite which is 
everywhere latent in things. But although,, when f biwame 
a geoiifetrician, I put off the»e opinions, there yet remained for 
a 'vhile atoms and the void, as relies of a slate of mind flint 
was in revolt against the idea of the infinite; for altliough 
1 granted that every voniinnum can in thouglit be divided 
ad injinitum^ yet I did not realty accept the view that in things 
there are innumerable parts^which follow from motion in the 
pUnum. At last, not only wjis I freed from this scrupk, but 
also I began to recognize something deeper in bodies, which 

APPENDIX I 

35a 

could not be comprehended , by the imagination. . • . This 
ought not to seem wonderful, for it is the nature of foundations 
to be humble, but if they are securely laid, great masses arise 
upon them. Accordingly, when I as yet acknowledged the 
iurisdiction of imagination alone in regard to material things, 
I was of opinion that any natural inertia in bcnlies was 
unintelligible, and that a body at rest in mcuo or in a free 
space must receive ihe velocity of another, however small that 
othf‘r might be ; and that this does not actually happen in our 
^•xperienee I attributed to the system established by the wisdom 
of the Siii^rcme Author of things, in which all things are ruled 
by the most just laws. Nor indeed did I douVjt that the origin 
of the system might be rationally thought out on mechanical 
yirinciph'H from those very laws of natural bodies, which explain 
oceurn*n(‘es hy the coiiijiosition of motions, smdi as I expounded 
regarding K(>veral cases in a treatise which I ])ublished when 
a young man.* rhoranommt, see Arch. f. f/wA. d. Phil. i. 577. 
‘ Wh(‘n I was a young man and. at that time, following 
Democritus and his adlierents in this matter, Oa.sKcndi and 
Descartes, I regerded the nature of body as consisting in mere, 
inert mass, 1 issued a trt*atise with the title tlypnihenis Pht/airay 
in whhili I expounded a theory of motion both abstract (inde- 
pendent of the system of things) and concrete (as it appears 
in tluj system of things), which I see has pleased many 
distinguished men better than its moderate worth deserved. 
In this treatise I maintained that, supposing my view of the 
nature of body to be right, every impinging body gives its 
impulse fcowofif-v] to the body on wliich it impinges or which 
is directly in its way, as such. For when the impact takes 
place, the body impinged upon endeavours to move forward 
and thus to go away, and tsince, as I then thought, body is 
indift'erent to motion or rest) this endeavour leflbH, conafus] 
must have its full etlect in the body impinged u})on, unless it 
is hindered by an oppo.site eft'oH., and even if it is so hindered, 
since these ditlerent etlorts must be compounded together. 
Accordingly it was manifest that no cause can be given why 
the impinging body should not achieve the effect towards 
which it tends or why the body impinged upon should not 
receive the whole impulse [rofio/jw] of the impinging body, and 
tHerefore the motion of Uie body impinged upon is compounded 
of its own original impulse and the new or foreign impulse it 
has received. Whence I further showed that if in body there 

APFEKDIX I 

. 353 

were recognized only mathematical notions, magnitude, figure, 
place, and their changes or their tendency [rofuifus] to change 
at the very moment of impact, and no account were taken of 
metaphysical notions, namely, of moving power \patefitia] in 
the foi*m, and of inertia (or resistance to motion) in the matter 
[of the body], and if it were thus necessary that the result of 
the impact should be determined by a purely geometrical 
composition of forces fconafu/tl, os we have explained ; then 
it ought to follow that the impulse of the impinging body, 
however small that body may be, is communicated to the whole 
of the body impinged upon, however large it may be, and thus 
the very largest body at rest is moved away by an impinging 
body, however small, without any letanling of the lati^T, since 
matter, thus understood, is not repugnant but rather indifferent 
to motion. Hence it would not be more difficult to move 
a largfj body at rest than a small one, and therefore there 
would be action without reaction, and no estimate of power 
could be made, since anything might be accompli shed by 
anything. . . . But afterwards, having considered the whole 
matter more profoundly, I saw in wliat the systematic exjdana- 
tion of things’ (i.e. the explanation of things as they actually 
are] ‘should consist, and I observed that my I'ormcr hypotbesis 
regarding the nature of body was not complete, ami that this 
as well as other argiimeiits proved that body must be regarded 
as having, in tiddition to magnitude and iinpcnetmbility, 
something from which arises the considemtion of forces [t??Vcs], 
the metaphysical laws of which, when combined with the laws 
of extension, give rise to those very laws of motion which f had 
called systematic. . , / Specimen JJi/namicum^ &c. (1695) 
Math.vi. 240). ‘ I am of opinion that the nn^chanical principles 
and reasons of the laws of motion do themselves arise not from 
the necessity of matter, but from some higher principle than 
imagination, and one independent of mathematics. . . . Besides 
I begai^to have considerable doubts as to the nature of motion. 
For when formerly I regarded space as an immovable real 
p 1 av'.e, possessing extension alone, I bad been able to define 
absolute motion as change of this real space. But fpwiually 
I began to doubt whether there is in nature such an entity 
as is called space; whence it followed that a rloubt might 
arise about absolute motion. Certainly Aristotle had said 
that place is nothing but the surface of what surrounds us 
« A a 

APPEITOIX I 

354 

{superflcies amhientiaY’, and Descartes, following him, had defined 
motion (that is, change of place) as change of neighbourhood 
fmuiatio iHciniae\ Whence it seemed to follow that that which 
is real and absolute in motion consists not in what is purely 
mathematical, such os change of neighbourhood or situation, 
but in motive force \potfntia motrix] itself; and if there is 
none of this, then there is no absolute and real motion. . . . 
Accordingly I found no other Ariadne thread to lead me out 
of this labyrinth than the calculation of forces [poteniiae^, 
assuming this metaphysical principle. “That the total effect 
is always equal to its complete cause’* \Quod effectus integer sit 
semper* aerptnlis causae suae plenae^ When I discovered that 
this agrees perfectly with cxx>erienco and satisfies all doubts, 
I was more confirmed in my opinion that the causes of things 
are not. so to speak, senseless aTul ])iirel3^ mathematical, 

like the concourse of atoms or the blind force of nature, but 
proceed from an intelligence which employs metaphysical 
reasons.* Phoratiomus, see Acrh.f. Gesch. d. Phil. i. 577. Tn the 
first of these dialogues ( Phorattomus, &c.) Leibniz says: 'As in 
goometi*y and nutnbei*8, through the principle of the equality 
of the whole to all its parts, geometry is brought within the 
scope of an analytical calculus, so in mechanics, through the 
prin(!iple of the tMjuality of the effect to all its causes or of 
the cause to all its effects, we obtain certain equations, as it 
were, and a kind of algebraic mechanics.* loc. cit. p. 576. Cf.’ 
Introduction to this book, Part iii. p. 107 note. 

* Phys. A. 4 . 3121 * 30 . 

NEW ESSAYS ON THE HUMAN' UNDER- 
STANDING. 1 704. 

By the Author of the System of Pre- 
established Harmony. 

prefatory note. 

The Nnr Fsttat/s contain the fullcHt Btatemcnt of Loihniz’H 
appreciation and criticism of Locke. Leibniz became ac- 
quainted with the main outline of Locke's Kssntf, before it was 
actually published in Knpflish^ by means of an abstract of the 
book, prepared by Locke, translated into French and published 
in Le Clerc’s Bihliothhjue Vuiverselle (1688), vol. 8, i)p. 49 sqq. 
When in 1690 the Essay itself was publiahed Leibniz reuAl it, 
making notes as he wont, and his criticisms were expressed in 
various short, papers, sonic of which were transmitted to Locke 
through Thom'cW Burnet of Keinnay. Locke, however, seems 
rather to have disparaged Leibniz’s criticisms and he did not 
count them worthy of a reply. Meanwhile lA>cke’B Essay 
passed through several editions, and in 1700 Coste’s French 
translation of it was published. This enabled Leibniz, whose 
knowledge of Pmglisll was somewhat imperfect, to mak(* a 
thorougli study of the Essay, and after writing some papers on 
special parts of it, he set himself to the task of preparing the 
elaborate exposition and criticism of the Essay which was after- 
wards published as the New Essays. The book was written 
somewhat hurriedly and discontinuously, during scraps of 

* Q.J with over-accuracy, omits * human,’ which Lfubriiz cannot 
deliberately have intended to omit, for he includes it in the titles 
of the first three books of the New Eamys, 

* A a a 

NEW ESSAYS 

356 

leimire time. Accordingly Leibniz, in view of publication^ 
submitted his work to Hugony and Barbeyrac (the great jurist), 
who revised a considerable portion of it, including the Intro- 
duction, and made numerous changes in its expression. 
Meanwhile a new edition of Coste’s translation, revised and 
corrected by Locke himself, was promised, and Leibniz was 
strongly advised by Coste’ to delay publication until after he 
had seen this new edition. Locke died in the end of 1704, and 
Leibniz, understanding that he had made considerable changes 
in his opinions, felt that it was now of little use to publish his 
own criticism. 

. Accordingly the Netc EsHayn remained in manuscript until 
1765, when they were published by Raspe. He printed the text 
in the form which it had finally assumed after the correction 
and revision of Hugony, Barbeyrac and Leibniz himself. 
Erdmann (K. 194 sqq.j follows this text. Gerhardt (G. v. 39 
sqq.), however, has tliought it better to reconstruct the original 
text, by going behind the corrections, on the ground that, 
while these corrections often improve the French style of the 
original, they do not always so well express Leibniz’s thought. 
Boutroux, approving the course taken by Gerhardt, has in 
various points corrected the Jbext mode by that editor. My 
translation is made from Boutroux’s text. Such variations as 
involve a change in translation are mentioned in foot-notes. 

In the Introduction to the New Essays (which was written 
later than the rest of the book), Leibniz summarizes the main 
j)oint8 regarding which he differs from Locke, while he 
chariuderisticaliy suggests that, after all, the differences 
between his view and that of Locke are not altogether in- 
surmountable. After some prefatory sentences, the Intro- 
duction deals in the first place (a) with the question whether 
(as Locke held) the mind is tabula rasa or whether (as Leibniz 
thought) there are innate ideas, necessary truths, including 
the question whether or not all our knowledge comes ^om the 
senses (pp. 357-367). (b) This leads naturally to the question 
whether (as Locke seems to say) there is nothing in our mind 
of which we are not actually conscious or whether (os Leibniz 
maintains) we have nnconscious perceptions (pp. 367-385). 

JLeibniz hero connects his psychology with his metaphysics by 
showing how the petites perceptions throw light upon the pre- 
established harmony, the law of continuity, the identity of 

NEW ESSAYS 

357 

indiBcernibles and the indeetructibility of bouIb, as well ob 
their inBeparabillty from bodies, (c) The next question con- 
sidered is that of atoms and the void (in which Locke believes) as 
against (Leibniz's view) (pp. 385 sqq.). (d) References 

to the criticism of Locke by Stillingfleet lead to a consideration 
of the question whether matter can think, Locke maintaining 
the possibility of this, while Stillingfleet and licibniz deny it 
(pp. 390 sqq.). This gives occasion to Leibniz to draw a 
distinction between the physical or real genus of a thing 
and its logical or ideal genus (p. 394), and in the remainder 
of the Introduction he applies this distinction, maintaining 
that as matter and soul are heterogeneous (i.e. not of the 
same physical or real genus), thinking, which is a mode of 
soul, cannot be a mode of matter, except by miracle, and that 
accordingly, if Locke’s contention were true, we should have 
to adopt a philosophy of unintelligible qualities or faculties, 
which would be even worse than the Scholastic theories of 
* occult * qualities or faculties, ho justly derided by later 
thinkera. 

Introduction. 

As the Essaf/ on the Understanding'^^ by an illustrious 
Englishman, is one of the host and most highly orsUiomod 
works of tho present time, 1 have resolved to mnkc^ some 
remarks upon it, because, having for a long time given 
considerable attention to tho same subject and to most of 
the matters with which tho es.say deals, I have thought 
that this would be a good occasion for publishing some 
of my opinions under the title of Nrw Essays on the 
Understanding^ in the hope that my thoughts will obtain 
a favourable* reception through api>earing in such good 
company. I liave toped also to be able to profit by the 
work of another, not only in the way of lessening iny 
own work (as in fact it is less trouble to follow the 
thread of a good author than to work on entirely un- 
trodden ground) but also in tho way of adding some- 

‘ E. reads ^ human understanding.' 

’ E. reads ‘ more favourable.' 

* £. omits tlie clause in brackets. 

NEW ESSAYS 

358 

thing to what he has given us, which is always easier 
than making an independent beginning ^ For I think 
I have removed some difficulties which he left entirely 
alone. Tlius his reputation is helpful to me ; and besides, 
being disposed to do justice and very far from wishing 
to lessen the esteem in wdiich his work is held, I would 
increase his reputation, if my approval have any weight \ 
It is true that I often differ from him in opinion ; but, 
far from ^ denying the woi*th of famous writers, we bear 
witness to it by making known in what respect and for 
what reasons we differ from their opinion, when wo 
think it necoaHai*y to prevent their authority from pre- 
vailing against reaison on some important i>oints’*; and 
besides, in replying to such excellent men, we make 
it easier for the truth to be accepted, and it is to be 
supposed that it is principally for truth that they are 
working. 

In fact, although the author of the J^Jssatf says a thousand 
fine things of which I cordially approve, our systems 
greatly differ. Ilis has more relation to Aristotle and 
mine to Plato ®, although in many things both of us have 

" E. oniiti* ‘always’ and adda (after ‘ beginning*), ‘and working 
on entirely untrodden ground.' 

" R. oniitH from ‘ For I think ' to * any weight.' 

^ K. reads ‘ denying on that account the worth of this famous 
writer, 1 do him justice,’ &o. 

" K. omits the remainder of the sentence, from this point. 

^ 'fhe main principles of laubniz's philosophy are really much 
more akin to the philosophy of Aristotle than to the doctrines 
which are peculiar to Plato. But, as regards Aristotle, Leibniz 
is here thinking of that side of his phfloaophy which led the 
Scholastics to attribute to him the saying, NUtil est in ititeiMu quod 
non priiut/i 4 ent in misu, (Of. Duns Scotus, Super Universalibus Porphyrii^ 
Question 3 : lUa prqpooiiio Ariftfoinlnf^ nihil est in intdlectu quin priuo 
fuertt in Mvum. . . .) This phraae does not occur in any of Aristotle's 
writings ; but it serves as a fair enough analysis of several passages 
in the Postenor Analytics, in which iwtarqfiq is traced to aJaOqais, 
though other passages supplement this by bringing in the work of 
vovs, (See especially AnaL Post ii. 19, and Eth, vi. 3, § 3.) The 
view that the soul is a tabula raaa is suggested by the passage : 

NEW ESSAYS 

359 

departed from the doctrine of these two ancient %vritera. 
He is more popular, and I for my part am sometimes 
compelled to be a little more acroamatic"^ and abstract, 
which is not of advantage to me, especially when a living 
language is used. But I think that by introducing two 
speakers, one of whom expounds opinions taken from 
this author's Essa^, while the other adds iny observations, 
1 show the rolation between us in a way that will be 
more satisfactory to the reader than if I bad put down 
mere remarks, tlie reading of w'hich would have biKJU 
constantly interrupted by the necessity of turning to his 
book in order to understand mine. Nevertheless it will 
be well also to compare our writings sometimes, and not 
to judge of his opinions except from his own work, 
although I have usually retained his expressions. It is 
true that owing to the limitations involved in following 
the thread of another persons argument and making 
remarks upon it, I liave^ been unable even to think of 
achieving the graceful turns of which dialogue is sus- 
ceptible ; but I hope that the matter will make up for 
the defects of the style. 

vws icTt rd yoijrd d foCs, dXX* ov9fy, npiv Ak yoy. dti 

3 ’ oCran S/urrtp iy ypafiparfiip ^ Orrdpx^i ytypappipoy 

{De Jmma, iii. 4. 429^’ 30'-. Cf. note la, In ro^nnl to Plato, 

on the other hand, Ijeihiiiz is jirobably thinking mainly of the 
Platonic theory of reminiscence, act-ording to which our knowledge 
of realities, in so far as wo can attain to it, is u i‘ocolh‘ction or 
restoration of knowledge possessed V>y Die soul in a previous state, 
BO that necessary and oternal trutliM are, in n neriHu, innate in us. 
On the whole matter cf. Nolen, (^n'd Lvilmiztua Aiishtdi ddmerily and 
Trendelenburg, Hist, ifeitidge, vol. ii. ^ 

i. §. esoteric. See Aulus Oelliiis, Noctea AHkm^ xx. 5 (quoted 
by* Ritter and Preller, Hist, PhU. Graac, § 398), where a distim-tion is 
drawn between the exoterio- and the ‘ acinmlic ' writings of Aristotle. 
Leibniz himself dehnes the word : ^The acroainatic way of pliiioso* 
phizing is that in which all things are deinonsirated, the exoteric 
is that In which certain things are said witliout domonstra> 
tion, and yet are confirmod by the consist/cjiey they have with 
various other things end by probabU^ [(opicnej reasons (or even 
reasons that might demonstrate, but are put forward only as 

NEW ESSAYS 

360 

The differences between us have regard to subjects'' 
of some importance. There is the question whether the 
soul, in itself, is entirely empty, like a writing-tablet on 
which nothing has yet been written (tabula rasa)y (which 
is the opinion of Aristotle and of the author of the 
Essay)y and whether eveiything that is inscribed upon it 
comes solely from the senses and experience ; or whether 
the soul originally contains the principles*^ of several 
notions and doctrines, which are merely roused on certain 
occasions by external objects, as I hold along with Plato 
and even with the Schoolmen, and with all those who 
interpret in this sense the i>assiige of St. Paul (liomans, 
ii. 15), in which he shows that the law of God is written 
in meirs hearts. The Stoics called tliese principles 
7rpoAT;i//€ic that is, fundaiuental assumptions or wiiat 

probable), and arc illustratod by instances and similar cases.' I)e 
8 iih philosiiphico Nisoln (1670) f E. 63 a ; G. iv. 146). 

** E. reads * objects.' 

“ Of. note 9. Aristotle's moaning, however, is very different 
from that of Locke. 6 Volf's is not the ‘ soul,' but reason as opposeil 
to Monso. And there is a vovs dva$^s. The context of the passage in 
which vovi is compared to the writing-tablet shows that Aristotle 
merely meant to protest against the view that rea.son has certain 
eompleto * ready- made ’ ideas, apart from all son so- experience. But 
this is quite eonsi>>tent with holding that there are in reason 
potiMitiol or virtual forms or ideas. Even the elcuin writing-tablet 
is nt least a writing- tablet and nut a sheet of water on which 
nothing can be written. Of. J)e Animas iii. 4. 429* 27 : /tai tv 9^ 
ol X^yovTts rfye tTvat t6vov tidutVj Srt oijTt 0A17 dAA* 

ovrt ivTtktxfl<f tlAAd ^vvdfiti rd ffUi/, Cf. Analiftica iW. ii, 19, 99^ 
ao sqq. 

*8 dpxod^ gnuinds or sources. 

** E. reads • common notions * after ' prin<?lple8.' 

** Tim original has prolepses. The Stoic however, was 

not nil anticipation prior to, or presupposed hy, all experience, but 
the common image resulting from a series of Bense-impressions, 
which leads us to exiiect other similar impressions. The distin- 
guishing characteristic of the wpok^iffus is that thc^y arise ^vaorav 
(naturaHy), and are not deliberately constructed by us. Thus 
Biogenes Laertius, vii. 54 : furi 9 ’ 4 ^p^kfpffts ivvota ^vaiieii rwv 
KQ$d\ov, Cf. HacUa, iv. zz, quoted by Ritter and Preller, Bist. FhiL 
Orwx. § 393, in which the Stoics are represented as holding a view 

NEW ESSAYS 

361 

we take for granted beforehand. Mathematiciaiia call 
them common notions (irott^al fwomi)**. Modern philo- 
sophers give them other excellent names ; and. in 
particular^ Julius Scaliger^'^ named them semimi aetet^ 
nitatis item as much as to say, living lii*os, 

flashes of light himmmr] hidden within us but 

appearing at the instance of the senses, like the sparks 
which come from the steel when it strikes the flint. 
And not witliout reason it is thought that these flashes 
[cr2a/^J indicate something divine and eternal, which 
appears above all in necessary trutlis. Hence there 
arises another question, whether all truths are dependent 
on experience, that is, on induction and instances ; or 
whether there are some which have yet another foimda- 
, tion. For if some events can be foreseen before we have 
made any trial of them, it is manifest that wo contribute 

much more akin to (hat of Lockothatito that of : ol Xra/ittoi 

ipaffiy* oray ytyyrfB^ 6 dyOpcjiro^f ^yffwyiic^y fjtifws rrjs 

Sjvmp xnprriv ivtpyov us d.noypa<lt’fiy' fls rovru piav indfTrtfy rwy ivpfuwy 
Ivanoypdiptrat, But tlio jK*culiarity of tin* Stoic MoiiiRin tnukoH it 
posKiblo to regard ihi» uh Icsm iiicousistcnt witli lA‘ibni/N than 
at first sight it apptjarH to be. Cf. KoudalTa Marcus Aurettm Auto- 
nimiH, Introduction, pp. Ixxvi Ixxviii ; and Bonbr>fit*r, ApicUt und 
die SUiOf pp. 187 sqq. 

Euclid culls axioms Kotval tvyotai* 

Julius Caesar Scaliger ( 1484 1558'), one of tlu^ groat scholars of 
the Konaissance. Among hia chief works ''hf'sidos many trariNlations 
from Greek into Latin ^ wt*ro a treatise on Latin grammar, />/ mwm.h 
hnfftuie Lafttate, and a book in opposition to the vi(?ws of Cardan, 
Exotirirae Exervitaticnes de Suhtilitatc ad II wrmymnm Cardunum. 

* Seeds of the eternal and kindling sparks.* Tlie rofonoK*** 
is to Puetice^ Lib. iii. cap, 11. fsth ed., 1617, p. aii^ : ‘Sunt iu nobis 
insita^opyra quaedain. id est, semina aeteruitaiis.' For similar 
expressions cf. Portic«, Lib. iii. cap. 1 and uo ; Poemafa^ Pnrn Alicut 
,1574), pp. 79 and 160; and Ad Amddum Ff-rronum AtFrum Orat iO 
{Epiafclae et OrationeSf p. 427). Zopyra is the Greek (wirvpa, ‘liglits 
used for kindling fires.* In the Zairs, bk. iii. 677 11, Plato spttaks <»f 
the survivors of the Flood as ir icopwpods vov apixpcL (wwvpa top rS>y 
djyOpinnay UaatavtrpUva yiyovs. 

** Trait de lumih-e is used in French for an illuminating thtmfffUy 
and probably Leibniz's phrase is intended to suggest this. 

NEW ESSAYS 

362 

to them fsomething of our own The senses, although 
they are necessary for all our actual acquiring of know- 
ledge, are by no means sufficient to give us the whole of 
our knowledge, since the senses never give anything but 
instances"', that is to say particular or individual truths” 
Now all the instances which confirm a general truth, 
however numerous they may be, are not sufficient to 
establish the universal necessity of this same truth ; for 
it does not at all follow that what has happened will ’^'* 
happen in the same way. For example, the Greeks, the 
Romans, and all the other peoples of the earth, as it was 
known to the ancients always observed that before 
twenty-four hours have passed, day changes into night 

E. roads *on onr part.' 

i. e. Hpccinl crsoh. 

In a Lcttre touchant ce qni est mdej)endant dPS Sens ct de la Matiire 
written to Qm^en Sophia Charlotte in 1702 (during the time when 
he was working at the New Essays), Leibniz says : * We use our 
external senses as a blind man uses his stick (after the simile of an 
ancient writer), and they make known to us their particular objects, 
wliicli are colours, sounds, odours, tastes, and touch-qualities. But 
th<iy do not make known to us what these sense -qualities are, 
nor in what they consist. ... It may bo said that sense-qualities are 
in fact occvli qualiUcs, and that there must bo other more manifest 
qunlit iOH, which can make them explicable. And far from its biung 
true that we understand tilings of sense alone, those are the very 
things w'e understand least. And although they aro familiar to 
us, wo do not on that account comprehend them better, as a pilot 
does not understaiul l>etter than other people the nature of the 
magnetic neodto which turns to the north, although he has it 
always before his eyes in the compass, and on that account has 
almost ceased to wonder at it. . . . Nevertheless 1 admit that, in 
our present state, the external senses are necessary for our thinking, 
and that, if we had none of them, we should not think. Btit what 
is necessary for anything is not on that account the essence of the 
thing. Air Is necessary to us for life ; but our life is something 
else than air. The senses fhrnish us with matter for reasoning, 
and wo never have thoughts so abstract that something of sense is 
not mingled with them ; but reasoning requires in addition some- 
tiling other tkan that which is of sense.* (G. vi. 499, 500, 506.) 

£. adds * always.' 

£. lias merely * and all other peoples.’ 

NBW ESSAYS 

363 

and night into day. But they would have been wrong 
if they had thought that the same rule is observed 
everywhere el8e*^ for since that time, the opposite has 
been experienced by people on a visit to Nova Zembla. 
And he would still be wrong who should think that, in 
our regions at least, it is a necessary and eternal truth 
that shall endure for ever*’, since we must hold that the 
earth and the sun itself do not exist necessarily, and that 
perhaps there will come a time when this beautiful star 
with its whole system will no longer exist, at least in its 
present form Whence it seems that necessary truths, 
such as wo find in pure mathematics and especially in 
aritlimetic and geometry, must have principles whose 
proof does not depend upon instances nor, consequently, 
upon the witness of the senses, although without the 
senses it would never have come into our heads to think 
of them. This is a point which should be carefully not^nl, 
and it is one whicli Euclid so well understood that he 
often proves by reason tliat which is evident enough 
through experience and through sense-images”*. Logic 
also, along with metaphysics and ethics \la morale]^ of 
which the one forms natural theology”® and the other 
natural jurisprudence, are full of such truths ; and con- 
sequently their demonstration^' can come only from the 

** E. omits * elso/ ^ E. rends ‘ seen/ 

^ E. omits ‘ that shall ondure for evor.' 

** Cf. Mon(»dof()gyj § 28. 

” Cf, the letter to Queen Sophia Charlotte, quoted above; ‘The 
senses can indeed in a way make known to us that which is, but 
they cannot make known that which ought to be or which cannot 
be otherwise. . . . The senses and inductions never yield us truth 
perfeofty universal nor that which is absolutely nooossary, but only 
that which is and that which occurs in particular instances.' 
(G. vi. 504, 505.) 

‘True metaphysics is hardly different from true logic, that is 
to say, from the art of discovery in general ; for in fact metaphysics 
is natural theology, and the same God, who is the source of all good 
things, is also the principle of all parts of knowledgo/ Lidn a la 
Princease Sophia (undated) (G. iv. 292). 

i.e. the certainty of logic, metaphysics and ethics as sciences. 

NEW ESSAYS 

364 

inner principles which are called innate. It is true we 
must not imagine that we can read these eternal laws of 
reason in the soul as in an open book’^ as the edict 
of the praetor may be read on his album without trouble 
or investigation ; but it is enough that we can discover 
these laws in ourselves by means of attention, for which 
opportunities are furnished by the senses ; and the 
success of ex{>erimonts serves also as a confirmation of 
reason, somewhat us in arithmetic * proofs ’ are useful in 
helping us to avoid en*ors of calculation when the process 
is a long one. In this also lies tlie difference between 
human knowledge and that of the lower animals. The 
lower animals are purely empirical and direct them- 
selves by particular instances alone ; for, so far as we can 
judge, they never succeed in forming necessaiy proposi- 
tions ; while men, on the other hand, have the capacity 
for demonstrative science. It is also on this account that 
the power of making concatmatims [of ideas] which the 
lower animals possess is something inferior to the reason 
which is in men The concatenations [of ideas] made by 
the lower animals are simply like those of mere empirics, 
who maintain that what has sometimes happened will 
happen again in a case which resembles the former in 
charactoristios which strike them, although they are 
incapable of judging whether or not the same reasons 
hold good in both cases. That is why it is so simple 
a matter for men to entrap animals, and so easy for 
paere empirics to make mistakes. From this making of 
mistakes even persons who have become skilful through 
age and experience are not exempt, ^dien they trust too 
much to theii- past experience, as some have done ill civil 
and military affairs ; because enough consideration is 
not given to the fact that the world changes and that 

^ ^ a Ztvr» outwf, lit. « <ui aperturam lihri, 

^ i. e. the tablets with * notices/ posted up in a public place, so 
that be who runs may read. 

** Of. JUimadology^ i{ a6-a^ » £. adds * for aU that.* 

KEW ESSAYS 

365 

men become more akilfiil by finding countless new con* 
trivances, while on the other hand the stags or the hares 
of our time do not become^ more full of shifts than 
those of former times. The concatenations [of ideas] in 
the lower animals are only a shadow of reasoning, that is 
to say they are only connexions'^ of imagination and 
passings '" from one image to another, because in new 
circumstances which seem to resemble others which have 
occurred before we^’’ expect anew what we“ at other 
times found along with them, as if things were actually 
connected together because their images are connected in 
memory. It is true that reason also leads us to expect, 
as a rule, that there will occur in the future what is in 
harmony with a long experience of the past, but this is, 
nevertheless, not a necessary and infallible truth ; and 
our forecast may fail when we least expect it, because 
the reasons which have hitherto justified it no longer 
operate And on this account the wisest people do not 
trust altogether to experience, but try, so far as possible, 
to get some hold of the reason of what happens, in order 
to decide when exceptions must be made. For reason 
is alone capable of laying down trustworthy iniles and 

E. reads ^ are not.* 

” E. reads * a connexion’ and * a passing.* 

E. roads * they.’ 

Cf. Lettre a la Heine Sophie Charlotte { 170a) : ‘ For instance, tliongh 
we may have observed a thousand times that iron, when it is put 
by itself on the surface of water, goes to the bottom, we liave no 
assurance that it must always be so. And without referring to the 
miracle of the prophet Elisha who made iron to swim, wo know 
that we can make an^ron pot so hollow that it*floats, and that it 
cancan carry a considerable load, as do boats made of copper and 
tin And even abstract sciences, like geometry, afford instances in 
which that which usually happens no longer liappons. For 
instance, we usually find that two lines which continually approach 
one another ultimately meet, and many people will be ready to 
take oath that this can never fail to happen. Nevertheless geo* 
metry makes known to us unusual lines (cjilled, on that account, 
Asymptotes) which, if prolonged to infinity, continually approach one 
another and yet never meet.* (G. vi. 505.) 

:7x:w ESSAYS 

366 

of supplying what is lacking in those which were not 
trustworthy, by stating the exceptions to them, and in 
short of finding sure connexions in the force of necessary 
consequences ; and this often enables us to foresee the 
event without having to experience the sense-connexions 
of images, to which the animals are confined, so that 
that which shows that the sources [principe^ of necessary 
truths are within us also distinguishes man from the 
lower animals. 

Perhaps our able author may not entirely differ from 
mo in opinion. For after having devoted the whole of 
his first book to the rejection of innate knowledge 
\}umieres\ understood in a certain sense, he nevertheless 
admits, at the beginning of the second book and in those 
which follow, that the ideas which do not originate in 
sensation come from reflexion. Now reflexion is nothing 
but an attention to that which is in us, and the senses 
do not give us what we already bring with us. That 
being so, can it be denied that there is much that is 
innate in our mind [c,spn7], since we are, so to speak, 
innate to ourselves, and since in ourselves there are 
being, unity, substance, dumtion, change, activity [action\ 
perception, pleasure and a thousand other objects of our 
intellectual ideas ? And as these objects are immediate 
objects of our understanding and are always present** 
(although they cannot always bo consciously perceived 
\apcr^s] because of our distractions and wants), why 
should it bo surprising that we say that these ideas, 
along with all that depends on them, are innate in us ? 

Accordingly I have token as illustratioh a block of veined 

« 

^ As distinguished from ideas or images of sense. Cf. Jlfonodoiogry, 

( 30, and PrinciplcB qf Nature and 0/ Grace, § 5 ; also Petit diecours de 
MMaphjfsique (1686') (G. iv. 45a) : * Those cxpi-essions which are in 
our soul, whether they are conceived or not, may bo called ideas, but 
tkose which are conceived or formed may be said to be mtitma, 
eonciptus/ 

^ E. reads * these objects are immediate and always present to 
our understanding.* 

NEW ESSAYS 

367 

marble^ rather than a block of perfectly uniform marble 
or than empty tablets, that is to say, what is called by 
philosophers tabula rasa. For if the soul were like these 
empty , tablets, truths would bo in us as the figure of 
Hercules is in a blpck of marble, when the block of marble 
is indifferently capable of receiving- this figure or any 
other. But if there were in the stone veins, which 
should mark out the figure of Hercules rather than other 
figures, the stone would be more determined towards 
this figure, and Hercules would somehow be, as it were, 
innate in it, although labour would bo needed to uncover 
the veins and to clear them by polishing and thus 
removing what prevents thorn from being fully seen. 
It is thus that ideas and truths are innate in us, as 
natural inclinations, dispositions, habits or powers [vir^ 
tualites] and not as activities [actions although these 
powers are always accompanied by some 

activities [actions], often imperceptible, which correspond 
to them. 

Our able author seems to maintain that there is in u» 
nothing virtual, and even nothing of which we are not 
always actually conscious But this cannot be understood 
in a strict sense ; otherwise his opinion would be too para- 
doxical, since, for instance we are not always conscious 

Cf. Mmadoivgy, 40, 43 and 54, with the iiotos. By a virtwtJiite 
Leibniz moana eomething beiwoen a more potency or capacity 
and a fully-develope<l activity or actual idea. Thua necessary and 
eternal truths are not innate in the soul in a fully-developed form, 
nor, on the other hand, does the soul merely have a capacity for 
receiving or acquiring them, but they are innate in gonn, as im- 
perfectly perceived i^as with a tendency to Wbcomo perfectly 
l^rceiiM. See Introduction, Part iii. pp. 125 sqq. and 130. 

“ Cf. Looke*8 E» 8 ay, bk, i. ch. i, § 5. This position is an imme- 
diate result of Cartesian principle.*;. See Introduction, Part iii. 
p. ia6. Cf. Geulincx, Jdetaphysiai Vet a, Part i. (Opera, Land's e<l., 
vol. ii. p. 150) : * It is impossible that ho who does not know how 
a Uiing is done should do it. If you do not know how a thing is 
done you do not do it.* 

^ £. reads * since, although we are not, &c. ... we often 
bring, &c.’ 

NSW fiSSATS 

368 

of acquired habits and of the things stored in our memoiyy 
and, indeed, they do not always come to our aid when 
we require them, although we often bring them back 
easily into our mind on some slight occasion which recalls 
them to us, as we need only the beginning of a song in 
order to remember it^®. Our author also limits his 
thesis in other places, saying that there is in us nothing 
of which we have not at least been conscious [aperpAs\ 
formerly. But in addition to the fact that nobody can, 
through reason alone, be quite certain how far our past 
apperceptions have extended, for we may have forgotten 
them, especially in light of the Platonic doctrine of 
reminiscence, which, though a myth contains, in part 
at least nothing incompatible with bare reason — in 
addition, T say, to this fact, wdiy must everything be 
acquire<l by us through apperception of external things^ 
and why should it be impossible to unearth anything in 

E". roadH ‘ to rnako us remember the rest of it/ 

*• Loibni//H «>bj«Gtion to the Platonic doctrine is that it implies 
a complete tor clear and distinct) knowledge of the Mdcus’ in 
a previous state, lie accepts the Platonic doctrine in so far as it 
implies that knowledge of the eternally true comes to the soul not 
through external sense, but by development from its own inner 
being. Cf. Kouveanx EsnaiSj bk. i. ch. i, 5 5 (E- 209 a ; G. v. 75') : ‘ It 
was the opinion of t lie Platonists that all our ideas [ cennatssanres] 
wore reniiniHconces,and that thus the truths which the soul brings 
with it at a man's birth, and which are called innate, must be 
remains of a former definite knowledge. But this opinion has no 
fouiidiition. And we may readily believe that tJie soul must have 
already had innate ideas [co?ma<asanc(»r] in its preceding state (if it 
did pre*oxiht), however far back that state might be, just as it has 
them now ; accordingly they must in turn have come from another 
prewding state, in which they would ultithately be innate, or at 
least created along with it ; or else we should have to go ad 
and regarti souls as eternal, in which case these ideas [connaissanoes] 
would in fact be innate, because they would never have had a 
beginning in the soul ; and if any one maintains that each prior 
state has recedved from another, prior to itself, something which it 
J;iaH not transmitted to thosf* which follow, the answer is that it is 
manifest that certain evident truths must have belonged to all 
these states.' 

^ E. omits ' in part at least.’ 

NEW E93AY8 

369. 

ourselves? Is our soul, then, so empty that, beyond^** 
images borrowed from outside, it is nothing? That, I 
am sure, is not a view which our judicious author can 
approve. And where shall we find tablets which have 
not some variety in themselves? For there is never** 
such a thing as a perfectly unbroken [u/tu] and uniform 
surface. Why, then, should not we also be able to 
provide ourselves with some sort*^ of thought out of 
our own inner being, when we deliberately try to 
penetrate its depths ? Thus I am led to believe that 
his opinion on this point is not fundamentally different 
from mine, or rather from the common opinion, inas- 
much as he recognizes two sources of our knowledge, the 
senses and reflexion ®-. 

I do not know that it will be so easy to reconcile him 
with us and with the Cartesians, when ho maintains 
tkat the mind does not always think, and especially that 
it is without perception when wo sleep without dreaming ; 
and he holds that, since bodies can exist without motion, 
souls might also quite well exist without thinking 
But here I reply in a way somewhat different from that 
which is usual ; for I maintain that, naturally a sub- 

E, nuids ‘ without.’ 

*• In E. tho Keiiteiico is intorrogativo : ‘ Is thoro over,’ Ac. 

E. reads ‘object.’ 

Leibniz, is here applying bis princi[>1o of tho ‘ identity of 
indiscernibloa,’ viz. that no two things are absolutely idonticul, 
which implies that no real thing is an absolute unity, ©xidusive of 
all difference or variety, but that everything has some csstintiiil 
characteristic or internal quality. See Monadology, $ 9. 

. If the mind is really tabula ramj what aro*thoH© ‘internal 
operatifns * or ‘ actings of our own minds,’ which Locke regards as 
the objects of reflexion? Leibniz suggests that Lo<;ke may not 
really mean all that ho seems to mean by tho ialmlt rasa, and that, 
accordingly, Locke is fundamentally at one with him in admitting 
at least innate ‘dispositions.’ 

“ Essay, bk. ii. ch. i, $ 9 (Fraser’s ©d., vol. i. p. 137). Soo Intro- 
duction, Part iii. p. 139. 

^ i, e. ‘in the ordinary course of things,’ ‘otherwise than by 
miracle/ 

• B b 

NEW ESSAYS 

370 

stance cannot exist without activity \aciion\^ and indeed 
that there never is a body without motion. Experience 
is already in my favour as regards this, and to be per- 
suaded of it one has only to refer to the book of the 
illustrious Mr. Boyle against an absolute rest. But 
I think that reason also supports it, and this is one of the 
proofs which I use to overthrow the theory of atoms 
Besides there are countless indications which lead us 
to think that there is at every moment an infinity of 
percej}tion8 within us, but without apperception and 
without rofloxi(Ui ; that is to say, changes in the soul 
itself of which we are not conscious \s\ipercevoir\^ because 
the impressions are either too small and too numerous 
or too closely combined \trop nnies\ so that each is not 
distinctive enough by itself, but nevertheless in com- 
bination with others each has its effect and makes itself 
felt, at least confusedly, in the whole. Thus it is that, 
through being accustomed to it, we take no notice of the 
motion of a mill or a waterfall when we have for some 
time lived quite near them. Not that this motion does 
not continually affect our organs, nor that sometliing 
does not pass into the soul, which responds to it because 
of the harmony of the soul and the body, but these 
impressions which are in the soul and in the body. 

“ Robert Boyle d). LiHinore, 1627, d. London, 1691), tlw famous 
chemist tind physicist, who (almost contomporuneou^ly with 
MariotUj) discovered the law of the pressure of gases, which is 
called the Boyle-Mariolte law. He maintained that there is no 
HU<*h thing ns absolute rest, in the hook here referred to, under the 
title bj AbiHilnU Kvsi in Bodies, [Boyle’s IVork.^ (London, 1744), vol. i. 
p. aSi.] It was alho published in Latin in his (Jpera V'aria (geneva, 
1680). Leihniz had some intercourse with Boyle during his stay 
in London in 1673. See Introduction, Part i. p. 7. 

As rest is infinitely small motion, everything moves. Conse- 
quently the essence of body cannot be absolutely unmoved 
extension, but must be force, which is the source of motion. But 
a force is a real unity, absolutely indivisible, while the atom is only 
physically indivisible, it being ideally divisible. Hence physical 
atoms are not tlie elements of things. Cf. New System, § iz. 

NEW ESSAYS 

371 

having lost the attractions of novelty, are not strong 
enough to attract our attention and our memory, busied 
with more engrossing objects. For*® all attention re- 
quiises memory, and often when we are not, so to 
speak, admonished and warned to take notice of some 
of our present perceptions, we let them pass without 
reflexion and even without observing them ; but if some 
one directs our attention to them immediately after- 
wards*^, and for instance bids us notice some sound that 
has just been heard, we remember it, and we are con- 
scious that we had some feeling of it at the time. Thus 
there wore perceptions of which wo were not immediately 
conscious [s"apvrcevoir\f apperception arising in this 
case only from our attention being directed to them 
after*' some interval, liovvever small. And for an even 
better unilerstanding of the iwttfcs perceptions wliich we 
cannot individually distinguish in the crowd, I am wont 
to employ the illustration of the moaning or sound of the 
sea, which w’e notice when we are on the shore. In 
order to hoar this sound as wo do, we must hoar tlie 
parts of which the whole sound is made up, that is to 
say the sounds which come from each wave, although 
each of these little sounds makes itself known only in the 
confused combination of all the sounds taken together, 
that is to say, in the moaning of the sea*\ and no one 
of the sounds would he observed if the wave which 
makes it were alone. For we must be affected a little 
by the motion of this wave, and we must have some 
pei'ception of each of these sounds, however little they 
may be ; otherwise we should not have tKe perception 
of a hitndred thousand waves, for a hundred thousand 

^ E. reads ‘which are busied only.* E. omits ‘ for.* 

E. omits ‘often' and ‘admonished and/ 

•• £. omits ‘ afterwards.' 

E. roads * in this case of our attention being directed to them 
only after,' 

•* E. reads ‘ sound.' 

** E. omits ‘ that is to say, in the moaning of the sea.* 

* B b 3 

NEW ESSAYS 

372 

nothings cannot make something. We never sleep so 
profoundly as not to have some feeble and confused 
feelings and we should never be wakened by the greatest 
noise in the world if we had not some perception o( its 
beginning which is small, just as we should never break 
a cord by the greatest effort** in the world, if it were 
not strained and stretched a little by less efforts, though 
the small extonsioii they produce is not apparent 

petites ptrccpiions have thus through their conse- 
quences** an influence greater than people think. It is 
they that form this something I know not what, these 
tastes, these images of sense-qualities, clear in combination 
but confused in the parts these impressions which 

** G. K'ttdH ^ eflVKjfc.' 

Cf. Monfciiigne, KasaiSy bk. ii. ch. 14 : ‘ If wo suppose a piece 
of twine equally strong tliroughout, it is utterly impossible that it 
should ever break. For in what pfirt of it is the breaking to begin, 
the flaw to appear? And for it to break in every part at once Is 
against all nature/ See Introduction, Part iii. p. 144 note. 

•• E. omits * through their consequences.’ 

8ense<qunlitios, according to Leibniz, are each clear as a whole, 
that is to s»y, each can bo perfectly distinguislied from others. 
But they are not alH<i distinct ; that is to say, wo cannot perfectly 
analyze their elements. Such an analysis is possible ; but toe cannot 
iwrform it, for it would involve an inflnitc process. Each sense- 
quality * contains infinity,' for It has connexions with everything 
else ill tlio universe. Cf. Lethe a la Heim Sophie Charlotte (170a) : 
‘Wo know by what kind of refraction blue and yellow are made, 
and that these two colours when mixed make green. But we 
cannot yot understand, for all that, how our perception of green 
results from our {H^rceptioiis of the two colours which compose it, 
nor how our perceptions of these colours arise from their causes. We 
have not even nominal definitions of such qualities so as to explain 
the terms for them. ... If I were to say to some one : You kflbw that 
gi-ecn means a colour con.sistiiig of blue and yellow mixed, ho would 
not make use of this definition as a means of recognizing green 
when he came upon it. But this is the function of nominal 
definitions. For the blue and the yellow which are in the green 
« are not distinguishable or recognizable, and it is only by chance, so 
to speak, that we have found this by observing that this mixture 
always makes green. Thus the only way to enable a man to 
recognize green in future is to show it to him at present ; but this 

NEW ESSAYS 

373 

surrounding bodies make upon us, who contain infinity 
this connexion which each being has with all the I'est 
of the universe. It may even be said that in conse- 
quence of these petUes perceptions the present is big with *** 
the future and laden with the past, that there is a conspi- 
ration of all things {rrvpTrvota Travra, as Hippocrates said 
and that in the least of substances eyes as penetrating 
as those of God might read the whole succession of the 
things of the universe, 

Quae sint^ quae fw'rinty quae mav futura trahantur^^. 

These unconscious [insensible] perceptions also indicate 
and constitute the identity of the individual, who is 
characterized by the traces or expressions'^ of his pre- 
vious states which these unconscious perceptions preserve, 
as they connect his previous states with his present state ; 
and these unconscious perceptions may bo known by 

is not iiecoMSHry in the cas<» of more distinct notioiiN, which can iw 
made known to rniophi by description, although wo do not have 
thorn at hand. . . . For this roaHon wo aro wont to wiy that tlio 
notions of sonse-quaUties aro r/<?ar, for thoyoiiablo iih torocognizo tho 
qualities ; but that those notioiiN aro not distinct, booauso wo cannot 
diseriminnto nor unfold >vhat they contain within them. What 
they contain is an J knoic not nhat, of which wo are conscious but of 
which we can give no account.' (Passages conihinod from O. vi. 
493, 493 . 500,) 

“ E. roads ‘and which contain infinity.' 

E. reads ‘ full of.’ 

See Monadology, note 97. 

‘ What things are, what things have been, and what futun- 
things may soon be brought forth.' Virgil, (Jeorgics, iv. 393. Virgil 
ascribes this knowled^ to Proteus. la^ibniz misquotes futwa for 
Ventura : futura would not scan. 

* £.*omits * or expressions.' 

Leibniz merely says ‘and they,’ so that tho referonce^ is 
doubtful. Ho may mean ‘the traces of previous stales.' What 
is meant is simply that as the unconscious perceptions are t)ie 
development of previous states of perception and at tho same time 
contain, in a germinal or confused way, all future states of percep- 
tion, they give continuity to the individual possessing them, i.e. 
they constitute his identity. Contra.st Locke's view, Essay, bk. ii. 
ch. 97. Of. Monadology, note 1 14. 

NEW ESSAYS 

374 

a higher mind [esprit], although the individual himself 
may not bo conscious of them^ that is to say, though he 
may no longer have a definite recollection of them. But 
they I these perceptions] furnish also the means of re- 
covering this recollection, when it is needed, through 
periodic developments which may some day occur That 
is why death, owing to these perceptions can only be 
a sleep, and cannot even last as a sleep, for in animals 
perceptions merely cease to be distinct \ distmfiue] enough’*, 
and are reduced to a state of confusion, in which con- 
sciousness [aperreption] is suspended, but which cannot 
last for ev(»r ", not to speak here of man who must have 
great privileges in this regard in order to keep his 
personality 

Further, the unconscious | j percej^tions ex- 

plain'*^ that wonderful pre-established harmony of body 
and soul, and indeed of all Monads or simple substances, 
whicli takes the place of the untenable theory of the 
influen(*e of one upon anotlier, and which, in the opinion 

Wliftt is inoaiit that, as porci'ptions are not isolated but 
linked together, they do not each indejK^ndently rise and fall in 
distinct iicMM by n kind of chance, but ns one group or system of 
{H^rceptions falls out of consciousness unothor rises into conscious' 
ness, .s<» tliat there is a kind of periodi<'ity in our perceptions, with 
tix»nghs and crests as in wave-inoti<ui. Tlius the recollection of any 
former j>erception means that tho system or group of which it is 
a member has passed from the crest c*f consciousness to the trougli 
of sub-couHciousness and so back to the crest again. Cf. C\mj<id€ratims 
9 ur la Jwirnif iCiut Kspnt Untrtisel Unique ^1703 ^E. 18 r a; O. vi. 
535) • * organs ’ [id the animal] * are merely enveloped and 
reduced to a small size, but tlie order of nature requires that some 
day all shall re-<levelop and return to an oU^ervable condition, and 
that in tliese vicissitudes there be a certain well-ordered pi*ogress, 
which 8 on‘ea to mature things ami to bring them to perfection.* 
For a development of this idea cf. Jameses Psychology ^ vol, i. ch. 9. 

E. omits ‘owing to tliese perceptions.' 

1. c. distinct enougii to produce cousciousnesa. 

” The remainder of tliis sentence is omitted by £. 

^ Cf. Principles qf Nature and qf Orace, § la, note 51 ; Mmadology, { 8a, 
note 130. See also Introduction, Fart iii. p. 116. 

£. reads ‘ by the unconscious perceptions 1 explain.' 

NEW iSSAYS 

375 

of the author of the most excellent of Dictionaries 
exalts the greatness of the Divine perfections beyond 
what has ever been conceived. After this I should add 
little, if I were to say that**’ it is these petites per- 
ceptwns wliich deterininc us on many occasions without 
our tliinking it, and which deceive people by the appear- 
ance of an indifference of equilibrium^ iis if, for instance, 
we were completely indiiferent whether to turn to the 
right or to the left It is also unnecessary for me to 
point out here, as I have done in the book itself, that 
they cause that uncasin4.^ss which I show to consist in 
something which differs from pain only as the small 
frf)m tlie great, and whicli nevertheless often constitutes 
our desire and oven our pleasure, giving to it a kind of 
stimulating relish It is also due to those unccuiscious 
linsensihtc] parts of our conscious [ ,sr/?6/7>/r | j)ei'ce])tions 
that there is a relation Ix^tween tliese portteptions of 
colour, lieat, and other sensible rpialities, and the motions 
in bodies which correspond to them ; while the Carte- 
siiins, along with our author, in Hj)it() (►f all his pene- 
tration, regard the perceptions we have of those (pialities 
as arbitrary, that is to say, as if («od had given them to 
the soul according to llis good pleiisure, without regard 
to any essential relation iK^tween the perccjptions and 
their objects ; an opinion which surprises me, and whicji 
seems to me not voiy woilhy of the wisdom of the 
Author of things, who does nothing without harmony 
and without reason 

** Pierre Bayle. See Monadoloqy, § i6, notes 28 iuai 29. 'I’he 
reference i.s to the article liorarius in Bayh''» DtHionary, wliere In* 

, Hays (flute L, 1) : ‘It' [the Mynicm of pre-oHtablihhMl liftriii<>nyj 
‘ e:«.Rlt.s above all that can bo conceived the f>owGr and intelligence 
of Divine art.* Baylc, however, makes this remark by way of 
objection to the system. 

£. reads ‘ aftor this I ouglit also to add that.’ 

*® E. omits ‘completely.* 

“ Cf. Introduction,^ Part iii. p. 141. 

** C£, Introduction, Part iii. p. T40. 

See Descartes, Principia^ Part iv. 196-198 and 204, Descartes 
f 

msw ESSAYS 

376 

In a word, unconscious [inaensihle] perc^tions are of as 
great use in pneumatics as imperceptible [insensible] ^ 
corpuscles are in physics ; and it is as unreasonable to 
reject the one as the other on the ground that they are 
beyond the reach of our senses Nothing takes place 
all at once, and it is one of my great maxims, one 
among the most completely verified of maxims, that nature 
never makes leaps ; which I called the law of cxmtinuitp 
when I spoke of it in the first'*® Nouvelles de la B^hlique 
des Lettres ®' ; and the use of this law in physics is very 
considerable : it is to tiie efiect that we always pass from 

held that 'colour, heat,* &c., as we perceive them, are not to be 
attributed to external bodies, the qualities which are all forms 
fif motion. There its on his view no absolute reason why one kind 
of motion should produce in us tli© sensation of colour and another 
the seiiKatioii of heat. Ij<dbniz, on the other hand, regards motions 
as themselves perceptions of a very low degree of distinctness, and 
tlio unconscious perceptions which in combination give rise to our 
conscious sensation form a connecting link between the motions of 
bodies and our corresponding sense-perception of their qualities. 

A name for the philosophy of mind or spirit, derived from the 
New Testament use of irrcOfta. In Scholastic times it included 
natural theology and the doctrines regarding angels and demons, 
as well as ^psychology.' In the seventeenth century it W'ns used 
in the more limited sense by Alsted in his Encylclo/Hidie (1630), 
a work which, according to Didorot, Ijoibniz thought of re- 
modelling, with the assistance of other scliolars ^(Euvre^ dc Diderot^ 
ed. Ass< 3 znt, vol. xv. p. 440). Cf. G. vii. 67. Tlie terms Pne(naah'cA;8 
and IWumatoliH/y ^in the sense of philosophy of the mind) were 
used in the Scottish Universities in the end of the seventeenth 
and beginning of the eighteenth centuries. The word Pmunutiics 
has now (^ea8od to liave any connexion with the philosophy of 
mind and is used to describe the branch of jiydrodynainics which 
is concerned with gases. 

E. omits ‘ imperceptible [insenwWe].* * 

Tlie reference is probably to the views of Descartes. See 
I^'incipict, Part iv. § 201. 

•• Cf. Introduction, Part ii. p. 37 ; Part iiu p. 83. 

£. reads * when I spoke of it elsewhere in the NauveUeSf* &o. 
e This was Bayle's magazine, and Leibniz {[brmulated bis law for 
the first time in the letter to Bayle (1687) to which reference is 
here made. (See G. iii. 51 ; For a translation of this see 

Introduction, Part iii. p. 83 note. 

NEW ESSAYS 

377 

small to great, and vke versa, through that which is 
intermediate in degrees as in quirts”' ; and that a motion 
never immediately arises from rest nor is immediately 
reduced to rest, but comes or goes through a smaller 
motion, just as we never completely traverse any line or 
length without having traversed a smaller line, although 
hitherto those who have laid down the laws of motion 
have not observed this law, and have thought that a body 
can in a moment receive a motion contrary to that which 
it had immediately before®^. And all this leads us to 
think that noticeable perceptions also®* come by degrees 
from those which are too small to be noticed. To think 
otherwise is to know little of the illimitable fineness 
[subtilile^ of things, which always and ovoiywhore contains 
[enveloppc] an actual infinity®". 

I have also noticed that, in vii-tue of iinpercc'ptible 
\ Insensible] variations, two individual things cannot bo 
perfectly alike, and that they must always differ more 
than numero^^. This makes an end of ‘the empty tiiblets 
of the soul,’ *a soul without thought/ ‘a substance with- 
out activity’ [action], ‘the void in space,’ ‘atoms,’ and 

i. o. in degree ah in quantity. 

Cf. Introduction, Part iii. pp. 87 sqq. 

•* E. omits ‘ also/ 

•* See Mtyna^ology^ $ 65, note 107. 

•• Cf. Introduction, Part ii. pp. 36 sqq. Monatlology, $ 9, note 

15, and Nouveau^ Essais, hk. ii. ch. 27, $ i (E. 277 b ; (I. v. 213) : 
* Besides the difTerenco of time and place, there must always l>e an 
internal principle of distinction, and although there are several things 
of the same kind, it is nevertheless true that none of them are 
ever perfectly alike. Jhus although time and ]»la((;c that is to say, 
external relation) enable us to distinguish things, which wo do not 
teadil^ distinguish by themsolves, the things are. nonr> the lens 
distinguishable in themselves. The exact determination of identity 
and diversity is not a matter of time and place, althougli it is true 
that the diversity of things is accompanied by that of time and 
plaoe ; because they' [i, e. time and place] ‘bring with them 
different impressions about the thing. Not to mention the fa<it 
that it is rather by means of the things that we must distinguish 
one plaoe or time from another, for in themselves they are perfectly 
alike, but of course they are not substances or complete realities.' 

NEW ESSAYS 

378 

even particles not actually divided in matter, ^absolute 
rest,’ * complete uniformity in one part of time, place or 
matter,’ ^perfect globes of the second element, arising 
from original perfect cubes"’,’ and a thousand other 
fictions of philosophers, which come from their incom- 
l>lete notions and which the nature of things does not 
admit of, and which are made passable by our ignorance 
and the slight attention we give to the imperceptible 
I insrmihle], but which cannot bo made tolerable unless in 
the limited sense of abstractions of the mind, which 
protests that it does not deny what it sets aside and 
thinks ought not to come into any present consideration. 
Otherwise, if wo seriously meant this, namely that the 
things of which wo are not conscious [s^aporccroir] are 
neither in the soul nor in the body, we should err in 
[diilosophy as is done in statecraft \2^lifique]y when no 
ac<*ount is taken of to pLKfmv^^ imperceptible \ insensible] 

Tlie i\>fonin«o iw to tlie vortex hypothesis of Descartes. Ac- 
cording to Doscartos, ns body is ultiinattdy extension in threc‘ 
dimensions, the t>riginal division of it (as tho result of motion 
imparted by Oodj would result in perfectly cubical parts. This 
original motion Descartus 8U}>posos to have been such as to make 
the f)arts rev(»lve on their own axos and also in groups rounrl 
ditferent centres. A.s a result of this (matter being a the 

angles of the cubes are rubl)od down, and the detrition protjoeds at 
an ever-in<‘i‘easiiig rate, because the smaller the body, the larger 
liti proportion to its bulk) is the sui-faco it ex|Hises to the rubbing 
of other bodies. Accordingly there are throe primary elements of 
the visible world, (i) the detritus, which includes tho .sun and the 
tixed stars, the remains of the (original cubes in the form of 
excoc'dingly minute globules, of which element tho sky consists, 
And v3) eome parts of matter which have been less easy to move 
than the glohule.s of the second element' and coDSequenil^ have 
not Ihhu) rubbed down so quickly ; such as the earth, the planets 
and conietH. In short, the first eleuient consists of luminous 
bodies, the second of transparent bodies and the third of opaque 
bodies. See Descartes, Pfimipiaf Part iii. §§ 46 sqq. In a letter to 
^icaise <1699) Leibniz si>oaks about tho ^useless chatter regarding 
little bodies and the first, second or third element, which are of as 
little value as the oooult qualities ' (G. ii. 534). 

Ati , , . rb fUKpbv ipvkd 7 ru¥ (Aristotle, PoliticSj v. 8 , $ 3. 1307^ 3a). 

I ' 

NEW ESSAYS 

379 

progressions; but on the other hand an abstraction is 
not an error, provided we know that what we ignore 
is actually there. So mathematicians make use of 
abstractions when they speak of tlie perfect lines which 
they ask us to consider, the uniform motions and other 
regular effects, although matter (that is to say, the inter- 
mingling of the effects of the surrounding infinite^*) 
always makes some exception. We proceed thus in 
order to discriminate conditions [considerations^ fi’om one 
another and in order to reduce effects to their grounds 
[raisons], as far as possible, and to foresee some of their 
consequences : for the more wo are careful to neglect 
none of the conditions which we can control, the more 
does practice correspond to theory But it belongs 
only to the supreme reason, which nothing escapes, t4> 
comprehend distinctly all the infinite and to see all 
grounds | raisons] and all consequences. All that wo can 
do as regards infinities is to recognize them confiJS<>dly, 
and to know at least distinctly that they are there ; 
otherwise wo hav<» a veiy poor idea of the IxMiuty and 
greatness of the universe, and also wo cannot have a 
sound physics, which explains the nature of bodies ' 
in general, and still less a sound pneumatics'®*, which 
includes the knowledge of God, of souls, and of simph* 
substances in general. 

This knowledge of unconscious [inscnsihle] perceptions 
serves also to explain why and how no two souls, human 

The chapter deala with inaximM for avoiding revolutions. § 3 refers 
to the fallacy of the H[iondt)irift : * Each expense la little, then^- 
fore the whole is littfe.' Cf. Politirs, ▼. 4, ^ i, 1303*’ 18 ; yivovrai fxit' 
ovi' ai^rdcus ov iripi fuKpwv dAA* in fMicpwy, 

** E. reads * the infinite which aurroiinds us.' 

Thai is to say, the more do actual occurrences correspond to 
our explanation of them. 

E. omits ‘ and to see.' 

* Otherwise * = ' but if we entirely ignore the infinities in 
things.’ 

E. reads Hhinga.’ 

See note 86. 

NEW ESSAYS 

380 

or other, of one and the same kind ever come perfectly 
alike from the of the Creator, and each has always ' 

from the first a reference to the point of view it will have 
in the universe But this indeed follows already from 
what I observed regarding two individuals, namely, that 
their diffcremc is always more than a numerical one. There 
is also another important point, as to which I must differ, 
not only from the opinions of our author, but also from 
those of the majority of modern writers. I believe, with 
the majority of the ancients, that all superhuman spirits 
[ genies\j all souls, all created simple substances are always 
combined with a body, and that there never are souls 
entirely so]>nrated [ from body j I hav(» a priori reasons 
for this, but it will also be found that the doctrin(3 is of 
advantage in this respect, that it solves all the philo- 
sophical dilficiilties about the stale of souls about their 
perpetual preservation, about their immortality and about 
thoir working ; for the difference between one state of 
the soul and another never is and m ver has been any- 
thing but a difference between the more and the less 
conscious ( the mon^ and the Joss perfwt, or vice 
versa, and thus the past or the future state of the soul 
is as explicable as its present state''**. The slightest 
reflexion makes it sufficiently evident that this is in 
accordance with reason, and tlmt a leap from one state to 
another infinitely different state could not be natural. 

I am surprised that the philosophic schools have without 
reason given up natural explanation'", and have deliber- 

attdy plunged tlieiiiselves into very great difficulties and 

• 

E. rondn * no two human aouls or two things of one and tl)e 
Fiame kind.' 

Cf. Mcnadotoffy^ §§51 aqq. 

E. omits *4WJnbijn»d,’ i-eading ^ nont toujoui-B d un corps.* 

God alone j« nctus pur us, without body. Cf. Introduction, 
Part iii. pp. xo8 aqq., and § 7a, note 115. 

• m ThU probably means questions as to what has l)een the state 
of souls in the past and what will bo their state in the fiiture. 

See Introduction, Part iii. pp. 113 sqq. 

E. reads 'natum* 

msw ESSAYS 

381 

given occasion for the apparent triumphs of freethinkers 
[es^ts /orfs]'", all of whose argum^||8 fall at once 
through this explanation of things, according to which 
Uiere is no more difficulty in conceiving the preservation 
of souls (or rather, as 1 think, of the animal), than there 
is in the change of the caterpillar into the butterfly, and 
in the preservation of thought during sleep, to which 
Jesus Christ has divinely likened death”*. But then 
I have already said that no sleep can last for ever ; and 
it will last for the shortest time or almost not at all in 
the case of rational souls, which are destined always to 
preseive tlie personal character \personnage] which has 
been given them in tlie City of God, and consequently 
to retain moinoiy ; and this is so, in order that they may 
he more susceptible of punishments and row'ards. And 
I add further that no derangement of its visiVde organs 
is capable of reducing things to complete confusion in 
an animal, or of destroying all its organs and depriving 

Cf. MonwiuUmy^ § 14. iK»to 35. iil«o CDnaidvratiom 8 ur Ui 

IhKtrhir <tun Esjfrit VnirrrHel Vniquf (170a) ((J. vi. 533; E. 179 b): 
* What has also, in iny opinion, oontributod jcrontly towardH 
making mon of intolbn^t bcdiovo in Uio doctrino of a Hinglu uni- 
versal 8pirit ia this, that ordinary philoaophera have aet forth 
41 dcHitrino ahout aoula aoparate ( from i>odieH'] and HlK)ut the 
func'tioiiM of the huuI Ix’ing independent of the body and iU organa, 
whieh doctrine thoy eould not auffieicmtly juatify. They won* 
f>i*rfectly right in wfabing to maintain the immortality of the mouI 
as in c*)nforinity with the Divine jjerfectionti and with a gonuiin* 
morality, but seeing that by death those organs in aniinnls which 
we obstirve are deranged and ultimately eorruptod, they thought 
it necessary to have recourse to separated souls, that is to say, to 
the opinion that the soul continues to exist wit}/l[>ut anybody and 
iionO^he less retains its tVioughts and functions. And in order to 
gi%"^ a better proof of this they tried to show Unit the soul has 
^ready in this life thoughts which are abstract and iiidopendeiil 
of ideas of matter. Now those who ngected this w^parated con- 
dition and independence [of the soul] as contrary to experience 
and to reason were so much the more led to believe in the 
extinction of the individual soul and the preservation of the 
nnivcuiAl spirit alone/ 

St. John xi. ver. 11. 

NEW ESSAYS 

382 

the soul of the whole of its organic body and of the 
ineffaceable remains of all its former impressions 
But the ease with which people have given up the 
ancient doctrine that the angels have ethereal [su5<i2s] 
bodies connected with them (which has been confounded 
with the corporeality of the angels themselves), the in- 
troduction of supposed iinembodied [scpartis] intelligences 
among created things (to which Aristotle’s theory of 
intelligences that make the skies revolve lias greatly con- 
tributed) and finally the ill-considered opinion people 

Cf. $§ 7^ *77 ; Sygienif §§7 and 8. 

According to Arintoth' iho hcuvona at^ niovud by the vpu/rov 
huyovy or i»rirno movor, i.o. by Ood, who ns Leibniz also admits) is 
(uius pumn. But this is an eternal (drSioi^) motion, and AristotU) 
describes the heavens as awpa n Buoy [De (Vies/o, ii. 3, 286* 11). 
Accordinuly the heavens are not moved by ‘ int 4 iUiifetuxs/ On the 
other hand, Aristotle representH the planets as having motions of 
their own, different from that of the fixed stars or the sphere of 
tlm heavens in general. These planetary motions are attributed 
to an activity (ir/od^iy) similar to that which exists in animals and 
plants (I)ti VadOy ii. 12, 392*’ x). But oven so, Aristotle cannot be 
regarded as meaning that the planets are moved by ^separate' 
intelligences. It seems likely that Leibniz was thinking of the 
views of Thomas Aquinas, who says : * A heavenly body is moved 
hy Hurne intellectual substance' {Contra GenUt^ iii. 23, 1); and 
also : * Heavenly bodies arc mf»ved by the substunces whioh move 
them through apprehension : not however a stmse-appreheiisiou 
.... and thereforo an intellectual one.' At the end of the chapter 
quoted, ho says ; ‘ For our present piir|H>Se it does not matU^r 
whether a hoavoiily body is moved by an intelUn^tual substance 
conjoined with it us its soul, or by a separate substance : or 
whether eae.h of the heavenly bodies is moved by God or none 
of them is immediately so moved, but all through tlie mt'diaiion of 
cit^ated intellect iml substances : or whether the first heavenly 
body alone is immed lately moved by God and the others bj the 
mediation of creatc'd substances — provided wo hold that the motion 
of the heavens is due to an intellectual subsUnce.’ There is here 
a suggestion of the Neo-Platonic influences to which Thomas 
Aquinas was necessarily subjects The theory mentioned by Leibniz 
is stated also by Albertus Magnus, Metaphyska, Lib. xi. Tract, a, 
cap. 10 {Cperoj ed. Jammy, 1651, vol. iii. p. 374 b\ and by J. O. 
Sesliger, Cbmm. «h HippocraHs lib, de Skmniis (1539), p. i a. C£. Leibniz’s 
Ctmaiddraiiom tur la IMKas d'tcn Etprit Unittr»el Unique (E. 178 b ; G. 

f 

NEW ESSAYS 

383 

have held that we cannot believe in the preservation 
of the souls of the lower animala without falling into 
metempsychosis and making them go [protucnerj from 
body to body, and the perplexity in which people have 
been through not knowing what to do with them’”’, 
have, in my opinion, led to the neglect of the natural 
way of explaining the preservation of the soul. This 
has done great injury to natuml religion and has led 
a good many to believe that our immortality is only 
a miraculous grace of God ; and our cohibrated author 
also speaks of it with some doubt, as I shall mention 
presently But it were well if all those who are of 

this opinion had spoken about it as wisely and as 
sincerely as ho ; for it is to be feaired that a good many 
people who speak of ini mortality through grace, do so 
only to fcuive appearances, and are at bi>ttom nearly of 
the same opinion as those Averroists and some erring 

vi.530) : *It is tnio, Uio IVripatt^lic j»hiluM>ph(»i‘s <li<l not tluf% 

spirit OH absolutely iinivorsnl; for hosidcs tlu> intoll which, 
according to them, animate tho stars, they )iad an iiihdligotico for 
this lower world, and this iiii^illigouec j>orforined the function 
of activf* understanding in the souls of mon/ 800 aUo BaylcV 
Ihctivnary^ vol. iv, article Hidus, noh« C. 

E. omits from * and making ' to ‘ with them.’ 

Infra, pp. 389 sqq. Sec Locke, Kumy^ hk. iv. cli. 3, 5 6 (.Frawr'H 
ed., vol. ii. p, 195, with note), and bk. iv, chp 4, ( 15 (Fraser, vol. ii. 
p. 240 iioti’)* Cf* also Locke’s Ixeast/nabftneHH of (’hriatiunify opeuiing 
paragraphs), where Locke Hoems to make the immortality of tiie 
soul conditional on religious faith. 

Averroos ;,or Ibn Roschd, was born at Cordova in 1126 and 
died in 1198. Much of his philosophizing was concerned with the 
relation between the vsGs irottjrtic^i (a phrase never actually uned b> 
Aristojyio} and tho vovs iraSrjriKos of Aristotle. (See J)e yfahmi, iii. 
5^430*10 sqq.’^ Developing a suggestion of Aristotle. Averroos 
regards the vovt wotffnx^i as one principle appearing in all men, 
while the vovt naBrirucbs is peculiar to the individual. The voDs 
notffTitfis is ultimately identical with the Divine Spirit and is thus 
immortal ; but there is no individual immortality, for the voOv 
waSyntids is mortal. Cf. Leibniz's CoHBidd-ations Hur la Doctrine d*UK 
Esprit Unirereel Unique {l^oai) (E. 178 a ; O. vi. 529' ; ‘ Stiveral people of 
intellect have thau|^t and do still think tlmt there is only one spirit. 

NEW ESSAYS 

384 

Quietists''*, who imagiue an absorption of the soul 
and its reunion with the ocean of divinity, a notion 

which Ih universal and which animates the whole universe and all 
its parts, according to the structure of each and the organs it finds 
ill oiicli, as the same blast of wind produces the various sounds 
from different organ-pipes. And thus when the organs of an 
animal are rightly arranged, this spirit appears in it as an in- 
dividual soul, but when the organs are broken up, this individual 
soul comes to nothing again or returns, so to speak, into the ooeau 
of the univiTsal spirit. To many p«3ople Aristotle appears to have 
had an opinion of this kind, which has been revived by Averroes, 
A famous Arabian philosopher. He Indil that there is in us an 
intvJU'Uua agensj r^r active undorstniidiiig, and also an intelleciits paiitmSf 
or passive iindcrstaiidiiig ; and that the former of these, coming 
from outside of us, is eternal and universal for all, while the 
passive understanding, which is pc'culiar to each, passes away at 
tli<» man’s death. I’his dmdrine was held by some of the Pori- 
patoticN, two or three centuries ago, sucdi as Pomp«>natius, 
i’ontarenus and others.' 

See CunsiiUraUima siir fa Doctrine d*un Esprit Unirersel Unique 
(K. 178 1 >; (i. vi. 530) : ‘Appanuitly MoUnos, and some other now 
t^uietists, among others a certain author called Joannes Angelas 
SilosiuM, wiio wrote before MoUrio.s, and some of whose works have 
lately be<*n reprinted, and oven Weigelius before them, favoured 
this opinion of the Sabbath or rest of souls in Ood. And for 
this reason tliey held that llio cessation of individual functions is 
the highest state of perfection.' Migued do Molinos was horn at 
Saragossa in 1627 and died liti the prison of the Inquisition) in 
1697 . II is chii'fhook was his li>piritu<jU GuidCf published in Spanish 
and afterwarils translated into many language.s. Madame Ouyon 
and Fiinelon were much influenced by his work. Vahmtino Weigel 
\%\%H born at Ilayn in Thuringia in 1533 1588. He was 

a Protestant minister in a village near Dresden, and although only 
one book of his was published in his lifetime, he left a large numlier 
of works in manusoript, many of which are still unpublished. He 
was a btdiever in the dii>ect revelation of truth by the ‘ inward light,' 
in answer to prayer Leibniz elsewhere meiftioiis him as * a clever 
man, who was indeed too clever,' and he says that Angelas wes ‘the 
author of certain rather pretty little bits of devotional verse, in 
(ho fomi of epigrams.’ Utscours de la Conf'rmiie de la Foi avec la 
/I'aison, $ 9 48a b ; G. vi. 55). There has been much dispute as 

to the identity of Arigtdus and little is known about him. His 
best known poem is tiie Cltetnbiniach&r IVafidersmann. See Vaughan, 
Itours with the Mystics, bk. vii. cJh. i ; and Schrader, Anffdus SUesius tt. 
seine Mfpttik, Leibniz distinguishes between the Quietisi ‘Sabbath* 
and the ‘ beatific vision,* saying that the ‘beatific vision of completely 

9 

NEW ESSAYS 305 

which perhaps my system alone clearly shows to be 
impossible 

We seem also to differ as regards matter in this, that 
the author thinks there must be a void in it [matter] 
for the sake of motion, because he believes that the 
particles of matter are indivisible [ro/rfo]. And I admit 
that if matter were composed of such parts, motion in 
the plenum would l)e impossible, as if a room were filled 
with a great many little pebbles, so that not even the 
smallest place in it was empty. But this supposition 
is not by any means grunted, and indeeci them does not 
seem to be any reason for it ; although this able author 
goes so far as to think that the rigidity or cohesion of its 
[laiticles constitutes the essence of the body. S]>ac6 must 
rather be conceived as full of an ultimately fluid matter, 

happy £K)uIh ia oompatible with the functions of thoir glorificMl 
ho<lioH. which will Hiill romain organic in their own way/ En^yrti 
Cnirtrsd Unique (E. ifla a ; G. vi. 536). 

^ For, according to l^ibniz, no subsUnce cun Iw without an 
activity of its owui, and thus none can bo lost in the ocean of the 
one spirit. Against this idea that * the universal spirit is like an 
ocean composml of an infinity of drops, which are separah^d from 
it when they nuimnte some pHrticiilar organic body, hut nix) 
reunited to their ocean after the destruction of the brsly's organs/ 
Leibniz argues that ^as the ocean is a quantity of dro{>«f, God would 
thus be an assemblage of all souls, somewhat in the samo way as 
a swarm of bees is an assemblage of these insects, but as the swarm 
is not itself a genuine substance, it is clear that in this way the 
universal spirit itself would not be a genuine bedng, and in place 
of saying that it is the only spirit, wo should havu in say that in 
itself it is nothing at all, and that in nature there is nothing hut 
individual souls of which it is the aggre^gato. ... If we hold that 
the souls, when reunited to God, are without afiy functions of 
their <%n, we fall into an opinion contrary to reason and to all 
good philosophy, as if any Ijeing with a continued existence could 
ever reach a state in which it is without function or impression. 
For when one thing is combined with another it ndains never- 
theless its peculiar functions, which, when corribine<l with the 
functions of the othors, produce the functions of the wliole, other- 
wise the whole would have no functions, if the parts liad none.* 
Esprit Universel Unique (E. 181 b ; G. vis 535 ). 

E. omits Mn it ’ [y]. 

NEW ESSAYS 

386 

susceptible of all divisions and even subjected actually to 
divisions and subdivisions ad infinitum ; but neverthe- 
less with this difference that it is divisible and divided 
unequally in different places, because of the motions, 
more or less tending to division, which are already in 
the particular place. Consequently matter has every- 
where some degree of rigidity as well as of fluidity, and 
there is no body which is hard or fluid in the highest 
degree, that is to say, there is no atom of invincible 
hardness, and no quantity of matter [masse] completely 
indifferent to division Thus the order of nature and 
especially the law of continuity make both^^^ equally 
inadmissible. 

1 have also shown that cohesion^ if not itself the effect 
of impulse or motion, would cause a tmction^ strictly 
speaking’^*. For if there were a fundamentally hard 

^29 Of. Manaddlodyy $ 65. 

extremes are both impossible : (i) the absolutelj hard or 
solid, (9) the absolutely soft or fluid. An absolutely hard piece of 
matter would be one in which the force holding it together should 
bo so strong that no combination of other forces could overcome it. 
An absolutely soft portion of matter would be one in which there is 
no force of cohesion whatever, nothing to resist division, so that it 
would be ^completely indifferent to division.' Hardness or solidity 
is, occording to the law of continuity, simply a low degree of 
softness or fluidity. 

i. Ow both a perfect atom and a perfect fluid. Of. Third 
Explanation qf the New System j p. 335 with note. Also Nouveauz Essaisj 
bk. ii. ch. 4. $ 4 : am also of opinion that all bodies have some 

degree of oohosioii, as in the same way 1 hold that there are none 
which have not someyZuidify and of which the cohesion cannot be 
overcome : and consequently in my opinion jbhe atoms of Epicurus, 
the hardness of which is supposed to be invincible, cannot exist 
any more than the perfectly fluid minute [svUite] mattei^'of the 
Oartesians.’ (£. 999 b ; G. v. Z14.) 

^ But, according to Leibniz, traction or attraction is unintelligible, 
unless in the sense of a force or impulse which can be overcome by 
counteracting forces. A * traction, strictly speaking.* would imply 
thsA one part of matter is for ever bound thirled ’) to another and 
must tlierefore always be dragged along with it. Leibniz, however, 
does admit that tllere is an ^ipparent tractionj even though there be 
no visible contact between the parts which draw one another, as 

f 

NEW ESSAYS 

387 

body, for ingtanee, one of the atoms of Epicurus, which 
should have a part projecting in the form of a hook (as 
we can imagine atoms of all kinds of shapes) the hook 
when impelled would draw with it the rest of the atom, 
that is to say, the part which is not impelled and which 
does not lie in the line of impulsion. Yet our able 
author is liimself opposed to these philosophical tractions, 
such as were formerly attributed to nature’s abhori'ence 
of a vacuum ; and he reduces them to impulsest maintain- 
ing, with the moderns, that one part of matter acts 
immediately upon another only by impelling it through 
contact In this I think they are right, because 
otherwise there would be nothing intelligible in the 
operation. 

Nevertheless I must not conceal the fact that I have 
observed a kind of retraction regarding this matter on 
the pai*t of our excellent author, whose unpretending 
straightforwardness in this respect I cannot but praise, 
as much as I have admired his penetrating genius on 
other occasions. I refer to his reply to the second letter 
of the late Bisliop of Worcester'"*, printed in 1699, 

in tho case of the magnet and some electrical phenomena. But 
in any such case, there is contact and impulse' between the bodies 
concorne<l, although it may not appear so to our senses. Of. 
Nouveatix Essais, bk. ii. ch. 4, $ 4 ; ch. 8, § ii (,£. 229 a, 231 b ; G. 
V. 1 13, 1 18). 

According to Democritus, atoms differ in * shape, arrangement 
and position.' (Aristotle, Metaph. A. 4, 985^' 13.) 

See Locke's Easay^ bk. ii. ch. 8, § ii (cf. Fraser’s note, vol. i. 
p. 171), and bk. ii. ch. 23, § 17 sqq. ^ 

Edward Stillingfleet, born at Cranboume, Dorsetshiro, 1635, 
died fK Westminster, 16^, having for ten years l)eon Bishop of 
Woicester. His ohief work was the Origlma Sacrae (1662;. His 
controversy with Locke originated in the anti-roligious use to 
which Toland (in his Chri&tianity not Mysterious) turned some of 
Locke’s views. In 1696 Stiilingfleet published A Discourse in 
Vindicettion qf the Doctrine qf the Tfinity with an answer to the late Sodnian 
otijecHonSf in which there appeared a criticism of Locke’s * way of 
ideas.' To this Locke replied at great length and the controversy 
contiirned until Stillingfleet’s death. Cf. Fraser’s ed. of Locke’s 
• C c 2 

NEW ESSAYS 

388 

p. ^o8, in which, by way of justifying the opinion he 
had maintained against the learned prelate, namely that 
matter might think, he says among other things : ^ It is 
tme, I say, that bodies operate by impulse and nothing 
else ” (Essay^ bk. ii. ch. 8, § 11 ). And so I thought when 
I writ it, and can yet conceive no other way of their 
operation. But I am since convinced by the judicious 
Mr. Newton’s incomparable book, that it is too bold a 
l>resumption to limit God’s power, in this point, by my 
narrow conceptions. The gravitation of matter towards 
matter, by ways inconceivable to me, is not only a demon- 
stration that God can, if He pleases,- put into bodies 
powers and ways of operation above what can be devised 
from our idea of body, or can be explained by what we 
know of matter, but also an unquestionable and every- 
where visible instance, that He has done so. And 
therefore in the. next edition of my book I shall take 
care to have that passage rectified'®®.' I find that in the 
French translation of this book, doubtless made from the 
latest editions this section 1 1 reads thus : ‘ It is 
evident, at least so far as we can conceive it, that bodies 
act upon one another by impulse and not otheiwise ; for 
it is impossible for us to undemtaiid that a body can act 
upon that which it does not touch, which is as much as 
to imagine that it can act where it is not 

Kitsaify vol. i. Proiegomma, p. xli ; Stillingfleet’a Works (1710), vol. iii. 
pp. 413 sqq. ; Locke’s Works (1823). vol. iv. 

See Fraser's od. of Locke’s Essay, vol. i. p. note. Also 
Locke’s Works (10 vol. ed,, 1823). vol. iv. p. 467. 

See Prefatory Note. The italics are hy Leibniz. The Eng- 
lish edition has merely : ^ The next thing to bo considered is, how 
bodies produce ideas in us ; and that is manifestly by impulle, the 
only way which wo can conceive bodies to operate in.* 

Of course the Newtonian theory does not necessarily imply 
that a body con act where it is not. * The whole is greater than the part: 
how exceedingly true ! Nature abhors a vacuum : how exceedingly 
fals^and calumnious t Again, Nothing can act but where it is : with 
all my heart ; only, whbbe is it ? * Carlyle, Sartor Eesartus, bk. 1 
ch. 8 (Library ed., vol. i. p ssX Cl Newton, JMneipia, del 8, and 
Scholium Oenerale ; also Stallo, Coneepte gf Modem Physics^ ch. 5. 

NEW ESSAYS 

383 

I cannot but praise the modest piety of our celebrated 
author, who recognizes that God can do beyond what we 
can understand, and that thus there may be inconceivable 
mysteries in the articles of faith ; but I would rather 
that we were not compelled to have recourse to miracle 
in the ordinary course of nature and to admit absolutely 
inexplicable powers and operations. Otherwise too great, 
a licence will be given to bad philosophers on the strength 
of what God can do ; and if we admit those centripetal 
powers [vertus] or those immedmte attracticns from a dis- 
tance, without its being possible to make them intelligible, 

In bk.ii. ch. 8, § ii,hocallM thorn vires cmtripetur 

(E. 231 b ; G. V. 1 18). Of. Antibarbarus Physicus pro PhiloHophia reali eontra 
renovationes quahtatum schofastirarum et intelUgentiarum cfiimaei icarum 
(G. vii. 342) : * And all who are not content to recognize with ur 
qualities which arc so far occult, that is, which are unknown, have 
suppoHod qualitio'j which are perpetually occult, dfifirfroty inexplic> 
able, which not even the highest spirit [(/< muaj could thoroughly 
know and make intelligible. Such are they who, led on by the 
success of the observation that the large bodies of the world exert 
among themselves and upon their own |>erccptible parts the 
attraction of this system, suppose that every body is attracted by 
eVfery other through the very force of mutter ; whether, as It were, 
like feels like and delights in it even from afar, or whether God by 
a perpetual miracle secures that they shall strive towards one 
another, as if they had feeling. However that may be, those people 
neither can reduce attraction to impulse or to explicable reasons (as 
Plato did in the Timneus) nor do they wish they could. ... It is 
surprising that even now, in the great liglit of this age, there are 
some who hope to persuade the world of a doctrine so opposed to 
reason. John Locke, in the first edition of his Essay on the Under- 
standing, declared rightly, and in accordance with tho mechanical 
physics established by his illustrious countrymen^ Hobbes, Boyle, 
and their numerous followers, that no body is moved except by the 
impulle of a body coming into contact with it. But afterwards 
(obeying, 1 think, tho authority of his friends rather than his own 
judgment) he withdrew this opinion, and held that there may lif^ 
hid in the essence of matter I know not what extraordinary things 
[mirahUia^ ; which is just as if one were to think that there an* 
occult qualities in number, time, space and motion, taken by them- 
selves, that is to say, as if one were to seek a knot in a bulrush ' 
[a difficulty wheix) there is none], * or to try deliberately to make 
clear things obscure.' 

I 

NEW ESSAYS 

390 

I see nothing to hinder our Scholastics from saying that 
everything happens merely through their ‘ faculties/ and 
from maintaining their ^intentional species/ which ^ 
from objects to us and find it possible to enter even into 
our souls If that is so, 

Omnia jam fientf fieri quae pqsse negdbam 

so that it seems to me that our author, judicious as he is, 
goes here a little too much from one extreme to the other. 
He raises difficulties about the operations of souls when 
the question is merely whether that which is not 
ceptihle \sensihl^ is to be admitted ; and here we have 
him giving to bodies that which is not even intelligible^ 
attributing to them powers and activities which surpass 
all that a created spirit can, in my opinion, do or under- 
stand, for he attributes to them attraction, and that at 
great distances without any limit to the sphere of its 
activity ; and he does this in order to support an opinion 
which seems to me’”“ no less inexplicable, namely, the 
possibility that within the order of nature matter may 
think. 

The question which he discusses with the distinguished 
prelate who had attacked him is whether matter can think ; 
and, as it is an important point, even for the present 
work, I cannot avoid entering into it a little and exam- 
ining thoir controversy I will state the substance of 

Seo Monadology^ § 7, note 10. 

' All the things will presently happen, which I said could not 
happen/ Ovid, Trisiia, bk. i. el. 8, ver. 7. The whole passage is: — 
Omnia naturae praepostera legilAis ibunt, 

Parsque suum mundi nulla tenobit iter : 

Omnia jam fient, fieri quae posse negabam, 

Et nihil est, de quo non ait habenda fides. 

[All things by the laws of nature will go topsy-turvy, and no part 
of the world will hold on its own way ; all the things will presently 
hagpon which I said could not happen, and there is nothing we may 
not believe.*] 

E. reads ' which is * instead of ^ which seems to me.* 

That Leibniz was deeply interested in the controversy appears 
from his letters to Thomas Bumet of Kemnay (G. iiij 151 sqq.?, in 

NEW ESSAYS 

391 

the oontroYersy on this subject^ and will take the liberty 
of sajring what I think about it. The late Bishop 
of Woroester, fearing (in my opinion without much 
ground) that our author’s doctrine of ideas was liable 
to some abuses prejudicial to the Christian faith, set 
himself to examine certain parts of it in his Vindicaium 
of the Doctrine of the Trinity; and having done justice to 
this excellent author, in recognizing that he thinks the 
existence of the mind [es2>ri^] as certain as that of the 
body, although the one of these substances is as little 
known as the other, he asks (pp. 241 sqq.)’”^ how re- 
flexion can assure us of the existence of the mind \e 9 yrit\ 
if God can give to matter the faculty of thinking, accord- 
ing to the opinion of our author (bk. iv. ch. 3), since 
thus the way of ideas, which should enable us to dis- 
criminate *** wliat may be proper to the soul and what 
to the body, would become useless, while yet it was said 
in the second book of the Essay on the Understanding 
(ch. 23, §§ 15, 27, 28), that the operations of the soul 
furnish us with the idea of the mind and that 

the understanding along with the will makes this idea 
as intelligible to us as tlie nature of body is made intelli- 
gible to us by solidity and impulse. This is how our 
author replies in his flist letter (p. 65)^^: ‘I think 
I have proved that there is a spiritual substance in us, 

which he frequently refere to it and likens it to hia own oontroveray 
with Arnauld, He has * no doubt that Locke will come well out of 
it. He [liocke] has too much judgment to give an advantage to 
messieurs les ecdesiastiquesy who are the natural directors of the 
peoples and whose formularies must be folloYred as much as 
possible.' (G. iii. a 16.) Leibniz also wrote two accounts of the 
conti^versy, with comments of his own. (G. iii. 223 sqq.) See 
also Foucher de Careil, Leitres et Opuscules incite de Leibniz^ Introduc- 
tion, pp. Ixii-lxxxiii. 

Stillingfleet’s Works (1710), vol. iii. p. 505. 

^ £. reads ^ investigate ' [discuter'] instead of diseemer, 

Locke's Works (e<L 1823), vol. iv. pp. 3a sqq.; Bohn's ed., 
vol. IL p. 387 ; Fraser's ed. of the Essay, vol. ii. p. 193 note. Here, 
and in other passages quoted, 1 give the words of the author — not 
re-translating from Leibniz, 
t 

NEW ESSAYS 

392 

for we experiment in ourselves thinking. The idea of 
this action or mode of thinking is inconsistent with the 
idea of self-subsistence, and therefore has a necessary con- 
nexion with a support or subject of inhesion : the idea 
of that support is what we call substance. . . . For the 
general idea of substance being the same evergwhere^^, the 
modification of thinking, or the power of thinking joined 
to it, makes it a spirit, without considering what other 
modification it has, as whether it has the modification of 
solidity or no. As on the other side, substance that has 
the modification of solidity is matter, whether it has 
the modification of thinking or no. And therefore if 
your lordship means by a spiritual an immaterial sub- 
stance, I grant I have not proved, nor upon my prin- 
ciples can it be proved (your lordship meaning, as I think 
you do, demonstratively proved) that there is an imma- 
terial substance in us that thinks. Though I presume, 
from what I have said about the supposition of a system 
of matter tliiiiking (bk. iv. ch. 10, § 16) (which there de- 
monstrates that God is immaterial), it will prove in the 
highest degree probable that the thinking substance in 
us is immaterial. ... Yet I have shown ’ (adds the author, 
p. 68) *** * that all the groat ends of religion and morality 
are secured barely by the immortality of the soul, without 
a necessary supposition that the soul is immaterial.* 

The learned Bishop in his reply to this letter^ in order 
to show that our author was of another opinion when 
he wrote the second book of the Essay^ quotes from it 
(p. 51)’^'^ the passage (taken from the same book, ch. 23, 
§ 15), in which it is said that *by the simple ideas we 
have taken from our own minds *** we are able to frame 

Leibniz's italics. Ed. 1823, vol. iv. p. 34. 

Stillingfleet's IVorfcs, vol. iii. p. 534. 

*** Leibniz's translation has * from the operations of our mind.' 
I g^ve the words as they are in SUllingfleet, who condenses Locke's 
sentence, which is as follows : ^ By the simple ideas we have taken 
from those operations of our own minds, which we experiment 
daily in ourselves, as thinking, understanding, willing, knowing, 

J 

NEW ESSAYS 

393 

the complex idea of a spirit. And thus by putting 
together the ideas of ^thinking, perceiving, liberty and 
power of moving themselves we have as clear a per- 
ception and notion of immaterial substances as well as 
material He also quotes other passages to show that 
our author opposed spirit to body, and says 

(p. 54) that the ends of religion and morality are best 
secured by proving that the soul is immortal by its 
nature, that is to say tliat it is immaterial. He also 
quotes (p. 70)*^^ this passage that ^all the ideas we have 
of particular distinct sorts of substances are nothing but 
several combinations of simple ideas,’ and that thus our 
author thought that the idea of thinking and of willing 
presupposes another substance, different from that which 
is presupposed by solidity and impulse, and that thus 
(§17) he indicates that these ideiis constitute body as 
opposed to spirit [c5pn^]. 

The Bishop of Worcester might have added that from 
the fact that the general idea of substance is in body and 
in spirit, it does not follow that their differences are 

and power of beginning motion, A.C., co-oxiuting in Home Hubniaiice, 
we are able to frame the complex idea of an immaterial apirit/ 
Leibniz reads ‘ our body ' instead of ‘ themselves.' 

Leibniz reads ^as of material.' Stillingfloet hero again 
shortens Locke's statement, though ho gives u more exact quotation 
of it on p. 540. Locke wrote : ‘And thus by putting together the 
ideas of thinking, perceiving, liberty, and power of moving then»- 
selvos and other things, we have as clear a perception and notion 
of immaterial substances as we have of material. For putting 
together the ideas of thinking and willing, or the power of moving 
or quieting corporeal motion, joined to substance, pf which we have 
no distinct idea, we £ave the idea of an immaterial spirit ; and by 
•puttAg together the ideas of coherent solid parts, and a power of 
being moved, joined with substance, of which likewise we have no 
positive idea, we have the idea of matter.' 

Still ingfleet's WerkSy voL iii. p. 535: ‘I am of opinion that 
the great ends of religion and morality are best secured by the 
proofs of the immortality of the soul from its nature and properties, 
and which I think prove it immaterial/ 

Stillingfleet, iii. 539 ; Locke's Essayy ii. 23, § 6. 

Essay y ii. 23, § 17 ; StiUingfleet, iii. 540. 

NEW ESSAYS 

394 

modifications of one and the same thing, as our author 
said in the passage 1 have quoted from his first letter 
We must certainly distinguish between modifications 
and attributes. The faculty of having perception and 
that of acting, extension, and solidity are attributes or 
perpetual and principal predicates ; but thinking, impetus 
{impctuosit6\ figures and motions are modifications of 
these attributes Further, we ought to distinguish be- 
tween physical (or rather real) genus and logical or ideal 
genus. Things which are of the same physical genus, 
or which are homogeneous, are of the same matter, so to 
speak, and can often be changed one into another by 
changing their modification, like circles and squares. 
But two heterogeneous things may have a common logical 
genus, and then their differences are not mere accidental 
modifications of one and the same subject [sujet]^^', or 
one and the same matter, metaphysical or physical. Thus 
time and space are very heterogeneous things, and it would 
be a mistake to suppose I know not what leal common 
ground [sujet], having nothing but continuous quantity 
ill general, from the modifications of which time and 
space arise. Nevertheless their common logical genus is 
continuous quantity Some one will perhaps ridicule 
this distinction of the philosophers between two genera, 
the one merely logical, the other real^®*, and between 
two matters, the one physical (that of bodies), the other 
merely metaphysical or general, as if one were to say 
that two parts of space have the same matter, or that 
two hours also have each the same matter as the other. 
Yet those distinctions are distinctions* not only of terms 
but of things themselves, and they appear to be*most 

Supra, p. 39a. 

Cf. Introduotion, Part ii. p. 34 ; Part iii. p. 127 ; ManerMogp, 

S5I4 m- 

Or ‘ ground.* *** E. gives this sentence ; G. omits it. 

*** £. reads * these distinotions.' 

^ E. reads • also real.' 

K£W ESSAYS 

395 

pertinent here, where confusion between them has pro- 
duced a false conclusions^. These two genera have a 
common notion, and the notion of the real genus is 
common to the two matters, so that their filiation will 
be as follows s*® : — 

^Merely logical^ its variations consisting of mere 

s 

ences. 

^ real, the differences of 
which are modifica- 
tions, that is to say, 
matter 

metaphysical merely, in which 
there is homogeneity, 
physical, in which there is a 
solid homogeneous mass. 

I have not seen the second letter of our author to the 
Bishop ; and the answer which the prelate makes to it 
hardly touches the point about the thinking of matter. 
But our authors reply to this second answer returns to 
that point. ^ God ' (he says, nearly in those words, 
P* 397)*®®> ^superadds to the essence of matter what 
qualities and perfections He pleases : to some parts mere 
motion, but to plants vegetation, and to animals feeling 
[^sentimcnt\ Those who agree with me so far exclaim 

The point simply is that no real thing can have two or more 
conflicting attributes, though it may at different times liave modijica- 
Hons which in themselvee are conflicting. Nevertheless attributes 
which, in a real thing, would be impossible because conflicting, 
may abstractly or * ideally * be comprehendod under the samu 
concept or in the same class, on the ground that there is an 
essential (not merely accidental) community between them. They 
are thus species of a logical genus. Modifications, on the other 
hand, are more or less accidental variations of some real thing, 
which is the bond of«union between them. They are thus H|>ocieH 
of a genus. Ultimately, perhaps, the modifications may turn 
out to be species of a logical genus (it is probable that they arc so in 
the mind of God) ; but, for us, an infinite analysis would be needed 
to show this. 

This ‘ filiation ' as a whole is, of course, an arrangement of 
logical genera and species. 

uv < Matter’ here is equivalent to * real genus.* 

Works (ed. 1893), vol. iv. p. 460; Bohn’s ed., vol. ii. p. 390. 
In translating this passage I have us^ Locke's words as much as 
possible. . 

NEW ESSAYS 

396 

against me when I go a step further and say^ God may 
give to matter thought, reason and volition, as if that 
were to destroy the essence of matter. But to make 
good this assertion they say that thought and reason are 
not included in the essence of matter ; which proves 
nothing, for motion and life are just as little included in 
it. They also urge that we cannot conceive how matter 
can think ; but our conception is not the measure of God’s 
oinnipotency He afterwards takes as an instance 
the attraction of matter, on p. 99’®", but especially on 
p. 408 where he speaks of the gravitation of matter 
towards matter, attributed to Mr. Newton (in words 
which 1 have quoted above), declaring that we can never 
conceive the ‘ how ’ of it. This is practically to go back 
to occult qualities nay more, to inexplicable qualities. 
Ho adds (p. 401) that nothing is more calculated to 
favour scepticism than to deny what one does not under- 
stand, and (p. 402)^“* that we do not conceive how even 
the soul thinks. He thinks (p. 403) that as the two 
substances, matt^rial and immaterial, can be conceived 
in their bare essence without any activity, it is in the 
power of God to give to the one or the other the power 
of thinking. And he endeavours to take advantage of 
the admission of his opponent, who attributed sense 
[sentiment] to the low^er animals, but did not attribute 
to them any immaterial substance He maintains that 
libei’ty and self-consciousness [la consciosite] (p. 408)**^*, 
and the power of making abstractions (p. 409)^^ can 

Cf. Essay f Fraser’s ed,, vol. ii. p. 340 note. 

All the texts give *99,’ which seems to be a slip for ^^399.’ 
Wcyrks (ed. 1893), iv. 463 sqq. ; Bohn's ed., ii. 399 sqq. 

Works (ed. 1893), iv, 467 ; Bohn's ed., ii. 395. 

The guatitates occtUtae of the Scholastics. See Introduction, 
Part iv. p. 156. 

^ Works (ed. 1893), iv. .^63; Bohn’s ed., ii. 399. Cf. Essay, 
Fi*aBer'8 ed., vol. ii. p. 194 note. 

*** Works, iv, 466 ; Bohn’s ed., ii. 394. 

Works, iv. 468 ; Bohn's ed., ii. 395. 

NEW ESSAYS 

397 

be given to matter, not as matter, but as enriched by a 
Divine power. Finally he quotes (p. 434)*“ the observa- 
tion of a traveller so considerable and judicious as 
M. de la Loub^re that the Pagans of the east recognize 
the immortality of the soul without being able to com- 
prehend its immateriality. 

Kegarding all this I will observe, before coming to 
the statement of my own view, that it is certain that 
matter is as little capable of producing feeling [sentiment} 
mechanically, as it is of producing reason as our 
author admits ; and that I most certainly recognize that 
it is not allowable to deny what one does not understand, 
but I add that we have a right to deny (at least in the 
order of nature^ tliat which is absolutely iioither intel- 
ligible nor explicable. I maintain also that substances 
(material or immaterial) cannot be conceived in their 
bare essence without any activity, that activity is of the 
easence of, substance in general ; and that the conceptions 
of created beings are not the measure of the power of 

*** Works, iv. 485 ; Bolin’s ed., ii. 406. 

Locke's word. 

Simon do la Loub^re, born at Toulouse in 1643, diod in 1729, 
In 1687 Louis XIV entrusted him with a missiou to Siam for the 
purpose of establishing diplomatic and commercial relations between 
that country and France. As the result of a throe months' resi- 
dence in Siam he published two volumcB Du Royaume dc Siam (1691 ; 
Eng. trans. t 693\ in which he gives an elaborate account of the 
Siamese people, their history, customs, and institutions. The book 
still ranl^ as an authority on its subject. Locke's quotation is 
taken from vol. i. ch. 19, $ 4. 

Cf. Nouveaux Essais^ bk. iv. ch. 3. § 6 (E. 34^ b ; G. v. 360' : 
*The primary powers constitute the substances themselves ; and the 
deriva0o$ powers, or if you like, the faculties, are merely nwdes [fat^ons 
d'etre], which must be derived from substances, and they are not 
derived from matter in so far as it is merely mechanical, that is to 
say, in so far as by abstraction we take account only of the incomplete 
being of materia prima^ or that which is entirely passive. And in 
this 1 think you will agree with me, sir, that it is not in the power 
of a mere mechanism to produce perception, sensation, reason.* 
Cf. Locke, Essay t bk. iv. ch. 10, f ro ^^Fraser, vol. ii. p. 313 ; also 
Honadi^ogy, (17. 

KEW ESSATS 

398 

God, but that their coneeptivity, or ability [/orce] to 
conceive, is the measure of the power of nature : for all 
that is in accordance with the order of nature can be 
conceived or understood by some created being’’®. 
Those who will think out my system will see that 
I cannot wholly agr^ with either of these excellent 
authors, whose controversy, however, is very instructive. 
But, to explain myself distinctly, it is before all things to 
be considered that the modifications which can naturally 
or without miracle belong”* to a subject [sujet] must 
arise from the limitations or variations of a real genus or 
an original nature which is constant and absolute”*^. 
For it is thus that among philosopher the modes of an 
absolute being are distinguished from the being itself: 
for instance, we know that size, figure and motion are 
manifestly limitations and variations of the bodily nature. 
For*’* it is clear how an extension when limited gives 
figures, and that the change which takes place in it is 
nothing but motion. And whenever we find any quality 
in a subject [sujet]^ we sliould believe that if we under- 
stood the nature of the subject [sujet] and of the quality, 
we should understand [ccmcevoir] how the quality can be 
a result of it”\ Thus in the order of nature (setting 

For Leibniz this would follow a priori from the essential unity 
of nature, shown in the fact that each Monad ^and therefore each 
created boing) contains within itself a representation of the whole 
universe. 

E. reads * come ' [wntr] for cowovnir. 

Things do have an * absolute ' original essence of some kind. 
They are not ultimate bare unities, equally capable of any kind of 
modification. 

E. omits * for.* Of. Spinoza's Letters, 50, $ 4. c 

Cf. Lettre a A^nauld (z686) (G. iL 56) : ‘Always in every true 
affirmative proposition, neoessaiy or contingent, universal or 
singular, the notion of the predicate is in some way comprehended 
in that of the subject, prasdicoAim ineat msbjeeto : otherwise I know not 
wbat truth i& . . . Than musi always ds soms foundatim for Ihs am- 
nation the tenms in a proposition and this is to he found in their notions. 
That is my great principle, to which 1 think all philosopben must 
assent, and of which one of the corollaries is the common axiom. 

NEW ESSAYS 

399 

aside miracles), God is not arbitrarily free to give to 
substances one set of qualities or another indifferently ; 
and He will never give them any but those which are 
natural to them, that is to say, 'which can be derived 
from their nature, as explicable modifications of it Thus 
we may hold that matter will not by nature have the 
attraction mentioned above, and will not of itself go in 
a curved line, because it is not possible to conceive how 
that can happen, that is to say to explain it mechanically ; 
while that which is according to nature \naiurei\ ought 
to be capable of becoming distinctly conceivable, if we 
were admitted into the secrets of things. This distinc- 
tion, between that which is natural and explicable and 
that which is inexplicable and miraculous, removes all 
difficulties, and to reject it would be to maintain some- 
thing worse than occult qualities and accordingly to 
renounce philosophy and reason, and to provide refugi^ 
for ignorance and idleness by a confused [sourd] system 
which allows, not only that there are qualities we do no|; 
understand (of which there are only too many), but also 
that there are qualities which the greatest mind ], 

even if God were to give it the widest possible grasp, 
could not comprehend, that is to say, qualities which 
would either be miraculous or without rhyme or reason ; 
and that God should usually perform miracles would 
certainly be without rhyme or reason. Accordingly this 
lazy hypothesis would equally destroy our philosophy, 

that nothing happens without a reason, which can^always be given 
why the thing took ^lace so rather than otherwise.’ Tiiis, of 
eouras, is radically opposed to the view of Locke. 

Aailes de Vignaranoe. Cf. Spinoza, Ethics^ Part i. Appendix :-~ 
Lmec ad Dei volutUatenij hoc esC, ignortmtiae asylum comfugeris (Bnider’s 
ed., i. aao). 

The French isJainSomie, licibniz is probably thinking of the 
fallacy of \ 6 yot or Igncna Ratio, to which he frequently refers 
in the TModicie (cf. E. 470 b ; G. vi. 30). The fallacy is that 
which counsels doing nothing, because things are fated one way or 
another, whatever we do. Leibniz means that the hypothesis of 

NEW ESSAYS 

400 

which seeks reasons, and the Divine wisdom which 
furnishes them. 

Now as to thinking it is certain, and our author 
more than once allows it, that it cannot be a modification 
of matter that is intelligible or can be comprehended 
and explained by matter : that is to say, a feeling or 
thinking being is not a mechanical thing, like a watch 
or a mill, so that one might conceive sizes, figures and 
motions, the mechanical combination of which could pro- 
duce something thinking and even feeling in a quantity 
of matter in which there was nothing of this kind — 
which thinking and feeling would also come to an end in 
the same way when the mechanism falls into disorder^’*. 
Accordingly it is not a natural thing for matter to feel 
and to think, and this can take place in it only in two 
ways, one of which is, that God should unite with it a 
substance to which it is natural to think, and the other 
is. that God should miraculously impart thinking to it. 
In this matter, then, I am entirely of the opinion of the 
Cartesians, except that I extend it oven to the lower 
animals, and hold that they have feeling \^ntiment\ and 
tliat their souls are immaterial (properly speaking) and 
no more perishable than ai'e atoms according to Demo- 
critus or Gassendi ' ; while the Cartesians, who are 
without reason perplexed regarding the souls of the 
lower animals, not knowing what to make of them 
if there is conservation of them (because it has not 
occurred to them that there is conservation of the animal 
itself in a minute form), have been compelled to deny 
even feeling [sentimeni] to the loweif animals, contrary 
to all appearance and to the judgment of mankilid^^^ 

which he is speaking is a Mazy* one, because acceptance of it 
would imply that it is futile to investigate the ^ secrets of things.* 

E. omits from ^ or can be ’ to ‘ matter.* 

Cf. jAf(mado2o$v, § 17. 

Cff. New System^ ^ 4. 

See Monadoloyyf § 14. 

NEW ESSAYS 

40t 

But if some one should say that at any rate God can add 
the faculty of thinking to a mechanism prepared for it, 
I would answer that, if this took place and God added 
this-faciilty to matter, without at the same time putting 
into matter a substance which should be the subject in 
which this same faculty (as I conceive it) is inherent 
(that is to say, without adding to matter an immaterial 
soul), matter must needs have been miraculously exalted 
so as to receive a power of which it is not naturally 
capable : as some Scholastics declare that God exalts fire 
80 as to give it the power directly to burn spirits separated 
from matter which would be entirely miraculous 
And it is enough that we cannot maintain that matter 
thinks, unless there is attributed to it an imperishable 
soul or lather a miracle, and that thus the immortality 
of our souls follows from that which is natural^'*’*: since 
we cannot maintain that they are extinguished, unless 
it be by a miracle, consisting either in the exaltation of 
matter or in the annihilation of the soul. For we know, 
of course, that the power of God could make our souls 
mortal, although they may be quite immaterial (or im- 
mortal by nature), since He can annihilate them ‘'’V 

*•* E. reads * bodies.' 

Cf. Noureaux Easais, bk. iv. oh, 3. § 6 (E. 347 a ; O. v. 360 : 
* To suppose that God acts otherwise and gives to things aocidonts, 
which are not modes [fagona d*itre^ or modifications derived from 
substances, is to liave recourse to miracles and to what the Schools 
called obediential potoer, through a kind of supernaiural exaltation, 
AS when certain theologians hold that the fire of hell burns 
separated ” souls. which case it may even be doubted whether 
it would be the fire which would do it, and whether God would 
not Himself produce the effect, acting in place of the fire.' 
Cardinal Bellarmine (1549-1691) in his Z>e Purgatario, bk. ii. chs. 10 
19 , expounds a view of this kind, holding that the fire of purgatory 
is material fire, but nevertheless miraculously burns souls. In this 
opinion he openly follows Augustine (De Civitate Dei, bk. xxi. oh. 10), 
and a similar view is expressed by Thomas Aquinas {Summa Thaol. 
Suppl. P. iii. Q. 70, Art. 3, conclusion. 

^ i. e. ^ from their nature * or * from the order of nature.' 

^ Cf. MonadoliOgy, § 6. 

X» d 

NEW ESSAYS 

402 

Now this truth of the immateriality of the soul is un- 
doubtedly of importance. For it is infinitely more helpful 
to religion and morality, especially at the present day 
(when many people have very little regard for revelation 
by itself and for miracles) to show that souls are natur- 
ally immortal and that it would be a miracle if they were 
not, than to maintain that" our souls would die in the 
course of nature, and that it is in virtue of a miraculous 
grace, founde<l on nothing but the promise of God, that 
they do not die. Besides it has for some time been 
generally known that those who have tried to destroy 
natural religion and to reduce all to revealed religion, as 
if reason taught us nothing about it, have been counted 
suspect, and not always without reason But our 
author is not of their number. He upholds the demon- 
stration of the existence of God and he attributes 
prohahiliiy in the highest degree to the immateriality of 
the soul which may accordingly be accounted a moral 
certainty ; and consequently it seems to me that, having 
as much candour as penetration, he could quite well agree 
with the doctrine I have expounded, which is fundamental 
in every rational philosophy; for’'*® otherwise I do not 
see how we are to keep from falling back into fanatical 
philosophy, such as the Mosaic philosophy of Fludd which 

E. omits the passage in braclcets. 
iM ivads ‘ it lins for some time been the case.’ 

In his l>iscour 8 de la OynfctrmiU de la Foi avec la Baison (1710), 
Leibniz gives, at oonsideruble length, an account of those who 
insisted on tho opposition between reason and revelation, in which 
he traces the origin of this view to the Averroists. Ho approves of 
the condemnation of this position by the fifth Lateran Council, 
under Leo X, in 1512. (See E. 483 sqq. ; O. vi. 56 sqq.) Of. N&aveaux 
Eftsais, bk. iv. ch. 17, § 23 (E. 403 a; G. v. 477); also Bayle’s 
Dictionary^ Appendix t^vol. iv. p. 620, iciaircissemmt),*^ 

See Essay, bk. iv. ch. 10, § 10 (Fraser, vol. iL pp. 306 sqq. 
with notes). 

See Essay, bk. iv. ch. 3, § 6 (Fraser, vol, il. p. 194). 

E. omits ‘for.’ 

Robert Fludd (Eobsrtus de Fludibue) was born at Milgate, 
Kent, in 1574 (or 1571), and died at London in 1637. After 

NEW ESSAYS 

403 

finds a ground for all phonomena by attributing them 
directly and miraculously to God, or into the barbarous 
philosophy, like that of certain philosophers and physicians 
of the past, who still showed traces of the barbarous- 
ness of their time, and who nowadays are rightly con- 
temned, who found a ground for phenomena [apparences^ 
by inventing for this purpose occult qualities or faculties, 
which were pictured Jis being like little sprites or elves 

studying at Oxford he tnivolled abroad and mado acquaintanco 
with the theosophical views of Paracelsus, which ho sought to 
make known in England through his Philosophia Mnsaicn (1638) and 
his llisfona Macro-et-Miao-Cosmi Metaphysxca, Physiva vt Technica (1617'), 
In those writings he tries to find a complete philosophy in the Old 
Testament and more especially in the l^mtateuch. His system, if 
so it can he called, is a combin'htion of Neo-Platonic doctrines with 
those of tlie Kabbala, and one of his favourite ideas is tliat of the 
analogy between the universe (macrocosm) and the liuman body 
(microcosm). Leibniz is here referring to his theory that nil things 
flow diiwtly from Ood, who contiiiiiully produces the variations in 
phenomena by condensation and rarefaction of matter. All things 
are emanations from God and return into His absoluio unity. 
Gassendi and Kepler wrote against tlie views of Fliidd, 

E. reads * wliich ’ [philosophy]. 

*•’ Leibniz is probably referring to the ‘elemental spirits' of 
which Paracelsus U493-i54ii writes in his l)e Nymphin, Sylphia, 
Pygmaetset Salamandns. He attributes to the ‘ nym])hs * the plieno- 
mona of water, to the ‘sylphs' the phenomena of air, to the 
* pygmies' the phenomena of earth, and to the ‘ salnmandors ' 
the phenomena of fire. Fludd also adopted this view. Possibly 
Leibniz may also be thinking of the older Van Heluioiit (Johann 
Baptista Van Helmont, 1577-1644), who was a follower of 
Paracelsus. In the Ppistola ad Thomasium (1669), § ii (E. 5a b; 
G. i. 33), Leibniz speaks of Van Helmont along with Paracelsus 
and others as representative of the stupid [stolid^} form of the 
reformed philosophy, * absolutely rejecting Aristotle. In the 
saine letter he refers to the ‘occult philosophy of Agrippa' 
(Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, 1486-1535', * who 
ascribes to everything an angel to bring it to birth' [quasi 
obaletrictKorem], * Thus,' adds Leibniz, ' wo return to as many little 
gods [deuncu/t] as there are subsUmtial forms and we u])prouch tlie 
Gentile iroAi/^ci’a^j.* There may also here be a reference to the 
apiritus familiaris of the Italian physician, philosopher and mathe- 
matician, Girolamo Cardano (1501 -1575). See his Ik Vita Propria, 
ch. 47, Opwa (1663), vol. i. p.‘ 44. On the whole matter, cf. Leibniz s 
* 1 > <1 2 

NEW ESSAYS 

404 

capable of artlessly doing what js required, as if watches 
were to indicate the time of day by a certain horodeictic 
faculty without needing wheels, or as if mills were to 
crush the grain by a fractive faculty without needing 
anything resembling millstones As to the difficulty 
several peoples have had in conceiving an immaterial 
substance, it will readily pass away (at any rate in great 
part), if it be no longer maintained that there are sub- 
stances separated from matter, as in fact I do not believe 
that there are ever naturally any such substances 
among created things. 

^ntibarharua PhyHcusy &c. (G. vii. 337'. See also Vaughan’s 
with the Myatksy bk. viii. chs. 4 and 5, and the Dedication of Pope's 
Rape of the Lock, where the ^ nymphn/ kc. are attributed to the 
Rosicruoians. Milton speaks of 

* Those demons that are found 
In fire, air, fiood or under ground.' 

Jl Penseroao, 1 . 93. 

E. reads *all that is required.' 

See Introduction, Part iv. pp. 156 sqq. 

i. e. other than miraculously. Of. Monadology, $ 7a. 

PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND OF 
GRACE, FOUNDED ON REASON. 1714. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

The Principles of Nature and of Grace has much in common 
with the Monadology ^ and, iYideed, it reads like a preliminary 
study, out of which the Monadology has been elaborated. They 
seem to have been written about the same time ; and Gerhard t 
holds, against the view of previous editors, that the Principles 
of Nature and of Grace is the treatise which was written for 
Prince Eugene. It has been shown by Gerhardt that when 
Nicholas Remond wrote to Leibniz from Paris in 1714, asking 
for a condensed statement of his philosophy, Leibniz sent 
him a copy of the Principles of Nature and of Grace, with a 
letter in course of which he says : ‘ I now send you a little 
discourse on my philosophy, which I have written here for 
Prince Eugene of Savoy. 1 hope that this little work will help 
to make my ideas better understood, when taken in connexion 
with what I have written in the Journals of Leipzig, Paris and 
Holland. The Leipzig papers are on the whole in the language 
of the Scholastics; the others are more in the style of the 
Cartesians; and in this last writing 1 have endeavoured to 
express myself in a way which can be understood by those who 
are not yet thoroughly accustomed to either of the other styles.* 
(Letttr of Aug. 26, 1714, quoted by Gterhardt, vi. 485 ; E. p. xxvii 
and p. 704 a.) Kirchmann suggests that probably Leibniz 
wrote the Principles of Nature and of Grace for Prince Eugene, 
and afterwards, thinking it insufficient, worked it up into the 
.Monadology, which he gave to the Prince. The Principles of 
Nature and of Grace was first published in the French journal, 
L*Europe Savante, in November, 1718. 

There are three different MSS. of this work. The first of 

4o6 principles op nature and grace 

these, which is the shortest, is divided, not into paragraphs, 
but into two chapters^ the point of division being the end of 
paragraph 6, where transition is made from 'Physics.* to 
* Metaphysics.’ In the other two MSS. the paragraph division 
appears, and the text from which tlte translation is made is 
that of the hist and most complete manuscript. In the 
Principles of Nature and of Grace the armngement of the 
matter is much less clear and careful than it is in the Monad- 
oloijy. Hut, following the lines of the division originally made 
by Leibniz himself, we may say that paragiuphs i-6 inclusive 
give an account of the created Monads in themselves and in 
their ndations to one another, so far as those can be considered 
apart from (iod ; while the remaining paragraphs consider the 
nature of <iod as ultimate reason of the universe, and the 
coiiHe(pionct‘8 which follow from His perfection in power, 
wisdom and goodm‘8s. Some of the most imi>ortant points in 
the Monadotofff/ are either passed over or very slightly treated 
in the Principles of Nainre and of Grace. For instance, in 
the Principles of Nature, and ^f Grace there is nothing to 
correspoiul to the passjvge in the Monadolofp/ regarding the two 
groat principles of knowledge, and while the i)re-e8Ubl)li8hed 
harmony is mentioned, it is not dwelt upon. Hut the connexion 
between the two writings, both in treatment and expression, in 
HO close that th(5 annotations to the Principles of Nature and of 
Grace may be companitively brief. 

The Principles of Nature and of Grace will be found in E. 
714 sqq. ; U. vi. 598 sqq. 

I. Substance i.s a being capable of action. It is simple 
or ci>inponnd. Simple, mhstance is that which has no 
parts. Compound substance ‘ is tlie combination of simple 
Bubstanct'H or Monads. Monas is a Greek word, which 
moans unity, or that which is one. Oompounds or bodies 
ai’O pluralities [rnwY/Z/wdes] ; and simple substances, Hives, 
souls, spirits, are unities. And ovciywhere there must 
be simple substances, for without simple substances there 

8ee Mfmadoloify^ note a. Strictly speaking 'compound sub-'^ 
stance,* according to Ijeibniz, Js not 'substance * at all. It is not 
substantia but substantiatum. Failure to observe tikis distinction was 
to some extent the source of Wolff's misinterpretation of Leibniz. 

PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 407 

would not be compounda ; and consequently all nature is 
fuUof life*. 

2. The Monads, having no parts, can neither be made 
[fopmees^ nor unmade. They can neither come into being 
nor come to an end by natural means, and consequently 
they last as long as the universe, which will be changed^ 
but which will not be destroyed. They can have no 
shape ( figure ] ; otherwise they would liavu parts ®. Con- 
sequently any one Monad in itself and at a particular 
moment can be distinguished from any other only by 
internal qualities and activities | actions] ^ which cannot 
be other than its perceptions (that is to say, the represen- 
tations of the compound, or of that W'hich is outside \ in 
the simple) and iia it ions {that is to say, its tendencies 
to pass from one perception to anotlier), which are Hie 
principles of change. For the simplicity of substance is 
by no means inconsistent with the multiplicity of the 
modifications which are to be found together in that 
same simple Hubsiance, and theso modifieationH must 
consist in variety of relations to the things wdiich are 
outside ^ It is as in the case of a centre or 2>oint, in 

* To say thni matter is' infinitely diviniblc is tho same ah saying 
that there is eom pound subsliinc«^ everywhere ; for to be divisible 
is to be compound. But compound substfino^'s are made up of 
simple Hub8iant;eM. Consequently there are simple substances or 
living beings everywhere. 

* If they had shnix*, they would he extended or spatial. But 
everything extended is divisihlo, mid hence they would not be 
simple but compound, having parts. 

* Thus we cannot iKsrceive Monads hy uieuns of our st^nsos. 
What the senses giv^ us is not the substarico iqielf, but merely 
a phenomenon bene fundaium. * Spirits, souls, and simtde substances 
dr M^ads in general cannot bo known [wmirrohendi] by tbe si'nsos 
and imagination, because they have no parts.' JCpietola ad iiterttfu/ium 
,1711; (E. 678 a ; O. vii. 501;. 

* Tho compound, as oompound, consists of parten extra parfte ; but 
OB compound, it is merely phenomenal. 

* ‘The simplicity of a substance is by no means inconsistent 
with its having within it several modes at one time. There are 
successive perceptions ; but there are also simultaneous x>eroeptiona. 
Fur when there ia perception of a whole, there are at the same 

4 o8 principles op nature and gracte 

which, although it is perfectly simple, there is an infinite 
number of angles formed by the lines which meet in it 

3. All nature is b, plenum. There are simple substances 
everywhere^, which are actually separated from one 
another by activities of their own *, and which continually 
change their relations'; and each specially important 
\distingu^e\ simple substance or Monad, which forms the 
centre of a compound substance (e. g. of an animal) and 
the principle of its oneness, is surrounded by a mass 
composed of an infinity of other Monads, whicli constitute 
the particular body of this central Monad, and according 
to the affections of its body the Monad represents, as in 
a kind of centre^ the things which are outside of it. This 
body is organic^ though it forms a kind of automaton or 

timt' {wrcoptioTiH of tho uctual parU, and even enoh part hun more 
ilinn 0110 mtHlidcatioii ; and iiiert) in j>ercoplion at the eame time 
not only of carh modification, but hIko of each part. Thoao multi* 
plied percoptioiiH ai-o different from one another, a1thou;;}i our 
att<'ntion cannot alwaya di^itinguish them, and thuiii we Jinvo 
cotifuaed porceptioiia, an infinity of which is contained in each 
distinct porceptiori, hocauso of its rolation to everytliing which is 
outside. In short, that which i.% combination of parts in the out- 
side world is repix^scnted in the Monad only by combination of its 
modifications; and without this simple beings could not be 
internally distiugiiiahod from one another, and they would have 
no relation wiiotevor to external things ; and in short, ns there 
are everywhere only simplo substances, of which com]>oundH are 
merely the aggregates, there would be no variation or diversity in 
things, if there W(*re no internal variation or diversity in simple 
suhatanoos.' TA;ttre a Masacm (1716) (G. vL 6a8). Cf. Munadology^ 
notes la and ao. 

’ E. omits * everywhere.’ 

* The idea is that each Monad is separated from every other 
inasmuch as it has spontaneity, i.e. an activity entirely its owtf; for 
if it had merely an activity like motion, which passes from one 
thing to another indifferently, it would be united with all other 
Monads in a conh'nimm and would thus cease to be a real, indepen- 
dent unit. 

^ £. omits disHnguMy reading * each simple substance.* 

^ Of course, this does not mean that the Monads constituting 
the body are really afKoQted by outside things. Leibniz is here using 
popular language. 

PRINCIPLES OP NATURE AND GRACE 4O9 

natural machine, which is a machine not only as a whole, 
bu4^ also in the smallest parts of it that can come into 
observation Since the world is a plenum all things are 
connected together and each body acts upon every other, 
more or less, according to their distance, and each, through 
reaction, is affected by every other. Hence it follows that 
each Monad is a living mirror, or a mirror endowed with 
inner activity'", representative of the universe, according 
to its point of view, and* as subject to rule as is the 
universe itself. And the j>ert*eptions in the Monad are 
produced one from another according to the laws of desires 
[appeiiis] or of the final causes of good and eviU which con- 
sist in observable perceptions, regular or irregular, as, on 
the other hand, the changes of bodies and external pheno- 
mena are produced one from another according to the 
laws of ejfficicnt causes^ that is to say, of nmtions Thus 
there is a perfect harmony between the perceptions of the 
Monad and the motions of botlios, a harmony pre-estab- 
lished from the beginning between the system of eificient 
causes and that of final causes. And it is in this way 
that soul and body are in agrefunent and are physically 
united, while it is not possible for the one to change the 
laws of the other 

4. Each Monad, wdth a particular body, forms a living 
substance. Thus not only is there everywhere life, 
accompanied with members or organs, but there is also 

Cr. Mmadologyj $ 64. 

'This ** mirror *’ ia a figurative expresHion ; but it in auitable 
<*nough and it has already been employed by ^ theologian h and 
philosophers, when (hey spoke of a mirror infinitely more perfect, 
nanfcly, the mirror qf the IkUy^ which they made the object of tbo 
beatific vision.' Letire a Massvn (1716) (,G. vi. 696). 

Ultimately, motions and desires {appetits) are different degrees 
of the same tiling, viz. appetition, or the passage from one 0011- 
scioUB or unconscious perception to another. The unconscious 
appetition is motion or cfficieni cause, not setting lieforo itself an 
end, while the oonsoious appetition or desire does set before itself 
an end of good or evil, i. e. a final cause, 

Cf. Monadology, (( 78 sqq. 

410 PKINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 

an infinity of degrees in the Monads, one dominating 
more or less over another* But when the Monad Jias 
organs so arranged that they give prominence and sharp- 
ness [du relief et du disHngttd] to the impressions they 
receive, and consequently to the perceptions which repre- 
sent these (us, for instance, when, by means of the form 
of the eye’s humours, the rays of light are concentrated 
and act with more force), this may lead to feeling [senti- 
ment \ that is to say, to a perception accompanied by 
memory/, in other words, a perception of which a certain 
echo long remains, so os to make itself heard on occor 
sion. Such a living being is called an animal, as its 
Monad is called a sauL And when this soul is niised to 
reason, it is sometliing more sublime and is reckoned 
among spirits | ea^riisl, as will presently be explained. It 
is true that animals are sometimes in the condition of 
more [ simple J living beings and their souls in the condition 
of mere Monads namely when their perceptions are not 
sufficiently shar]) [distingia^] to bo remembered, as happens 
in a deep dreamless sloop or in a swoon. But pei*ceptions 
which liave become completely confused are sure to ha 
developed again in animals for reasons which I shall 

The irnnHition from the unconscifmii to thu conscious per- 
ct^ption is not by nny moans made clear. Leibniz is, of course, 
usina onlinury luiiguuffe ; but it is difficult to S4^ bow he could 
translaio it into the terms of his system, unless be were to content 
himstdf with saying that eonscioua Monads have lo^s confused 
'IHM'Coptions than unconseioua Monads and have bodies whose 
organs aro differontly arranged. For, in Ltnbniz*« view, the action 
of any one Monad upon another is purely ideal ; and there is 
nothing in the world but Monads. Cf. Monadtilogy, § J5. 

Q. reads elendre, wiiich might here be translat'd * increase^ for 
m^e'iidrc; [heard], which is E.'s reading. Kntmdre stf^^ms more natural. 

i. o. unconscious living beings and unc<msciou8 Monads. 

” That is, perceptions animals) which have passed into the 
complete concision of uiiconsciousDesa are sure to pass Into con- 
sciousness again. Confusion in perceptions is the same thing as 
eni^lopment or contraction, (Hence the petxlea iwropiiims are con- 
fused.) On the other hand, clearness in perceptions is the same 
thing as development or expansion. Cf. note 51 and Neic Esmys, 
Introduction, note 74. 

PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 4II 

presently mention (§ 12). Thus it is vreli to make din- 
tinotioQ between perctpiion, which is the inner state of 
the Monad representing outer tilings, and appercqfUm^ 
which is cofisciousness or the reflective knowledge of this 
inner and which is not given to all souls nor to the 
same soul at all times. It is for lack of tliis distinction 
that the Cartesians' have made the mistake of ignoring 
perceptions of which we are not conscious as ordinary 
people ignore imperceptible bodies ®. It is 

this also that has led these same Cartesians to believe 
that only minds are Monads, that the lower 

animals have no soul, and that still less are tliere other 
principles of life And as they euine into too great con- 
flict with the common opinion of men in denying feeling 
[sentiment] to the lower animals, so on the other hand 
they conformed too much to the prejudices of the crowd 
in confounding a prolonged unconsciomnessy which comes 
from a great confusion of perceptions, with absolute death, 
in which all perception would cease. This lias confirmed 
the ill-founded opinion that some souls are destroyed, and 
the bad ideas of some who call themselves free-thinkers 
forts] and who have disputed the immortality of 
our soul **. 

“ St»o Monadology, § 14. 

* * As in l>o(ly we hold that there is atfrirwia and figun* in 
gi^neral, although we do not know what uro tho figures of im 
perceptible bodies ; so in the Wf hold that there is iK^rception 
and api)otition, although we do not distinctly know the imp»'r- 
ceptible elements of the confu»<*d jH*rceptions by which the iin 
perceptible parts of bodies are C5xprc»»©d. . . . You ask wdioflicr 
I believe that there are bodies which do not ftilJ within sight. 
WWy should I not believe it^ I think it impossible to doubt it. 
Through microscopes we »e<^ animalculao otherwise jmpcn-<‘p<ibIo, 
and tiie nerves of these animalculao, and other aiiiinalculae, 
perhaps swimming in the fluid parts of thr:iMO, cannot be 
The minuteness rai46ftZifdsJ of nature gcxm ad infinitum.' Kpiatofaad 
BuBfUngium {iTn) (E. 678 a ; O. vii. 501). 

** Leibniz probably means what elsewhere, following Scholastic 
usage, he calls ^ forms.' Of. Introduction, Part iv. p. 156. 

" Of. Monadologiff § 13. 

412 PRINCIPLES OP NATURE AND GRACE 

I>. There is a connexion among the perceptions of 
animals which has some likeness to reason ; but it is 
based only on the memory of factB or effects^, and not 
at all on the knowledge of causes. Thus a dog avoids 
the stick with which it has been beaten, because memory 
represents to it the pain which this stick has caused it 
And men, in so far as they are empirics, that is to say 
in three-fourths of their actions, do not act otherwise 
than the lower animals. For instance, we expect that 
there will be daylight to-morrow because our experience 
has always been so : it is only the astronomer who 
rationally foresoos it, and oven his prediction will ulti- 
mately fail when tlie cause bf daylight, which is not 
eternal, ceases But genuine reasoning dej)onds upon 
necessary or eternal truths, such as those of logic, of 
number, of geometry, which produce an indubitable 
connexion of ideas and infallible inferences. The animals 
in wliich these inferences do not appear are called the 
lower animals ; but those which know these neces- 

sary truths are properly those which are called rational 
animals^ and their souls are called minds [r,spn7,s]. These 
souls have the power to pei-foim acts of reflexion and 
to observe that which is called ego, substance*®, soul, 
mind in a word, immaterial things and truths. 

And this it is which makes science or demonstrative 
knowleilgo possible to us‘®. 

6. Modern research has tatight us, and reason conflims 
it, that the living beings whose organs are known to 
us*', that is to say, plants and animals, do not come 

•• O. rends tni everts ; E. omits this, 

** Cf, Mtmoiioloffyf $$ a6~a8. * 

E. reads ‘ Monad ' liolween * bubstnoce ' and ‘ soul *; G. omits it. 

** Cf. MonaSi)!ogy, ^ § 39 and 30. In the Mofiodology God is added 
as an object of tho seir-oonsoi<ius soul. 

** All Monads have organic bodies, and the series of Monads and 
of (gganisms extends continuously from the lowesb of Monads with 
the least perceptible of organisms up to the Monad of Monads, God. 
At both ends the scale there sre beings whose organs are not 
known to us. 

PRINCIPLES OP NATURE AND GRACE 413 

from putrefaction or ohaos^ as the ancients thought^ but 
from preformed seeds, and consequently from tho trans- 
formation of pre-e:KiBting living beings. In the seed of 
large animals there are animalcules which by means of 
conception obtain a new outward form, \i*hich they 
make their own and which enables them to grow and 
become larger so as to pass to a greater theatre and to 
propagate the large animaP*. It is true tliat the souls 
of human spermatic animals are not rational, and that 
they become so only when conception gives to these 
animals human nature And as in general animals are 
not entirely born in conception or generation, no more do 
they entirely perish in what we call death ; for it is 
reasonable that what does not come into being by natural 
means should not any more come to an end in the course 
of nature. Thus, throwing off their mask or their tattered 
covering, they merely return to a more minute theatre, 
where they may novertlieless be as sensitive ( | 
and as well ordered os in the larger theatre ' ^ And what 
has just been said about the large animals applies also 
to the generation and death " of spermatic animals 
themselves, that is to say, they are growths of other 

" Cf. llonadotogy, §5 7^ 75- 

* Cf. Moi\adolitgy, § 89. It would be inconsistent with Loibniz'H 
general principles to aupposo that a Mpermatic niiiinul could have 
a rational soul (otborwiso tlmn in germ, hr all rouIh may be regarded 
as potentially rational). For the rationality of a hoiiI in merely 
a very high degret; of cloarnoRR and diRtirictneaR in its perc€iptionitf 
which again dotermincR ita rank as a dominant Monad. But 
nothing else than its rank aa a dominant Monad dotermiium the 
nature of tlie body* it has. ConaequeriUy a rational soul niUHt 
aliR%yR hare a human body or a body of aomc higher kind, Kpiriiual 
or angelic, and the union of a spermatic animal s body with a 
rational soul is impossible. 

* Cf Jkfonadcfcffy, §i 73, 76, 77. 

E. (manifestly by mistake) omits a rlauRc following these 
words. A tran%Iation of his text would be: generation and 

death of the smaller spermatic animals in comparison with which 
they* [sc. tho large animals] ‘may be counted large/ Ac, This 
misses tho point of the sentence. 

414 PRINCIPLES OP NATURE AND GRACE 

smaller spermatic animals, in comparison with which 
they in turn may be' counted large^ for everything in 
nature proceeds ad infiniium-\ Thus not only souls but 
also animals are iiigenerable and imperishable : they are 
only dev©lopc3d, enveloped, clothed, unclothed trans- 
formed. Souls never put off the whole of their body, 
and do not pass from one body into another body which 
is entirely new to them. Accorilingly there is no metenh 
paychosiSf but there is metamorphosis. Anunals change, 
take on and put off, parts only**. In nutrition this 
takes place gradually and by little imperceptible | insensible | 
{portions, but continually ; and on the other hand, in con- 
ception or in death, when much ** is gained or lost all at 
once, it takes place suddenly and in a way that can be 
noticed [ni)iahlemvnt\j but rarely, 

7 , Thus far we have spoken merely as pure pht/skisla ^* : 
now we must rise to meiaphysics^ making use of the 
(prat principle^ usually little employed, which affirms that 
nothing takes jdace without suffident reason^ that is to 
say, that nothing liappens without its being possible for 

‘So, naturnliMiM observe, a flea 
lln^ Hjnaller Seas that on him prey ; 

And these have Hinaller still to bite ’em, 

And so proceed ad — Swift, On Poetry. 

The idea of * iiitiiiiti<'S vif infinity* is a favourite one with Leibniz, 
and it is closely connected with the notions underlying his diffet- 
runtiul calculus. * For instance, Ave must conceive (i) the diameter 
of a small element in a grain <»f sand, (a) the diameter of the grain 
of sand itself, (3) that of the globe of the earth, (4) the distance of 
a Axed star from us, (5) the magnitude of the whole system of fixed 
stars, as ( i) a differential of the second degr«H>, (a^a differential of the 
first degree, (3> an ordinary assignable line, (4) an infinite lin€3,«^3) 
an infinitely infinite line.' I^ettre a M. d'Angicoufi ^^716), Buiens, iii. 
500. Cf. Monadology^ $§ 6s-^o. 

** Of. a Corinthians, v. 4. 

Cf. UonadologHf 7^, 77. Aristotle condemns the theory of 

transmigration of souls in his Aninui, i. 3, 407^ t^. 

***£. omits beaucaup much *] and reads, ‘ all is gained or lost at 
once/ 

** I. e. students of nature. 

PAlNClPLfiS OP NATURE AND GRACE 415 

one who ehould know things sufficiently, to give a reason 
which is sufficient to determine why things are so and 
not otherwise. This principle being laid down, the first 
question we are entitled to put will be — Wh^ does 
thing eaist rather than nothing? For ^ nothing* is simpler 
and easier” than ^something.’ Further, granting that 
things must exist, we must bo able to give a reason whg 
they should exist thus and not otherwise*". 

8 . Now this sufficient reason of the existence of the 
universe cannot be found in the sequence of contingent 
things, that is to say, of bodies and their representations 
in souls : because, matter Ixung in itself indifferent to 
motion and to restand to one or another particular motion, 
we cannot find in it the reason of iiiotion and still loss 
the reivson of 0110 particular motion And although the 
motion which is at i)re>eiit in inatU'i* comes from the pre- 
ceding motion, anti that again from another preceding 
motion, we are no farther forward, however far we go ; 
for the same question always remains. Thus the suffi- 
cient reason, which has no need of any other rt^ason, 
must nei>ds be outside of this sequence of contingent 
things and must be in a substance which is the cause 
of this sequence, or which is a necessary being, bearing 
in itself the reason of its own existence, otherwise we 
should not yet have a sufficient reason with which we 
could stop. And this ultimate reason of things is called 
God*\ 

i. c. mnre paNily brotiglit into oxiMlonre. But if w»* can nay 
pvon thi» of* nothin|i(,* niuat not ‘ nothing ' ho ‘ HOinelhing *? How 
can we nay of that wljich i» not at all, that it ia ‘ ainipJe ' and ‘ «n«y * 
in comparison with other things f * 

Mtmadolo^y i 33 . 

Motion (which, for Leibniz, is wliat wo ahould now call an 
abstraction) in regarded a« paMsing from body to body and an having 
no definite source in the phenomenal world. Tho point of view is 
that which Descartes auhstitntod for the Peripatetic theories, and 
Leibnizes point i»that, while Descartes's view is good so far as it 
goes, it is insufficient and requires to bo supplemented by a deeper 
explanation. 

*• Cf. Monadoloffy, (( 36-38, and Uftimate Origination iifThingtfp, 338. 

4 i6 principles op nature and grace 

9, This primary simple substance must include emi* 
nently the perfections contained in the derivative sub* 
stances which are its effects. Thus it will have power, 
knowledge and will in perfection, that is to say, it will 
have supreme [souveraine] omnipotence, omniscience and 
goodness. And as justice^ taken very^" generally, is 
nothing but goodness in conformity with wisdom, there 
must also bo in God supreme justice**. The reason 
which has led to the existence of things through Him 
makes them also depend upon Him for their continued 
existence and working ; and they continually receive 
from Him that which makes them have any perfection ; 
but any imperfection that remains in them comes from 
the essential and original limitation of the created 
thing **. 

i.(>. ill a higher degree. See Manadology^ note 61. 

E. om its /or( [very I . 

‘There is n greut difl'erenee botwoen the wiiy in which 
ai'e juat and thi^ way in wliich Ood ia just; hut it is merely 
a diiTeronee in degriH^. For (lod is perfectly and entirely just, and 
the justice of men is mingled with injustice, faults, and sins 
hei'auae uf the imperfection of human naturo. The perfections of 
Ood are infinite and ours are limited. . . . Juatice is nothing but 
that which is in conformity with wisdom and goodness taken 
together ; the end of goodness iatbe greatest good, but in order to 
recognizee this there is need of wisdom, which is nothing but the 
knowledge of the good. In the Kame way, goodness is nothing but 
the inclinatioii to do good to all and to prevent evil, unless it be 
necessary in order to M^curo a greater good or to prevent a greater 
evil. Thus wisdom is in the understanding and goodness in the 
will. Ami consequently justice is in both. Power is another 
thing ; but if it coiue.s into play, it makes the right become 
actual and causes what ought to be really t^ exist, so far as the. 
nature of things allows. This is what God does in the w««']d.' 
MeditoHon sur la nofien ammuw de la Justice ( Holla t, pp. 60, 6a \ 
Of. Oh iMe Notions Kight and Justice (1693), P* 

Of. Monadotogyy § 4a. This is a brief statement of the main 
oontention of the TModioSe^ in so far as it endeavours to vindicate 
the goodness of God in face of the evil in the w.orld. God is the 
source bf the perfections of each Monad, because it is through His 
ohoiee of the best of all possible worlds that each Monad actoallj 
exists, and continues in existence. But every Monad has some 

a 

PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 417 

10. It follows from the supreme perfection of God 
that in producing the universe He has chosen the best 
possible plan, in which there is the greatest variety 
along with the greatest order ; ground, place, time being 
as* well arranged as possible the greatest effect pro* 
duced by the simplest ways ; the most power, know- 
ledge, happiness and goodness in created things that the 
universe allowed^*. For as all possible things in the 
understanding of God claim existence in proportion to 
their perfections, the result of all these claims must bt? 
the most perfect actual world that is possible. And 
a|>art from this it would not be }K>ssible to give a reason 
why things have gone tlius rather than otherwise 

11, The supreme wisdom of God led Him to choose 
.si>ecially the laws of motion which are most fitting and 
which are most in conformity with abstract or meta- 
physical reasons. There is conserved the same <]uantity 
of total and absolute force, or of activity \aetion\ also 
the same quantity of relative force or of rwiction, and 
finally the same quaidityof force of direction Further, 

inalienable ijnporfeclion ; otberwine it would bo India- 
tinguiahablo from Hod. And Hod e.annot rhana^^ tbo obhohco of 
any Monad, as it in in tho ^region of idean,’ wliieh in Kin undor- 
standing. lie can merely create and support, or withhold Ilia 
cieation and pn^uervation. 

** Cf. Ultimai^ Originaiim ofThmgSj pp. 340 gqq. 

*• Cf. Monadoiogfi, 5 § 5.S“58- Cf. MimaduU^f, 53 and 54. 

** Every system or aggn'gato of bodies has a total absohito force*, 
i. a total force belonging to tbo aystcui as a completely indejHm- 
dent 8 y 8 t<*m — a total force calculated on the supposition that there 
are no other total forces in relation to it, which might increuM^ or 
diminish it. The whole mutter of the universe is such a sysiem, 
and consequently its total absolute force remftius always the 
iiafAe. But total absolute force is always made up of two partial 
forces, i. e. forces wiiich belong to tho parts of the aggregate or 
S3wtc*m. Tliese partial forces aro(ii ‘relative forco' or ‘force of 
reaction,* which is tho force involved in the mutual action and 
reaction of the bodies constituting the system or aggregate, i. e. its 
internal action,* and (3) ‘force of direction/ which ia the force 
involved in Uie external action of tho system. Cf. Introduction, 
Part iii. pp. 89 sqq. See also Exidanation qf tke New Syelem, note 30, 

4 i8 principles of nature and grace 

action is always equal to reaction, and the whole effect 
is always equivalent to its full cause. And it is remark- 
able [sufprenant] that by the sole consideration of effiiHmt 
causes or of matter it was impossible to explain these 
laws of motion which have been discovered in our time 
and of wliich a part has been discovered by myself. 
For I have found that we must have recourse to final 
cauaeSy and that these laws are dependent not upon the 
principle of necessity^ like the truths of logic, arithmetic^ 
and geometry, but upon the principle of fitness [con- 
venance]f that is to say, upon the choice of wisdom. And 
this is one of the most effective and remarkable proofs 
of the existence of Ood for those who con go deeply into 
those things 

12. Again, it follows from the perfection of the Su- 
preme Author not only that the order of the whole 
universe is the most perfect that con be, but also that 
each living mirror representing the universe according 
to its point of view, that is to say, each Monad, each 
substantial centre, must have its perceptions and its 
desires [appetits] as thoroughly well-ordered as is com- 
patible with all the rest Whence it also follows tliat 
souls, that is to say, the most dominant Monads, or 
rather animals themselves cannot fail to awake again 

** Tlu'lawM of actual ‘concrete’ in<»tion cannot bo deduced a priori 
under the law of contradiction ; but a knowledge of them involves 
a rofonuice to experience. As a n^sult of this reforeuoo to experience 
we aw' oompoilod to oonooive body, not ns niero oxtornality of parte, 
indifferent to motion, bat ae something whi^b always has a>l>rr« of 
its own. Thus bodioa arc ultimately or really ^as distinct from 
phenomenally) independont forces (Monads), which differ frdfti one 
another endlesitly but are yet in such harmony that they form 
one perfectly regular systemf the laws of which we c^n discover 
and state. Such a system could never havo come into existence 
‘ of itself,* by a law of blind neoessity, indifferent to good and evil, 
Mke the principle of contradiction. An all-wise, aU-powerfnl and 
infinitely good Ood must have chocen this system as the best 
among all possible systems. Cf. Monadoiogif, § 51. 

^ £. omits, themselves.* 

FBINOIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 419 

from the condition of stupor into which death or some 
other accident may put them 

' *r3. For all is regulated in things, once for all, with as 
much order and mutual connexion as possible, since 
supreme wisdom and goodness can act only with perfect 
harmony. The present is big with the future, the future 
might be read in the past, the distant is expressed in the 
near. We might get to know the beauty of the universe 
in each soul, if we could unfold all that is enfolded in 
it and that is perceptibly developed only through time. 

^ ConsciouB Monads may for a time fall into unconsciousness ; 
but that they ahould remain permanently in that oundition woubl 
Ikh against the general order of things. For the tendency of all 
created Monads is to advance to higher perceptions. In this 
advance each Monad is essentially limited to somo extent ; but 
apart from this tssetUial limitation, which is independent of the 
will of God, no other permanent limitation is imposed. Thus, if 
a Monad has on<*e been conscious, it may be conscious again, for 
manifestly it is not essentially Umite<l to the unconscious state. And 
it musi some day Ik* conscious again, for the world is the l>ost of all 
p^issible worlds, not merely on the whole but as regards each of 
its parts, which is equivalent to saying that the world is so con> 
structed that each of the Monads constituting it shall rise to the 
highest point of perft»ction (i. c. of p^sreeption and app«d.ition) which 
its essential limitations allow. Leibniz elm^where speaks of the 
world in terms which, with slight alteration, he would apply to 
the individual soul. * You are right in saying that our globe ought 
to have been a kind of Paradim.% and 1 add that, if that is vki, it 
can quite well b€»como one yet, and it may have drawn back in 
order to make a l>etter leap forward.’ Letirs a Bourgimt (1715) (K. 
731 a; G. iii. 578;. Cf. Lettre touchanl cc qtU est independant dUm Sms 

ds la Mature (1702^ (G. ri. 507) : * Always wh<m we penetrate 
into the depths of any things, wo find in them the most beautiful 
order that could la? desiml, even bc^yond what w<^ imagined, as all 
thoafi who have gone dei*p]y into the acionecM are awans ; and 
acordingly we may hold that the same is the case as n^gards all 
other things, and that not only do immaterial substances always 
continue to cueist but their lives, their progress and their changes 
also are regulated so as to attain a certain end, or rather t<i 
approach it inore^ and more, as asymptotes do. And although we 
sometimcis fall back, like lines which iiave bends in tljem, advance 
none the less prevails in the end and gets the vict«.iry.* Cf. New 
Etmys^ Introduction, note 74. 
i 

£62 

420 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 

But 08 each distinct perception of the soul includes an 
infinite number of confused perceptions, which involve 
the whole universe, the soul itself knows the things of 
which it has perception, only in so far as it has distinct 
and heightened [or unveiled] perceptions of them ; and 
it has perfection in proportion to its distinct perceptions. 
Kach soul knows the infinite, knows all, but confusedly ; 
as when I walk on the sea-shore and hear the great noise 
the sea makes, I hear the particular sounds which come 
from the particular waves and which make up the total 
sound, but I do not discriminate them from one another. 
Our confused perceptions are the result of the imprassions 
which the whole universe makes upon us. It is the same 
with each Monad God alone lias a distinct knowledge 
of all, for lie is the source of all. It has been very well 
.said that as a centre lie is everywhere, but His circum- 
fei^uice is nowhere for everything is immediately pre- 
sent to Him without any distance from this centre. 

1 4. As regards the rational soul or mind there is 
in it something more than in the Monads or even in mere 
\ffimple] souls It is not only a mirror of the universe 
of created beings, but also an image of the Deity. The 
mind has nut merely a perception of the works 

of God, but it is oven capable of producing something 
which resembles them, although in miniature. For, to 
say nothing of the wonders of di'earas, in which we 

H. rendH (}. roadn revrteea. Jievcfffs (without tho UHual 

aci'piiis) looks liko a slip of tho pon and rrlertes is elsewhere used 
in a similar connexion. Of. ilfonmloZitgry, § 35. 

Cf. MoHadifloffUf §5 60 and 61. 

'* ‘llio world is an infinite sphere, of vrhich tho centre ifrevery- 
whero, the circuinfen>ncc nowhere.* Pascal, Penste^^ i. (Havet's od., 
p. i^. Havet traces tho phrase to Rabelais (bk. iii. ch. 13 s thence 
to Gerson and Bonaventiira, and ultimately toYlnctmt do Beaurais 
;»‘arly in the thirteen*th century) who attribulcH it to Empedocles, 
olt is not in any writing of Empedocles now known. See Ha vet's 
pp. 17 sqq. 

^The Monads' here moans hare or unconscious Monads, while 
* mere souls ' means conscious souls, which are not self-oonseious. 

PRIKCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 421 

invent without trouble (but also without willing it) ^ 
things which, in our waking hours, we should have to 
think long in order to hit upon, our soul is architectonic 
also • in its voluntary activities and, discovering the 
scientific principles in accordance with which God lias 
ordered things {ponderCy mensura^ numeWy &c.)®\ it 
imitates, in its own province and in the little world in 
which it is allowed to act, >vhat God does in the gi-eat 
world 

15, It is for this reason that all spirits whether 

of men or of angels entering in virtue of reason 

and of eternal truths into a kind of fellowship with God. 
are members of the City of God, that is to say, of tlie 
most perfect state, formed and governed by ilio greatest 
and best of monarchs : in wliicli 11101*0 is no crime with- 
out punishment, no good action without a proportionate 
reward, and in short as much virtue and happiness oh 
is possible ; and tliis, not by any interfiu’encu with the 
course of nature, as if what <jrud prepares for souls were 
to disturb the laws of bodies, but by the very order of 
natural things, in virtue of the iiarniouy pre established 
from all time betwecui the n^alins of nature ami of grace, 
between God as Archibnit and God as Monan-b, st> that 
nature itself'^® leails to grace, and grace, by the use it makes 
of nature, brings it to perfection 

16. Thus although reason cannot make known to us 
the details of the grout future (which are reserved for 
revelation), we can be assured by this same reason that 
things are made in a way which exceeds our desires. 

E. rctada sans en avoft meme la trdonley * without even willing it.' 
G- (fl^ni whom I tranKlaie) iiaei »Mai« awusi nans en atyjir la vttlonfH, 

^ Sed omnia m m^rvfura, et numero $tjxmdere dinpoeutelia. A quotatjon 
(frequently uaed in Lcibniz'ti lime; from the Vulgate, JSoi)k qfWwUmy 
ch. II, V. ai. *But by measure and number and weight Thou didht 
order all tliingii ' (R. V. ch, 1 1 , v. 30). The pliraw) p<mdere, numero, 
mnmtra occun in remains of Ulpiau, Inttit. bk. i, fragment iii. 

Cf. Mcnadalogyy f 83. 

^ E. omits * itself 

Cf. Mmadokgjfy || 84--S9, 

422 PR 117 CIPLE 3 OF NATURE AND GRACE 

Further, as God is the most perfect and most happy and 
fMmsequently the most lovable of substances, and as 
gefmme pure love consists in the state in which we find 
pleasure in the perfections and the felicity of the beloved, 
this love is sure to give us the greatest pleasure of which 
we are capable, when God is its object. 

17. And it is easy to love God as we ought, if we know 
Him as I have just said For although God cannot be 
perceived by our external senses, Ho is none the less very 
lovable and He givps very great pleasure. We see how 
much pleasure honours give to men, although they do 
not consist in anything that appeals to the external 
senses. Martyrs and fanatics (though the emotion of the 
latter is ill-governed) show how much influence mental 
pleasure [le plaL^ir cle V esprit] can have : and, what is more, 
oven the pleasures of sense are really intellectual plea- 
sures confusedly known Music charms us, although 
its beauty consists only in the harmonies [convenances] of 
numbers and in the counting (of which we are unconscioua 
but which nevertheless the soul does make) of the beats 
or vibrations of sounding bodies, which beats or vibrations 
come together at definite intervals. The pleasure which 
sight finds in good proportions is of the same nature ; 
and the pleasures caused by the otlier senses will be 
found to amount to much the same thing, although we 
may not be able to explain it so distinctly**. 

i.o. ‘ disinUjmstfMi ' love. See iiontkdalogy, $ 90, note 14a. 

*God is love [cAarttos], which is known by love [amcr] and is 
loved in being known.’ Nioholas of Cusa, Excitations ex SertnonibuSf 
io« 188 b. 

^ For sense is conruse<l perception, ch Introduction, Part 
Hi. p, 125. ♦ 

** Leibniz does not mean, as some of bis critics (o.g. Kirchmann) 
Hciem to have thought, that the pleasure we have in music or in 
painting is entirely a matter of the senses. What he wants te 
show is that even Uie sense-element in artistic pleasure is really 
of an intellectual kind, and this he does hyk showing that it 
depends upon an unrecognized perception of proportion, measure 
or rhythm. He elsewhere calls it *a hidden [oeeuEe] arithmetic* 
(G. iv. 551). 

PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 423 

18. It may even be said that firom this time forth the 
love of God enables us to enjoy a foretaste of future 
felicity. And although this love is disinterested, it con- 
stitutes by itself our greatest good and interest, even 
though we may not seek these in it and though we may 
consider only the pleasure it gives without regard to the 
advantage it brings ; for it gives us perfect confidence in 
the goodness of our Author and Master, which produces 
real tranquillity of mind, not as in the case of the Stoics, 
who forcibly school themselves to patience, but tlirough 
a present content which also assures to us a future liappi- 
ness*". And besides the present pleasure it affords, 
nothing can be of more advantage for the future tlian this 
love of God, for it fulfils our expectations also and leads 
us in the way of supreme happiness, because in virtue 
of the perfect order that is established in the universe, 

*Tbor© itt EH much difference between genuine morality 
and that of the Stoics and Epicureans, as there is bfttween 
^'oy and patience ; for their tranquillity was founded only U|wn 
necoHsity, while ours should be founded upon the ]^>erfoction and 
the beauty of things, upon our own felicity/ Theodicie^ § 954 ; 
E. 580 b ; G. vi. a68, ‘Wliat is called FaJlum .SVotcum was not so 
black as it is painted. It did not ki^ep men from l(X)king aftei 
their affnira; but it tended to give them tranquillity as regard; 
events, through the oonsideratioii of their iiet'CHsity, which makes 
our anxieties and regrets useless. . . . The teachings of the Stoics 
(^and perhaps also of some famous philosopliers of our own time), 
l>eing confined to this supposed iic>cesHity, can only seizure a forced 
patience ; instead of wliich uur Lord inspires us with more sublime 
thoughts and teaches us even the way to have cont4*nt, when lie 
assures us that as God is perfectly good and wise and takes all 
under His care, so as not oven to neglect a hair of our heads 
our confidence in Him ought to lie complete ; so that we should 
Hee, y we were able to comprehend it, that it is impossible even 
to dcftiro anything better (either al>8oIutely or for ourselves) than 
what He does. It is as if we were to say to men : “ I>o your duty 
and bo content with what comes of it, not only b4M auso you 
cannot resist Divine providencx) or the nature of things (which 
would he enough to make us but not to make us oonUuii) 

but also because'^you have to do with a good Raster.*' And this 
might be called F<U%m Chrittianum* Thdodic^f Preface, £. AToh\ 
G. vi. 30. 

424 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 

everything is done as well as possible both for the 
general good and also for the greatest individual good of 
those who believe in it and who are satisfied with iBe 
Divine government. And this belief and satisfaction 
must inevitably be the characteristic of those who have 
learned to love the Source of all good It is true that 
supreme felicity (by whatever beatific vision^ or knowledge 
of God, it may be accompanied) can never be complete, 
because God, being infinite, cannot be entirely known 
Thus our happiness will never consist (and it is right 
that it should not consist) in complete enjoyment, which 
would leave nothing more to be desired and would make 
our mind [esprit] stupid ; but it must consist in a per- 
]>etual progress to now i>loasures and new perfections**. 

** ^We ought iilways to bo content with the order of the past, 
l ocnuso it is in conformity with the abKohit/o will of (lod, which 
wo know through what lias come to |>uhh ; but we must try tn 
make the fuiuns far aa it deptmds upon \i% in conformity with 
the presumptive will of God or lli« commandments, to adorn our 
SparOi and to labour at doing good, yet without vexing ouiselves 
when 8UCC08S does not come to us, in tho firm belief tliat God will 
he able to find tho most fitting season in wliieh to make changes 
for the hotter. Those who are not content with the order of tilings 
cannot flatter themselves that they love God as they ought.’ 
LeUra a Arnauld (1690) (G. ii, 136; K. 108 a}. 

According to Ltdhniz's sysU^m, if a Monad were to know tiod 
entirely, it would be God and would thus cease to l>e itsolf, which 
is impossible. Yet Leibniz regards tho relation of men to God as 
so close that he calls them * little gods, subject to the groat God.' 
Uttte d Artiauid {l 68 ^) (G. ii. 125). Cf. Nicholas of Cusa, JSxcHaitfmfs 
f.r S«mont^us, x. 188a: *To be able always more and more t^i 
understand (to conform oneself to the Creator) without end, is tho 
likeness of eternal wisdom.’ * 

•* * Felicity is to |>ersoiiM what perfection is to beings.* Ripc^r 
without a title (x686) (G. iv. 46a). Cf. Ultimate Originaticn qfThingtt, 

PI*- 345. 348- 

INDEX 

Abstraction « rightly used are not 
errors, 370. 

Achilles and the tortoise, 81 11. 

Actum motricc, 91. 

Activity essential to substance, 

90 3^5. 397* 

Adamson (U.) on Ficht<s 180 n, 
183 n. 

Agrippa voii Nctteshcim, 403 11, 

Alberius Magnus, 360 n, 502. 

Algebra, its conneziou with geo- 
metry, 76 ; relation to other 
soiences, ^io. 

Alphabet of human thoughts, 85. 

Alsted, 376 ii. 

Angelus SilesiuH (Joannes), 384 n. 

Animals, birth and death of, 115, 
239, 413; indestructibility and 
immortality oC 262, 306, 374; 
resuscitation of, 224 n, 306 ; ac- 
cording to Descartes, are mere 
machines, 52 ; according to 
Leibniz, not mere machines, 
300 ; animals incomparably 
greater than ours may exist, 
11411, Ii6n; organs of animals 
in relation to perception, 231 ; 
otganio body of, 253 ; souls of, 
400 ; nature of *animal con- 
sciousness, 232, 322, 364, 412. 

Animal spirits, 3i4n. 

Anselm. 277. 

drrirvwfo, 35 n, 94 sqq. 

Apperception, in Leibnizes sense, 
34,121; Locke's view, 367 sqq.; 
distinction between appercep- 
tion and pereeption, 126 sqq., 
41 1. Bee also Feroeption. 

Appetition deBned, 33, 35, 226, 
407; degrees of, 51, 138; not 

necessarily conscious, 35 ; a 
result of the piinoiplo of suf- 
hoiunt reason, 71. 

Aquinas, 143 n ; on sensible 
^-pecies, 219 n; on anteoo<lent 
and cc»nH(H|uenl will of llnd, 
270 n ; on stuils of lower 
animals, 302 ; on the tnoiiotiH 
of the planets, Ac., 382 n ; his 
explanation of * tmiinent/ 238 n. 

Ariskdlc, 3a, 155, 238 n, 253 n, 
508, 358 n, 378 n ; in relation 
to Leibniz, 229 n ; bis ethics, 
293 n ; bis description of place, 
353 ; tabula roso, 360 n ; 

oil the motion of tint skies, 
382 n. 

Amaiild and I.>ci1>niz, 6, 298 n. 

Association of ideas, 232 n. 

Astraea, 64 n. 

Atomism, 23, 26, 31 ; lucibniz’s 
relation to, 29, 30, 1 59 ; 

Atomism of Descartes and 
Locke, 124. 

Atoms, 223 n ; Leibnizes early 
liking for atoms and the voict, 
32 ; his criticism of atoms, Ac.., 
ai8n, 310, 335, 370, 3R5 ; 
metaphysiofl atoms, 33 n ; 
atoms of substance Monads, 

330. 3”- 

Attraction (immediate) from a 
distance, 389. 

Attributes to l>e distingujahed 
firom modifications, 394. 

Augustine, 207 ; Civitat Dei, 
267 n. 

Automata, 254, 264 n; Monads are 
automata, 229 ; soul a spiritual 
automaton, 315. 

INDEX 

426 

Averroee, 38511. 

Axiome may require proof, 59. 

Bacon, John, 260 n, 303, 303 n. 

Bayle, Pierre, 336, 3360, 375; 
on pre-fcfltabliahed harmony, 
349 n ; on multiplicity in the 
Monacl, 373. 

Beautiful, definition of, 386 n. 

Becoming, principle of, 83. 

Bellarmine (Cardinal), 401 n. 

Benevolence, 385 n. 

Bernier, Fran^oui, 335. 

Birth of an organiim, not abaolute, 
115; birth and death, 259, 413. 

Body not a subiitance, 98 u ; the 
mechanical cause of substance, 
107; in flux like a river, 97, 
1 14, 358, 363 u; without soul 
unreal, 111; is sours point of 
view, 113 , 348 n ; is momentary 
mind, 3300; each Ixidy affected 
by all others, 1130, 334 n, 351 ; 
infinite division of bodies, 337 ; 
reason for the existence of bodies, 
334 n. Bee also Matter and Soul. 

lioineburg, 4. 

Bossuet and Leibniz, x 1 ; and 
hVnelon, 369 u. 

Boutruux, E., 334 n. 

l^ijyle, Robert, 7, 370. 

Brahe, Tycho, 318 n, 

Bruno, Giordano, 34, 570. 

Buddous, 38. 

Bnffon, 198. 

Cabbalista, 155 n. 

Calculating machines of Leibniz 
and Pascal, 6. 

Calculation, every paralogism an 
error of, 85. 

Calculus, discovery of the differen- 
tial, 7 ; infinitesimal, 80 sqq. ; 
logical, 84 sqq. 

Cam|ianella, 155. 

Cardano, Qiroh^o, 155, 403 n. 

Carlyle, Thomas, 388 u. 

Cameades, 384. 

Cartesians on the souls of the lower 
animals, Ac., 41 1 ; ixnperfeotion 
of their view of pcTceptUvn, 334. 
See also Detoartes. 

Cause, Leibnis's view of, 3<H sqq. ; 

FirstCause, 137 ; cause and effect 
an ideal relation, iq6, 343n; effi- 
cient and final causes, 107, xoSn, 
ao5, 338 n, 363, 368 n, 409, 
418; Kant on final causes, iv6^ 
Lotze’s view, X93 ; the world *a 
system of final causes, 107. 

Cavalieri, 76 n. 

Cell-theory of physiology, 198, 
*57 a- 

Centripetal powers, 389. 

Charity, 284. 

Choice of God among possible 
universes, 66, 1 74. 

ChristiaDity in relation to natural 
law and the law of nations, 295. 

Christiem V of Denmark, 347. 

Churches, projects for reconcilia- 
tion of, 5, II, ii9n. 

City of God, 267, 393, 316, 431. 

Clarke and Leibniz on space and 
time, 103 n, 104 n. 

Cleanthes, 343 n. 

Clocks illustration of pre-estab- 
lished harmony, 45, 331 ; 

Foucher*s use of, 330; Geu- 
lincxes use of, 43, 331 n. 

Codex Juris Gentium Diploma- 
ticus, 381. 

Cogito ergo sum, I^eibniz’s criticism 
of, 55- 

Cohesion of matter, 386. 

Compossibility, explanation of, 64 ; 
is sufliciont reason, 64 ; in rela- 
tion to Kant's position, 174. Bee 
also Possible. 

Cou^unds not real substances, 
96 n, 97, 109,310,330. 

Conception and perc^tion, views 
of Kant and Leibniz, 171. 

Concours ordinaire of God, 43. 

Conduct, the end o(^ 146. 

Consciouznees not essential to 
perception, 34; not dependmt 
on organic structure, 331. 

Contingent truths, 57, 134, 2^3; 
demand an infinite analysis, 61 ; 
their final reason to be sought 
in God, 63. See also Truths. 

Continuity, law of. 37, 38, 83, 
37^ i applied to motion 
and thoi^ht, 130; an applica- 
tion of sufficient reason, 71. 

INIp^EX 437 

CottUnooTii aokd mo- 

blem of their reooiioiliiktl<m, 

C<]iDtn2Sc:iioii» principle of, 58 iqq., 
^ principle of excluiiion, 
*67; inadequncjr of, 60 i reUtion 
to sufficient reason, 66, 187; 
according to Leilmiz and Kant, 

1 7a sqq. ; according to Schopen- 
hauer, 184; aocoroing to Leib- 
nia and I^ise, 106 ; iti conse- 
quences in Jjeibniz*s philosophy, 
68. See also Sufficient reason. 

Conway, Countess of, 155. 

Copemious, 318 n. 

CoHemoi, 43 n, 310 n. 

Created beings pregnant with their 
future states. 44 n, 231, 373, 
419 ; iniperfec!tions of, 240, 250, 
410. See Monads. 

Creation, emanation and fulgura- 
tion, 2430. 

Cyrus, story of, 290. 

Death, meaning of, 115, 259, 413 ; 
is a sleep, 374. 

De Diaeta quoted, 308 n. 

Democritui^ 155, 219 n, 306, 307 n, 
36 ^- 

Demonstration, 56 n. 

t>«wsartes, 43 n, 155, 243 n» 35« I 
Leibniz's dissatiafaGtion with 
his philosophy, 8, 9 ; Leibniz's 
criticisms of, 54 n ; Descartes's 
▼iew of matter, 86 ; in relation 
to transubitantiation, 5 ; hit 
views of matter and mind re- 
jected by Leibniz, 37, 1 38 sqq. ; 
iiis proofs of the existence of 
God criticized by Leibniz, 375 ; 
his views on the immortality of 
the soul criticized by Leibniz, 
325 n; Descartes* and Leibniz 
secondaiy qnalitieiL Sio,, 375f 
376 n ; on 4he seat of tbe soul, 
314 n ; Descartes's tbeoir of 
knowledge, 1 22 ; his view 01 per- 
ception, 234 ; clear and distinct 
idea^ 48 ; self-consciousness, 
53 ; principle^ of contradiction, 
58 ; eternal truths, 2x2 n ; 
possible things, 64 n ; thinking 
and extendi subetitno^ 42 ; 

animals, 59 ; animal spirita, 
31411; analytical geomet^, 77; 
conservation of motion, 80 sqq., 
88 n, 364 n, 327 ; nature of 
Bubstaaoe, 25 ; sensation, 52 ; 
soul and body, 263, 311 ; tnten- 
tionid species, aao n; on tbe 
meaning of * eminent ' and 
* formal,* 238 11 ; ineiliod of 
doubt, 24 ; vortex hypothesis, 
378 n ; Desoarres’s use of the 
idea of cause, 160; of the idea 
of God, 161 ; attitude towards 
earlier thought. 15a, 157 ; afieo- 
tation of ignorance, 153 n; rela- 
tion to Gassendi, 303 n ; Ijooke, 
I34n; R^is,305 11; Spinoza, 34. 

Desire, instinctive. 138. 

Development ana envelopment, 
II.*;, 259. 307» 374 “*4M* 

Diderot in praise of Leibniz, 17* 

DUImann on I^ibniz, 1560; on 
vtneufum mbHunttale, 1 19 n. 

Du Bols-lieymond, 37 n, 93 n, 
199 n. 

Duns ScotuB, 343 n, 358 n. 

Eokhnrt, Leibniz’s secretary, 16, 

17- 

RducUon of fomis, 260 n. 

I^gypt, L«il>niz's project for the 
conquest of, 5. 

Einpinoal knowledge, 52,233, 364, 

365^ 4i*- 

Knlightenment, value of, 149. 

Kntdechies, 50, 159, 221 n, 329, 
3ot ; in matter, 94 n, 96 ; of 
oonipoiind substances, 110; dis- 
tingiiislied From souls, 230. 

Kntia mevtalia and 
(alia, 10 J. 

Epicurus, 2640. 

Equity, 287. , 

Erdmann on Leibniz's view of 
space and time, loi ; on the 
einvulum mbstanfvile, 119 n. 

Ernest, Landgraf of Hesse-libeln- 
feli, 298 n. 

Essen^ or fv>H8ibilities, 241 n; 
tend to existence, 347, 3x0, 343 ; 
essence and existence, 60 

Eternal and necessarr truths, 57, 
1^0, 233, 363; conditional, 60 n, 

INDEX 

428 

ao6 ; not dependent on the will 
of God, 57, 243 ; undentending 
of God is the region of, 241, 343. 
8ee elMo Truth#. 

Ethies of Leibnix, 137 eqq. 

Eugene, Prince, 315, 405. 

Euler’e criticiHm of ijeibniz, 255 n. 

Evil, origin of, 240 n ; problem of, 
346 sqc].. 4160; leadii to greater 
good, 349 ; evil of individaalH 
not to be juHtified by good of 
the whole, 348. 

KxpUinatioti 0/ the Neu System, 

3 * 9 - 

Kxtenidon, elements of. 329; nut 
the essence of matter, Jb, 94. 

Pact and reason, propositions of. 
206. 

Facnlias^ 288. 

Fatum Stoicumt 423 n. 

PoeliiJg an element in every per- 
ception. 139. 

F<^‘iielon and ilossuet, 270 n. 

Peruol, 260 n. 

Pidite. 252 n; on the spirituality 
ot the universe, 267 n ; influence 
of Leibniz upon, 178 sqq. ; 
Fichte's Kgo and Leibniz’s 
Monad, 180 ; Fichte and Kant, 
178 sqq. 

Fatness or choice of the best, 243 ; 
degrees of perfection, 247. 

Fliuld, Itobert, 402. 

Fluid, perfect, does not exist, 335, 
38b. 

Foiitenelle, 309 ri. 

Force, notion of, 91, 300 n; conser- 
vation of, 90sqq., 327, 417 ; dis- 
tinct from iSciiolastic potency, 
91 u ; cwseutial to matter, 94 ; 
a form of appetition, 226 n ; 
development of Leibiuz’s views 
regarding, 351 ; distinction be- 
tween absolute and directing 
force, 328 n; total and partial, 
Ac., 417. 

Forces proportional to squares of 
velocities, 92. 

FonM) aocidenlal, 157; substan- 
Ual. 108 n, 1190, 156 sqq. ; 
rejected at first bj Leibnia, 3 ; 
re* introduced by Leibills, 159, 

301 ; origin and duration of, 
259 sqq. ; forms in matter, 94 n ; 
indivisible, 302. 

Fonoher. Simon, 319, 320; Leib^ 
niz*s comments on his dispute 
with Hartsoeker, 334 sqq. 

Freedom, Leibniz’s view of, 141 ; 
degrees of, including necesidty, 
145 ; freedom and determina- 
tion, 343 ; is Bp<jDtaneity and 
intelligence, 145 ; highest free- 
dom accompani^ by most per- 
fect knowledge, 146. 

Fulgurations ot the Divinity, 243. 

Galen. 314 n. 

Gasseudi, 303 n. 319, 352. 

Genus, distinctiou between phy- 
sical or real and logiciii or ideal, 
394 »M 14 * 

Geometrical relations not merely 
quantitative, 77. 

Geometry, synthetic and analytic, 
75 ; connexion with algebra, 
76 ; analytical geometry of 
Descartes, 77. 

Geulincx, 31 2 11. 367 n ; use of the 
clocks lUustraiion, 43, 331 n. 

God, idea of, in J^escartes's system, 
161 ; according to Leibniz and 
Descartes. 57 ; inconsistency of 
Leibniz’s account ot. 175, 177 ; 
proot of Uis existence. 242 ; 
ontological proof, according to 
Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz. 
274 sqq. ; tkisiiiological proof. 
239 n ; proof from pre-estab- 
lisbed harmony, 202, 316, 418 ; 
Kant on the proofs, 1 73 ; Gotl 
the ultimate sufficient reason of 
things, 66, 238, 339, 415 ; the 
source both of essences and 
existences, *241. 343 ; the ulti- 
mate reality, 136 ; Hie relation 
to the world, 257 n, 344, 416 ; 
to other Monads^ Ac., 243 n, 
366, 304; God not the only 
Spirit, 385 n; * assistance* <n 
God, 43 ; love of God, 148, 286, 
423, 423 ; Uis perfeolion, 240 ; 
His antecedent and cons^ueut 
will, 270, 424 n; Uis justice 
compart with human Justice, 

INDEX 

41611 ; Hia xindertiMiding the 
region of eienuU 66, 

241 > 543 f poeeibility nn- 
, . liiiiiWd, 3400; Hie power, 
knowledge end will, 344 ; Hie 
* choice among possible universes, 
66, 174; His oenire everywhere, 
circumference nowhere, 430 ; 
without body, 359 ; vision of all 
things in Goti, 53 n ; things not 
inmles of God, 13^0; ethical 
importance of the idea* of God, 
293. 

Good and evil, relative terms, 146. 
(vreen, T. H., on Leibnix and 
Kant, 168 n, 172 n. 

(trotiuB, 38B, 393 n. 

Guhrauor, 37. 

Happiness, 287 n ; is a perpetual 
prcigross to new perfections, 434 ; 
nothing more truo than, 350. 
Hartmann, K.. 199. 

Harisoeker, 305 11 ; Leibnix's ooiii* 
meuts on his dispute with 
Foucher, 334 w^q, 

Hegel, 34; his solution of tli© 
dualism in Leibniz, 186 sqq. ; 
shows that contradiction pre- 
supposes sufficient reason, 187 ; 
view of self-iMnsciousnosB, 18^, 
I90 ; his * notion ’ and Leibniz's 
Monad, 188. 

Herbart, 23011; his ‘reals* and 
Leibniz's Monads, 185; mathe- 
matical methods iu [isychfilogy, 
186. 

Herder, 198. 

Hemietics, 155 n. 

Hennolaus Barbarus. 245. 
Hippomtes, 351, a6on, 373 *, on 
the indestructibility of anunals, 
308. * 

jlobbes, 364 n ; influence ujion 
Leibniz, 7 ; definition of space, 
101 « 

Huyj^ens, 33a n ; intercourse with 
]4nbnix, 6 ; pendulum experi- 
ment, 45 n, 333. 

Hy|>oihese|, uges of, 335. 

Ideas, views of Descartes and 
Leibnix regarding clear and 

439 

distinct, 48 ; clearness and dis- 
tinctness not the sole criteria of 
truth, SS ; innate ideas, 
333 n, 3&> sqq. ; illustrated by 
block of veined marble, 131, 
366 ; views of Descartes, Locke 
and Leibnix regarding innate 
ideas, 135 ; region of ideas in 
understanding of God, 66, 341, 
343 '• syinUdizing of ideas, 85. 

Identity, principle of, see Oontra- 
tliction. Identity of the indi- 
vidual, how constituted, 13311, 
373 > not detonniued by time 
and place, 377 n ; pbyiioah and 
moral identity, 358 n. 

Ifjimva ratio, 399 n. 

Immortality oftlie soul, 116, 333 n, 

iSQ “W-. 3>fi. 383 . 40» «i‘l- : 

of the latioiml soul, 1 16, 307 ; 
iu relation to ethics, 392, 293 n. 

Impenetrability, 94 sqq. 

Impulse iu matter and hoilies, 3S7, 
38H. 

IridetenuiniBin, error of, 143. 

Indiflerence of (Mpiilibriuui, 375, 

Indincemibles, identity of, 36, 333, 
369 11. 377; an application of 
sufficient reason, 71. 

Indivisible elements, how can they 
form a continuum, 31 B(]q. 

Inei-tia of iMxiy, 95, 340. 

Infinite, difFereul iiieaniugs of, 
*55 n. 

Infinitely little, 79. 

Jiifiuitosimals, 81 ; a virtual re- 
cognition of the principle of 
Becalming, 82. 

Infinity, notion introduced into 
geometry, 75 ; degrees of, 4140. 

Injluxutt phyiticuM, 42, 46, 21911, 
333* 

.Justice, definition of, 148, 283: 
universal, 287 sqq., 294 ; com- 
mutative, 287 sqq.; distributive, 
287 Hfiq.; con tribu live, 28911; 
Aristotle's sub-di visions of jiar- 
ticiilar justice, 287 n ; arith- 
metical and geometrical equality 
in justice, 390 n ; Divine ami 
human justice dtifer only in 
degree, 391 n, 416 o. 

INDEX 

430 

Kaaty reUtion to Ldboix, 168 
Mqq. ; bill own T{ew of bis relation 
to Loibnie, ao8 sqa. ; Kant and 
Leibniz on peroration and con- 
cepti(»n, 171 ; K^t’i thlng-in* 
itzelf in relation to Leibniz, 175 ; 
Kaut*ii tinsundenitanding of 
Leibniz, 163 n ; be mieunder- 
ztandM Leibniz's view of space, 
aai n ; bis criticism of Leibniz, 
1690; Kant and Wolff, 168; 
Kant received problem of space 
in Wolffs form, 169; develop- 
ment of Kant's view of space, 
170 ; Kant on iotonsive quan- 
tity, aaon; on tbe ontol<^oal 
proof of the existence of uod, 
^77* ^73 i relation of 

GcmI to the world, 177 ; on final 
causes, Ac., 176. 

Kepler's iutr<^uction of tbe notion 
of infinity into geometry, 75. 

Ker of Kersland, 16. 

Kircbuiann, 259 n. 

Knowledge, Leibniz's theory of, 
lai sqq. ; how deiiendent on his 
main principles, 1 33 sqq. ; know- 
leilge at once innate and experi- 
ential, la6. 

Knutzon, 168. 

Language, philosophical, 85 sqq. 

Law, positive Divine, 296. 

Leibjniz, boyhood, x ; early studies, 
i , a ; university life, a ; gradua- 
tion theses, 3; connexion with 
Boinoburg, 4 ; residence in 
Nilmlierg, 4; secretary to a 
society of Kosicruoiiins, 4 ; in 
tbe service of the Archbishop of 
Mainz, 4; residence at Frimk- 
fort, 4 ; projects of Church 
re»uiuon, 5, 11; residence in 
Paris, 5 ; visit to London, 7 ; 
intercourse with Huygens, 6; 
study of higher mathematic^ 6 ; 
invented a caloulating macdiine, 
6 ; reason for writing in French, 
6 ; advocated use of German for 
libiloBOphical writing, 6: relation 
to Hobbes, 7 ; interooune with 
Boyle, 7 ; discovery of the Dif- 
ferential Calculus, 7 ; itndj and 

translation of Flato^ a; ao- 
qtuuntanoe with Tsobbrnhapsefi. 
9 ; Nevrton and tiie Calculus, 8 ; 
personal relations with Spinom, 
9^ 10 ; librarian to the Duke of 
Brunswick, 8 ; residence in 
Hanover, 1 1 ; visit to Rome, 1 1 ; 
first publication of his pbiloso- 

E hioal system, 1 2 ; growth of 
is system, la ; writing and 
publication of Nouveaux 
*3i 355; of TlUodie^e, 14; his 
correspoodence, 14 ; foundhig of 
academies, 14, 15; intercourse 
with Peterthe Great, Charles VI, 
and Prince Eugene, 1 5 ; suffers 
from prejudices of George 1 , 15 ; 
death and funeral, x6 ; personal 
characteristics, 16, 17 ; principal 
works and editions, 18 sqq. 
Lbxdniz, three chief conceptions of 
bis metaphysic, 47, 48 ; logical 
principles of his philosophy, 58 
sqq. ; nis view of self-conscious- 
ness, 53, lao. 138, 133, 334n; 
his ethics, 137 sqq. ; psychology 
of volition, 14a n ; logic, ao6 
sqq. ; theory of knowledge, xai 
sqa. ; his mathematics in relation 
to nis philosophy, 74 sqq. ; anti- 
cipatiem of transformation of 
energy, 93 n ; optimism,66, 1 47 n, 
348, 371, 345 sqq., 417, 434; 
on the ontological proof of the 
existence of G^, 375 sqq. ; holds 
that matter cannot thi^, 400 ; 
interest in microscopy, 356 n ; 
eclecticism, 154. 155 ; fore- 

shadows the critical spirit, 154 ; 
early rejection of substantial 
forms, 3 \ his account of his 
early phifpsophical views, 399 
■qq. ; growth of his views re- 
garding foroe and motion, 3^1 ; 
mizunderstood by his disoi{ne^^ 
163 ; accused of borrowing elooka 
illustration from Geulincx, 43. 
— relation to Plato and Aristotle, 
358 n, 339 n ; to earlier thinking, 
151 sqq., 15ft; tiiBsatislaotion 
vdth Demrtes’s p^osophy, 8 ; 
difference Itmn Desoartes re- 
garding clear and distinct ideas. 

INDEX 431 

48 n; LeilHiis tt&d Datcftrtat on 
seoondnry qmdifcio*, 4e.» 375* 
31 ^ a; eiiuoliim of Sjpinosrt 
340; Loibnu and 
. Spinoia on empirkid knowledge} 
70 ; re)ati<aui to Kewtcm, 8, 80 ; 
oorrwpondenoe with Clarke, 
10a Ik, 104 n ; dieoiweion with 
Bayle on multiplioity in the 
Monad, a 7a ; Leibn)s*f account 
of hii relation to Locke, 337 
eqq. ; oriticiBnii of Locke, 13; 
oritioiim of the tabula roMi, 
laa n, 569 ; via media between 
Deeeariee and Locke, 133; on 
the oontrorerey between L(X)ke 
and BUUin^eet, 3^ eqq. ; re- 
lation to fLint, loS eqq., ao8 
aqq. ; Kant’e discumion of 
LeiMi's iirKt principles, ao8 ; 
relation to Fichte, J 78 sqq. ; to 
Sohopenliauer, 183 ; toHerbart, 
184; to Hegel, ]86 ; to Lotze, 
190 sqq. 

Lemoiue on the nnculum sub- 
»(antiale, iiqn. 

Lessing, 198. 

Leuwenhoek, a^dn, a6on, 305 n. 

JJborty of iudifrereuce does not 
exist, 14 1 sqq. 

Life everywhere in nature, 105, 
109, 11a, 356,309, 409. 

Ldmitation, necessity of, 340 n. 

Liroitations of created things, 240, 
250, 416, 419 n. 

Limits, mathematical points are, 
28, 29. 

Locke, 36 n ; his JSuay, 355 sciq. ; 
Leibniz’s relation to and criU- 
cism of, 13, 133, 357 soq.; 
Locke's theory of knowledge, 
f aa : his view tl}^ mind may 
exist without thought, opposed 
■by Leibnis, 139 ; his aooount of 
* nneasineai,* 140: his account 
of virtue criiioiaf^ 140 n ; on 
the immortality of the soul, 
383 n ; on the immateriality of 
the soul, 40a ; holds that matter 
may thinl^ 3^, 395 ; Locke and 
DeeoarteS} 1 24 n ; Locke and 
Htillingfleet, 387 sqq. 

Logic of Lsibnix, ao6 sqq. ; 

Lelbnix’s early interest in logic, 

a. 

Lotse, Il4n ; ration to Leibnis, 
194 sqq.; eritioism of Leib- 
nis, 195 sqq. ; on innate ideas, 
ia6n; on meohanlsmi 19a; 
his monadology, 194 ; teleology, 
193: relation to Herbart, 191 ; 
on Hegel, 190, 19a. 

Loubbre, Simon de la, 397. 

Liuls XIV, 5. 

liove, disinterested as distinct 
from selfish, 148, 369, 285 ; 
Divine, a86, 433. 

Machines of nature are maohinoH 
throughout, 354, 309; have an 
infinity of organs, 300. 

Mainz, Archbishop of, employs 
Leibniz, 4. 

Malebranche, 305 n, 313; inter- 
course with Leibnis, 6 ; Benue 
in which Leibniz agrees with 
him, 53 n; he might appnivc 
the pre-established harmony, 
44 n. 

Malpighi, 39 n, 256 n, 260 n, 305 u. 

Matfria primri, 95 ; and materia 
^ecuwla, no; poHsfssseiJ by 
every created Monad, 97. 

Materia eecunda, 96, 258 ; an 
aggregation, 97, 300 ; a tnerc 
phenomenon, 97 ; in flux like a 
river, 97, 1 14, 258, 262 n ; dis- 
tinct from substance, 96 n. 

Mathematios in relation to Leib- 
niz's philosophy, 74 ; Divine 
mathematios, 342 ; rnatheiitatical 
points, 311. 

Matter, Leibniz’s theory of, 93 
sqq. ; not mere extension, 28, 
94 ; a mere aggregnte, 300 ; in- 
finitely divibed 08 well as infin- 
itely divisible, 39, 237, 255, 335 ; 
living throughout, 256 ; cohesion 
of, 386 ; primary and secondary 
qualities, 100 ; inseparable from 
mind, 111, 128; can matter 
tblnk? 390 sqq.; miraculous 
exaltation of matter, 401 ; Des- 
cartes’s view of matter, 86. 

Mechanical philosophy, 158. 

Mechanism, Divine and human, 

INDEX 

432 

jf4f 309; can explain nothing 
but mechaniKm, aaSn; cannot 
produce perception, 227, 397, 
400. 

Melimug, 259 n, 308. 

Memory the sign of conRciouHneflH, 
230 n; inaniinalg, 332, 323, 364, 
413. 

MetamorphosiH in compound sub* 
stance, 114, 258, 307, 414. 

Metaphymcal laws in nature, 344. 

MotempsychoBis inaclmiflidble, 1 14, 
358. 304. 4 >4- 

MicroHcopy in Leibniz b time, 256 n. 

Milton quoted, 404 11. 

Mind always thinks, 129, 369Bqt{. ; 
likened to veined marble, 131, 
366. See also Souls (rational). 

Miracles of reason, nature full of, 
354"- 

MoHuoh, Miguel dc. 38411. 

Monads, history of the term, 34 ; 
account of, 30 sqq-, 217 sqq., 406 
sqq. ; the only real existences, 
97 : infinite in uiiiiiber, 37 ; an 
iiifinito series, 37 ; corripare<i to 
ordinates of a curve, 37 11, 38 ; 
their production, 243 ; creation 
and annihilation, 219 ; ingener* 
aide and iin perishable, 36, 115, 
i 1 S, 302, 407 ; qualities of, 2 20 ; 
must have Lioth perception and 
appetition, 33 ; have no parts, 
2i7sipp,407 : notin space, 22111; 
not ))eroeive<l by the mmsee, 
407 u ; spontaneity of, 35, 50, 
^74* 3*3; incoqioreal auto- 
mata, 229, 315, 408 ; jjiresent of 
each Monad big with its future, 

44 «. ^3L 373, 4*9; 
ideas innate, 125 ; its helf-tden* 
tity not static but dynamic, 
69 ; continually unfolding or 
4*iifolding itself, 113; Monads 
have no windows. 219; mutual 
uxclusiveness, 36, 219; each as 
imlependent as if there existed 
only God and itself, 313 ; meta- 
physical atoms, atoms of sub- 
stance, of nature, &c., 33 n, 228 ; 
metaphysical points, 311; centree 
i>r concentrationB of the world, 
70, 407 ; changes in Monads, 40 

•qq., 222 sqq. ; ooiTelativity of 
their changes, 41 ; inultiplieity in 
the Monad, 224 n, 216, 27a, 407 ; 
Monads as living mirrors of the 
universe, 36, 41, 253, 409; 
variously represent or implicitly 
contain the whole universe, 50, 
248, 420 ; each represents most 
distinctly its own body, 253 ; 
elements in Monads, 245 ; ea^ a 
concrete unity of soul and body,' 
109 ; activity and passivity 
of, 105, 245, 246, 317 ; influence 
one another ideally, 42, 45, 105, 
246 ; their mutual agreement, 
313 sqq. ; their interrelation not 
to be realized by sense or ima- 
gination, 46 ; differences among 
Monads, 49, 55 ; degrees of per- 
ception, 410 ; three grades of 
created Monads, fo, 229 sqq., 
409 sqq. ; each higher grade has 
characteristics of lower, 5 a ; im- 
perfections of Monads, 240, 250, 
416 ; their progress towards per- 
fection, 419 n ; dominant Monad, 
109 sqq., 253 n, 257, 408 ; 

Monads in relation to Fichte's 
* Ego,* 180 ; to Herliart's * reals,* 
185; to Hegel's ‘notion,' 188. 
See also Souls. 

M(ntadolo^yf time and oiroum- 
stances of its composition, 215; 
relation to PrincipU* of Nature 
and Grace, 215, 405 ; analysis of, 
216; Kant's discussion 209. 

Mvntu Monad urn, 57, 189. 

Montaigne, 372 n ; on indeter- 
minism, 144 n. 

More, Henry, 155. 

Motion, Leibniz’s view of, 89 ; 
development of Leibniz's views, 
351 ; rel^itivity of motion and 
rest, 89 sqq. ; conservation of 
direction, 93, 264, 3 2 7 , 4 1 7 f Des- 
cartes's view of motion, 86 sqq. ; 
he maintains its conservation, 
87, 264 n ; that it is not merely 
relative to rest, 88 ; and that its 
direction is variable, 89 ; laws of 
motion, aooCfding to Descartes 
•nd UibniE, a*?. 353> 4>7: 

absolute and relative motion. 

INDEX 

433 

317, 318 ; mbaurdity of iwifUai 
potiible motion, 375. 

Muller, JohannoB, 193, 19S. 
Muller, Otto F., 163 n. 

NeUura natnratu and tio^ara 
naturata, 163. 

Nature and grace, realma of, 368, 
431. 

Neceasary and eternal truths, 56, 
233. 363 ; necessary and 
oontingent truths, 134, 340 ; 
their difference cowfiar^ to that 
of oommensurablo and inooni> 
mensurable numbers, 61 n. 
Necessity, different kinds of, 339 ; 
metaphysical and physical, 34 j ; 
metaphysical and moral, 67. 1 45. 

347 n, 377 ; necessity an infin- 
itely small degree of free<!oni. 
145 : riC4teMs1ly and fitness, 418. 

Nefv circuiiistancos of 

writing, Ac., 13, 355. 

.WfP Sy»(em, 297. 

Newton on the relations bc'tweeii 
geometrical tigun's, Sa ; on 
attraction, Ac., 3J*S; view of 
space, 103 n ; relation to 1^11)- 
nis as regards the Infinitesiinal 
Talculus, 8, 80. 

Nicholas of (/Usa, 3a n, 34 n, 333 n, 

348 n, 350 n, 355 n, 367 n, 424 n. 
Nizolius, lsjiliniz''s essay on, 6. 
Nolen, 1)., quoted, 65 n ; on Leib- 
niz and Kant, 1 78 n. 

Number, 329. 

Occasionalism, 43, 46, 333; de- 
scribed and critioised, 313 ; 
Leibnizes criticism of, 44. 

Occult qualities, 157, 3890, 399, 

403- 

Optimism of Leibniz, 66, 348, 371, 

a45 "qq-. 4' 7. 4^4; 
op'>»misxn, I47n. 

Organic and inorganic, nature of 
the distinction between, lit ; 
organic beings between man and 

J20IL 

Organism, conception of, 31, 355 
sqq. ; pervades nature, 105, 109, 
IT3, 356, 309, 409; organisms 
alwaysccone from seeds, 160, 413. 

Ovid, 390 n. 

ParaoelsQs, 403 n. 

Parmenides, 155 n, 359 n, 308. 

Pascal, 430 u ; on mathematical 
infinity, 77 n. 

Perception, its nature according 
to Leibniz, 33, 1 35 sqq., 3 34, 3jro, 
407 ; equivalent to inultinlioity 
in unity. 35 ; not to l>e explained 
by mtM'Lanism, 337, 397, 400; 
degrees of perception, 51 n, 331, 
410; not necessarily conscious, 
34, 331, 370, 411 ; iinct>njioious 
is symbol of ot»rreH|.>ondiug con- 
scious |>erception, 47 ; confused, 
clear, and distinct perception, 48, 
49* <05 : never without feeling, 
139; jM'i'ceptions always leave 
traces, 133 n, 373; likenetl to 
pi'ojectittii in perspective, 136 ; 
l>eri<Hlioity in t»6rceptioiiH.374 n; 
perception and apperception, 1 36 
sqq., 411; ptfiileH perceptions, 
370 ; i>»rcep- 

iion and conoeption, views of 
Kant and Ix)ibiiiz, 171. 

Perfection, meaning of, according 
to Leibniz, 349, 340 ; continual 
pngresH of the world in, 41 9 u. 

Peripatetic philosophy. J56 scp|. 

I'fleiderer, Kdmund, 43. 

Pht-m^mena htne fumlaUi^ 98 sqq., 
118; compared to rainbow, IQO ; 
their reality different from that 
of substance, 99 n ; how distin> 
guished from phenomena of 
dreams, 99. 

Philosophy, fanatical or barbarous, 

40a, 403- 

Piety, 387 sqq., 391. 

Place, meaning of, 303 ; acconling 
to Aristotle, 333. 

Plant-animals, 38. 

Plato, 34 n, 155, 361 n; world of 
ideas, 341 11; drictrine of remi- 
niscence, 131, 359 n; Leibniz's 
view of, 368. 

Pleasure and jHun, 139 sqq.; to 
some extent in every soul, 14Q; 
pleasure instinctively smight by 
every soul, 141, 146, 285; no- 
broken pleasure begets loathing, 

INDEX 

434 

348, 434 ; firtistie pleasore U 
intellectual, 431. 

nenum, conception oftheworld an, 
40f 351 r 385,408. See Vacuum. 

Pliny, 506, 307 n. 

PlotiniiB, j 55 Ti. 

Plutarch, 353 n. 

PneutnaiicH, 376. 

Points, inetaphynical, niathema- 
tioal and phyHical, 31 1 ; mathe- 
irmtical pointH are limiti, 38, 39. 

Poiret, 57, 343. 

Pope, 19S, 357 n, 349 n. 

I’oHKihle, definition of, 63 ; poeeible 
and CQiiii)o»Hil)le, 64, 340 sqq. 

PoBBiblo thingH. See Ea^enceM. 

Vrat'dicahim inrmt tmhJertOf 61 ii, 

398 “• 

Pre-eatabliRhed harmony, 39 aqq., 
346, 363. 374 8q(K, 409, 421 ; 
firat uientioiuvl by Leibniz, 326 ; I 
called a hypothesja of agree- 
uionta, 315 ; cotn|)are<l with 
Scholastic and Occaaionaliat 
theories, 43, 44, 333 ; explaineil 
by a Npooial irintanco, 300 ; 
advantages of, 333; a proof of 
the existence of (io<l, 203, 316, 
418; elo<;ktt and cdioira illustra- 
tioiiM of, 45, 47, 331 ; might be 
approved by Mitlebranche, 44 n ; 
Kant’s account of, 309 sqq. 

rreforii\ation, 260, 413 s(|q. 

Present big with the future and 
laden with the past, 44 n, 231, 
373» 4*9- 

Preservation is a continual crea- 
tion, 44 n, 244 n. 

0/ Nature anil ofOrare 
in relation to the Monadolog^^ 

405 «iq. 

Progrt'ssion, i'onservntion of the 
quantity of, 328. 

Propositions, categorical and hyinj- 
thetioal, ao6 \ import of, 307. 

Pufliendorf, 393 n. 

Pythagt^ras, 34 n ; Pythagorean 
views, 155 n. 

Qualities, intrinsic and extrinsic, 
333 0; occult, 157, 38911, 399. 
403. iSee Sul^tance. 

Quantity, intensive and extensive, 

330 n; 'negligible,’ 79; Iieib- 
siz's sliarp distinction between 
quantity and quality, aain; 
quantitative unity, 78. See Su|)>- 
stance. 

Kainbofv simile for phtnamenfin 
bene funtlatum, loo, 

Keasoii, moaning of, 130; reason 
and imagination, 333, 365 ; 
reason and fact, propositions of, 
306 ; ultimate reason of things, 
66, 338, 337»339»415- See Suf- 
ficient Keasoti. 

Keasoning, truths of, 57, 335. 

Kellexion, acts of, 50, 334, 413 ; 
ideas of, 366. 

Rt^gis, 305 n. 

Relativity, how Leibniz tries to 
avoid, 135 sqq. 

Representation the essence of the 
relation between whole and 
part, 32. See Peirepti«»n. 

Resistance a jiassive force, 95. 

liesuicitMtion of animals, 224 n, 
306. ' 

Rewards and punishments, 369, 
304, 381, 421. 

Riedel, O., on Knnt, I78n. 

Right, doctrine of, 382 ; precepts 
of, a88 ; degrees of natural 
Right, 287 sqip ; voluntary 
Right, 395. 

Rorarius, 237. 

Rosicrucians, Leibniz’s connexion 
with, 4. 

Sanuatian salt-mines, 346. 

Scaliger, Julius Caesar, 361. 

Soeptics, 155. 

Schclling ou Leibniz, 1 79 n ; on 
the relation between Leibniz 
and Fichte, i8i. 

Schiller, 198 n, a68 n. 

Scholasticism, Leibniz finds viuue 
in, 156 ; Scholastic potency 
distinct fn>m force, 91 u, 123 n. 

Schopenhauer in relation to Leib- 
niz and Fichte, 1S3. 

Schwann, 198, ^ 

Self-consciousness more than 
merely self-consistent, 59 ; im- 
plies oonsciousneas of objects. 

IKBEX 435 

155 ; Ii 6 ibniz*a view of, 53. lao, 
128, 133, >34 n ; l>e«cart«e*« 
view of, 52 ; di^ereuoe between 
ifeecartes and Leibnis, 54 ; 
Slohte'e view, iBi ; liegel*H 
view, 189, 190. 

•Seff - ooiuUtency, if real, inuet 
have grounds, 59. 

Self-love Uie gronnd of all our 
aotioni, 14S ; disintereHted in 
pn){K)rtion ae it in enlightened, 
148 ; eelf-love and the love of 
(lod, 423. 

Semi-pleaRuree and Henii-painfl, 
140. 

Seneation it confuted ])erception, 
135, 373 ; necettary to thought 
but not the eatcuce of it, 362 n ; 
according to Deacartos, it purely 
phytical and mechanical, 52. 

Sente-experience n(»t the 8t>urce 
of all truth, 134, 361 mnp ; gives 
only particular trullit, 362 ; 
views of Locke aud Injibiitz 
regarding, 134. 

SeiLsc-quolitioH are laicult (jualitict, 
362 n ; clear but not distinct, 

372 n. 

Seriet, in6uito, 78 tqq. 

Sigwart, H. C. W., 45 n. 

Sin aud virtue, 269. 

Sophia ('lmrlotto,<.iiioen of I'ruttia. 

M, 15- 

Souls, cliiHt of Mona<lt callc<l, 51, 
410 ; dittinguiflhed from cnic- 
lechies, 230 ; indivUible, 302 ; 
Hpontaneity of, 274, 313 ; infi- 
nite complexity of, 252 ; each 
hat tome perception nf all things, 
Ii3n; Hoult and at<jint, diSer- 
ence l»etweeu the changot in, . 
223 n; teat of the toul, 314, ; 
^ 5 n ; soul likeneil to an animal 
mnaiciau, 273 ; the final cause | 
of tubtlaitce, 107 ; bouU all in- | 
Rtinctivelj seek pleasure, 141, I 
J46; origin and duration of, i 
259 tqq. ; trautcreation of, 1 1 7 n ; | 
trarluctioD of, 260 n ; indettructi- ; 
bility and ininiortaUty of, 116, | 

aasn, 359 m » 3*6, 383 , 4<>* I 

tqq. ; toult cannot remain per- ^ 
manently unconteiout, 230, 374, ; 

' F 

419 ; utterly forget nothing, 
252 n. See Monadt. 

Souls, rational, or apiritt, 51, 233, 
365* 413 ; creation of, 117, 265 ; 
peraonal immortality of, 307 ; 
like ttnall divinities, 266, 304, 
424 n; nre jHirtes tointeft, 349; 
relation to (lod, 266, 293, 349, 
420 ; to other toult aud Monads, 
116 sqq , lai, 172 n, afifi, 303, 
410,412. 

Soul anil boi^, rolationt between, 
4a, 258, aOj sqq., 31 1 sqq., 333 , 
331 st^q., 40S ; l)esoartes'sot)m- 
pleto separatum between, 42, 
263 ; mutual indepeudeuce of, 
334 n; souls never entirely sepa- 
rate frevin btHlies, 105, 225, 25S, 
3H0 : souls act as if there were 
no bodies, 264 ; how soul isoou- 
sciouH of bisiy. 200; soul uoi 
perfectly conscioiiM of what 
happens in liody, x 1 2 u. 

Space, independent reality of, 
eontraiy to principle of suf- 
ficient t*caHon, 102 sqq.; einply^ 
space an ab<f traction, 102 ; for- 
mation of the i<lea of space, 
202 sqq. ; Luibnix's theory of, 
101 sqq. ; Kant on space, 169 
sqq., 221 n ; Woltt’s view, 
168 M^q. 

S|>eoies, KcUMible, 219. 

SpermaloK ia, 261. 

Spinoza, 31, 106 11, 1,(^5 n, 2190, 
230 u, 239 n, 244 II, 399 n ; 
view of HuiMtaiicc, 22 ; use of 
the idea of cause, 1^2 ; on 
possible things, 64 n ; his cona- 
ius, 71 n; Leibniz's criticism, 
2411, 276; oi>rreH|>onden<-o and 
intercourse with Lotlmiz, 9 ; 
Spinoza anfl l2;ilmiz on etiipi- 
rlcal knowlcnlge. 70 ; relation 
to J)eiM»rtofl. 24 ; Spinoza's 
philosophy rulwl by the prin- 
ciple of conirulictum, 58. 

.Spirit, universal, 23911. 

SpiriU. Sec Souls, rational. 

Stallo, 02 li, 93 n. 

Stein, Ludaig, 340, 43 n. 

Stillingflcet ami Locke, 387 tq<|. ; 
on the qncMlion whether matter 

INDEX 

436 

can think, 390 ; Htillingfleet 
chargeB Locke with inoon> 
■iHtency, 39 a. 

StoicB, 155 n, 243 n; irp 6 \rjt//is, 
360 ; Stoic patience compared 
with Chrifiiian, 423 n. 

Subatanoe, I^eibriiz’ii view of, 27 ; 
development of Leibniz’s view, 
1 2 ; unit of, 30 ; unity of, 
98 n ; cannot be without activity, 
9011, 335, 397; analogouB to the 
human soul, 159; all substances 
potentially self-conscioufl, ia8; 
qualities of substances not arbi- 
trarily given by God, 399 ; spon- 
taneity of, 33, aoo, 304, 313; 
inter - relation of substances, 
suinmaty "of Leibniz's view, 
lof) n ; inuiual actnm of sub- 
stances, 317; extension not the 
osHcnco of material substance, 
38, 94; Leibniz on Descartes's 
theory of material substance, 
27 ; Jlescartes’a account of su!>- 
stancu, 25 ; Spinoza’s tlieory, 22. 

Siilistance, oomjMuind, 109 ; unity 
of, q6, 118, 310, 330; a mere 
aggregate, 310, 330 ; inter- 

relations of compound Hub- 
stances, 251 ; classes of organic 
compound substances, 120; 
cliaiiges ill, 1 1 3, 358, 41 4 ; simple 
and coiiipoiiud substance, no. 

3.10, 406. 

Substance, simple, 37 ; variety in, 
333. St^e Monads. 

Suffleient rcafum, principle of, 
61 n, 63, 335, 414 sqq.; out- 
side the se<]uence of contingent 
thingB, 338, 338.415 ; synonyms 
for, 335 n ; c'onsequences in the 
philosophy of Leibniz, 69 ; rela- 
tion to principle of contradic- 
tion, 66, 164, 187 ; l^escai'tes and 
Spinoza, 160, 263; I^ihniz and 
Kant on the relation between 
contradiction and Bufficient 
reason, 17a sqq.; Schopenhauer, 
184; Hegel, 187; LoUe, 196. 

^ammerdam, 356 n, 305 n. 

Swift Quoted, 414 n. 

Symbolizing of ideas, 85 ; of 
thought, 137; of whole by part. 

33 ; mutual eymboUzing of 
things, 351 n. 

Symbols, thinking and reasoning 
in. 147. 

Tahuht rasGt 1 34 n, 360 sqq. ; 
I^ieibniz’s criticism of, 1 33 n, ^9. 

Tendency or impulse, lowest de- 
gree of appetition, 138; tenden- 
cies to action, 1 33 n ; tendencies 
to motion in all things, 90. 

Tetens, 1 39 n. 

77^^WfVe, 315, 316, 340 n, 337, 
416 n ; writing and publication 
of, 14. 

Thomasius, Jacob, 3. 

Thought, self-sufficiency of, 136. 

Time, I^eibniz’s theory of, 101 : 
empty time an abstraction, 102 ; 
itH inde^ndont reality contrary 
to principle of sufficient reason, 
103. 

Tolaiid, John, 2a6n. 

ToletUH, 157. 

Traction of matter inadmissible. 
3«6. 

Traduction of stmls, 260 u. 

Transmigration of souls. See 
Me tempsychoHi s . 

Transubstaritiaiion, 119; in rela- 
tioTi to Cartesian and Loibnitian 
views of substance. 5. 

Trinity, doctrine of, 244 n. 

Truth, two kinds of, 57, 134, 235 
sqq. ; nothing more agreeable 
than truth, 350. 

Truths, analysis of, 236 sqq. ; of 
fact, 57 ; trutlui of fact require 
an infinite analysis, to obtain 
Buffioient reason, 61, 237; con- 
tingent truths, 57, 134, 243; 
relation Ijetween necessaiy and 
contingent, 61 n, 134. 340 ; 
necessary truths not depexmnt 
on the senses, 363. 

Tschimhausen’s account of Leib- 
nil, 9. 

tJlpian, 288 n, 421 n. 

Unconsciousnes#, 230, 37^ 41 1. 

ITneasineasyLooke ami Leibnia on, 
240, 142 n, 375. 

Unit of substance, 30 ; no real 

INDEX 

withoQt real nnita, 33, 
317. 300 »qq., 310, 406. 

Unity, qoAiititatjvo »iid 
^trioal, 78; rnttohanioiil and 
^cKrfrsnic, 331 ; dominaiit unity 
lof the universe, 337. See Sub- 
stance. 

Iniiverse, continual prc^fress of, 
550, 419 n ; contains nothing 
fUlow, sterile or chaotic, 257 ; 
infinite number of possible 
universes, 65, 1 16 n, 247. 

XTnum J^er amdcnn and uitvin per 
se, 97 n, 98 n, 118. 
d'Urfe, Honorc, 65 11. 

Vactiuni, inip<»ssibility of, 73 n, 

357 385, 408. 

Van Uelmoiit, F. Mercure, 34 n, 

> 55 - 

Van Heliiiont, .T- B., 403 n. 
Vinculum tuhaianlialCf ii8. 
Virgil, 373 n. 

VirtualiU in Ix^ibniz’s sense, 
367 n. 

Virtue, definition of, 383 n. 

Ffs Wen, 9a. 

Void. AUnrm and Vacuum. 
Volition not absolutely nccessi- 
tateil, 144 ; Leibniz's psyebo- 
logy of, 143 n. 

Wallace, W., 18511. 

Weigel, Krhard, 3. 

Weigel, Valentine, 384 n. 
'Weirtinann, 198 n. 

Whole and parts, problem of, 32 ; 

437 

dynamic relation between, 31 ; 
ration of representation, 3 a ; 
their relation under the principle 
of contradiction, 68; Peseartes's 
presu^iposition regartiing, a6 ; 
Atomist view, 26. 

Will or self-conscious desire, 138 ; 
frequently acts from a sufficient, 
not necessitating, reason, 145 ; 
willing to will, 14a, 144 n. !^e 
Freedom. 

Windelband, 149. 

Wisdom defined, 287- 

Wolfi*, Cliristian, philosophy of. 
164 sqq. ; relation to l«eib' 
niz, 165 ; misunderstanding of 
Leibniz, 46 n ; his point of view 
Cartesian, 166, 167 ; combinatioVi 
of Monaiiology with Atomism. 
166; optimism, 168; teleology, 
167; view of spacn, 168 stpj. ; 
relation to Kant, 168. 

Words liko algebraic symbols, 147. 

World entirely in caeli of its parto, 
50 n ; receptivity of, 341; its 
physical and moral perfection, 
345 ; l^est of all possible worlds, 
66, 348, 271 ,345,41 7 ; infinity of 
worlds, 65. 1 16 II, 247 ; Infinity 
of worlds of living beings in 
each particle of matter, 356. 

Xenophon, 390. 

aeteruifoih. 

THB END 

oxiomi 

I'KINTICO AT THE < LAHENDON I'KKS.S 
HV HORA> R IIAMr, M.A. 
I'KINTI.k 1U IMF. INIVKKKI1V 

WORKS PUBLISHED 

AT THE 

^LARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 

Bacon. Novum Organum, Edited, with Introduction, 

Notes, &c., by T. Fowler, D.D. Sirotid Edition. 8vo, i 5 .r. 

Berkeley. The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., 

formerly Bishop of Cloync : including many of his writings hitherto 
unpublished, with Prelaccs, Annolalitms, and an Account of his Life 
and Philosophy, by A. Campbell Fraser, Hon. D.C.L. and LL.I). 
4 vols. 8vo, £3 i8.t. 

The Li/Cf Letters^ separaidy^ i6s. 

Selections. With Introduction and Notes. For the 
use of Students in the Universities. By the same Editor. Fourth 
/id than, Crown 8vo, 6rf. 

Bosanquet. Logic ; or, The Morphology of Knowledge. 

By B. IlosANoruT. M A. 8vo, 2X5. 

British Moralists. Selections from Writers principally 

of the Eightoonth Century. Edited by L, A. Sklhy-Biuur, M.A. 
2 voU. Crown Sv«), iHj. 

Butler. The Works of Bishop Butler. Edited l)y the 

Right Hon. W. E. Glal.stone. 2 voU. Medium 8vo, £i 8/. ; or in 
crown 8 VO, loj. (yd. 

Fowler. The Elements of Deductive Logic, designed 

mainly for the use of Junior .Students in the Universities. ByT. FowlER, 
D.D. 7Vnth JidUton^ with a Collect i<‘n of Examples. Extra fcap. 
8vo, (yd. 

The Elements of Inductive Logic, designed mainly 

for the use of Students in the Univcr»itiea. Sixth Edition. Extra 
fcap. 8vo, 6 j. 
o 

Logic; Deductive and Inductive, comltined in a single 

volume. Extra fcap. 8vo, yr. (yd. 

Fowler and Wilson. The Principles of Morals. Hy T. 

Fowler, D.D., and J. M. Wilson, B.D. 8vo, 14J. 

Green. Prolegomena to Ethics. By T. H. Greek, M.A. 

Edited by A. C. Bradi ey, M.A. Third Edition. 8vo, I3r. (id. 

Works Published st the Clarendon Press» Oxford. , 

Hegel. The Logic of Hegel; translated from the Encyclo- 
paedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With legomena to the §tudy 
of Hegel’s Logic and Philosophy. By W’lLS^M Wallace, 

LL.D. Second Ediliotty Revised and Augmented, a vols. Crown i%o, 
10/. tni. each. 

Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind. Translated from the Encyclo- 
paedia of tlie Philosophical Sciences. With Five Introiluctory Essays. ‘ 
By William Wallace, M.A., LL.D. Crown 8vo, loj. 

Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature. Reprinted from the 
Original Edition in Tlirec Volnmes, and edited by L. A. Selby-Bioge, 
M,A. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 8/. 

Enquiry concerning the Human Understanding, 

and an Eniiuiry concerning the Principles of Morals. Editetl by I.. A. 
Seluy-Bicck, M.A. Crown 8vo, 7/. 6</. 

Locke. An Essay concerning Human Understanding. 

By JiHlN I.ocKK, Collated and Annotated with Prolegomena, Bio- 
graphic.al, Critical, and Historical, by A. Campbell Fraser, Hon. 
n.C.L, and LL.I). a vols, 8vo, l a/. 

Locke’s Conduct of the Understanding. Edited by T. 

Fowler, 13.D. Third Edition. Extra fcap. Svo, a/. <)d. 

Lotze’s Logic, in Three Hooks ; of Thoiifi^hi, of Inve.stip:ation, 

an<l of Knowledge. English Translation ; edited fjy B. Bosanqukt, 
M.A. Second Edition, a vols. Crown 8vo, J2S. 

Metaphysic, in Three Books; Ontology, Cosmology, 

and Psychology. English Translation ; edited by B. BosANQUET, 
M.A. Setond Edition, a vols, Crown 8vo, lax. 

Martineau. Types of Ethical Theory. By James 

Martineau, D.D. 'Third Edition, a vols. Crown Svo, 15/. 

A Study of Religion : its Sources and Contents. 

Seiond Edition. 2 vols. Crown Svo, 15X. 

©;tfor> 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

* 

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C.